                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT IN THE PRESENCE OF CHILD LABOR

                                          Natalie Bau
                                       Martin Rotemberg
                                         Manisha Shah
                                        Bryce Steinberg

                                      Working Paper 27241
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27241


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2020




We are grateful to seminar and conference participants at Duke, IFPRI, Kent, NBER Children's
meetings, Northwestern, NYU, UCSD, and PacDev for insightful comments and suggestions.
Shah and Steinberg gratefully acknowledge funding from NSF grant#1658852. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Natalie Bau, Martin Rotemberg, Manisha Shah, and Bryce Steinberg. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Human Capital Investment in the Presence of Child Labor
Natalie Bau, Martin Rotemberg, Manisha Shah, and Bryce Steinberg
NBER Working Paper No. 27241
May 2020
JEL No. I2,J1,O12

                                          ABSTRACT

Policies that improve early life human capital are a promising tool to alter disadvantaged
children's lifelong trajectories. Yet, in many low-income countries, children and their parents face
tradeoffs between schooling and productive work. If there are positive returns to human capital in
child labor, then children who receive greater early life investments may attend less school.
Exploiting early life rainfall shocks in India as a source of exogenous variation in early life
investment, we show that increased early life investment reduces schooling in districts with high
child labor, especially for girls and lower castes. These effects persist and are intergenerational,
affecting fertility, per capita household consumption, and other measures of household poverty,
and lead to a divergence in the next generations' educational outcomes. Our results are robust to
the inclusion of rich controls for district-level characteristics and an IV strategy. We provide
evidence that reductions in educational investment in response to positive early life shocks are
inefficient.

Natalie Bau                                      Manisha Shah
Luskin School of Public Affairs                  Department of Public Policy
University of California at Los Angeles          University of California, Los Angeles
3250 Public Affairs Building                     Luskin School of Public Affairs
Los Angeles, CA 90095                            3250 Public Affairs Building
and NBER                                         Los Angeles, CA 90095-1656
nbau@ucla.edu                                    and NBER
                                                 manishashah@ucla.edu
Martin Rotemberg
New York University                              Bryce Steinberg
19 W4th St, 6th Floor                            Watson Institute
New York, NY 10012                               Brown University
mrotemberg@gmail.com                             111 Thayer Street
                                                 Providence, RI 02912
                                                 and NBER
                                                 bryce_steinberg@brown.edu
1       Introduction

Policies that increase human capital investment during the critical period between the ages of
zero to five, when the developing brain is most plastic (Knudsen et al., 2006), are a promising
tool to increase overall human capital attainment. From 2001 to 2013, the World Bank made
273 investments in early childhood development across 80 different countries, spending 3.4
billion USD (Sayre et al., 2015). Beyond the high returns of these early interventions, there
may be "dynamic complementarities" in the human capital production function, where early
skills raise the returns to later human capital investments (Cunha and Heckman, 2007),
endogenously leading to increases in those investments. A growing empirical literature tests
for the presence of these dynamic complementarities.1
    However, the success of these interventions in low-income countries may depend critically
on the economic environment because early interventions may also increase the payoff from
children or adolescents engaging in market work, working on the family farm, or working in
home production. In fact, the prevalence of child labor is still incredibly high in low-income
countries. The International Labour Organization estimates that there are around 265 mil-
lion working children in the world--almost 17 percent of the worldwide child population
(Ortiz-Ospina and Roser, 2020). As a result, in environments where children have oppor-
tunities to work productively, actions taken by parents and children to alter human capital
investments in response to positive early life shocks can reduce the positive educational ef-
fects of these interventions. Thus, while much of the literature on early life investment has
focused on the effects of early life investment in high-income countries where child labor is
rare, understanding how parents and children respond to positive early life shocks is partic-
ularly important in low-income countries, where child labor is common (Bharadwaj et al.,
2013; Edmonds, 2007).
    In this paper, we exploit variation in early life investment due to rainfall shocks to provide
evidence that increased early life investment increases the opportunity cost of schooling
by increasing the returns to child labor in rural India. We show that increased early life
investment reduces schooling (and increases work) in districts with a high prevalence of
child labor. Moreover, we find that these reductions in schooling are most pronounced
among girls and lower castes, suggesting that early life investment can increase inequality
and harm the most vulnerable in regions with high child labor. Including controls for district-
and household-level socioeconomic characteristics and school quality has little effect on these
results.
    1
     See for example Adhvaryu et al. (2018); Aizer and Cunha (2012); Agostinelli and Wiswall (2016); Gilraine
(2017); Johnson and Jackson (2019); Malamud et al. (2016); Duque et al. (2020); Rossin-Slater and W¨      ust
(forthcoming) among others.


                                                     1
     Importantly, these effects are both persistent and intergenerational. To assess the effects
of early life investment, we provide some of the first long-run and intergenerational estimates
of the effects of early life rainfall shocks.2 We show that positive early life income shocks
make adults from high child labor districts worse off on a variety of dimensions. By age 16,
individuals in high child labor districts who experience positive rainfall shocks in early child-
hood score lower on math and reading tests. Households whose heads experienced positive
early life income shocks in high child labor districts spend a higher share of their earnings
on food. The net negative effect of a positive shock persists across generations. Children
of household heads who received a positive early rainfall shock in a high child labor district
are more likely to work and less likely to attend school. Additionally, while positive early
life shocks improve long-run per capita consumption and reduce female fertility in low child
labor districts, they have no positive effects in high child labor districts. Altogether, these
results suggest that the presence of child labor can eliminate the positive long-term impacts
of early life investments and even ultimately cause these investments to make children worse
off.
     Decreased educational attainment and diminished long-run outcomes do not necessarily
imply that reduced schooling is welfare-reducing. It is plausible that the returns to child
labor are similar or greater than the returns to schooling in high child labor areas. Efficient
households may prefer additional income today to greater income in the future. On the other
hand, parents may inefficiently underinvest in education in response to positive shocks either
because they underestimate the size of dynamic complementarities (that is, make mistakes) or
because there are incomplete contracting problems between parents and children. The latter
case occurs when imperfectly altruistic parents do not make efficient educational investments
because they cannot capture the returns to these investments in the future (Banerjee, 2004;
Ashraf et al., 2020; Bau, 2019). We examine whether reductions in education are consistent
with welfare maximization in several ways.
     First, we allow our estimates to depend on gender and birth order. Since oldest sons
traditionally care for parents in their old age, thereby allowing parents to partake in the
returns to their education, we expect incomplete contracting problems to be less important
for their educational investment. Indeed, we find that for oldest sons parents reinforce early
investments in human capital regardless of child labor prevalence. Second, we examine
whether parents are aware that positive early life shocks increase children's cognitive ability.
Parents' assessments of the ability of children who experience a good early life shock are
significantly higher than their assessments of those who do not, regardless of the prevalence
  2
    A notable exception is Maccini and Yang (2009) in Indonesia, although our range of adult outcomes is
considerably broader.



                                                   2
of child labor in the district. This suggests that parents are not simply making mistakes
because they are unaware of their children's cognitive skills. Finally, we use a back-of-
the-envelope exercise to estimate the maximum discount factor that would justify increasing
child labor today at the expense of future consumption if parents are perfectly altruistic. The
implied discount factor is lower than social discount factor estimates and is also inconsistent
with Indian interest rates over the same period. Altogether, the pattern of results suggest
that parents' inefficiently underinvest in children's education in response to positive early
life shocks and that at least part of this problem is driven by incomplete contracting.
     One important concern about the validity of our results is that high child labor districts
differ from low child labor districts on a variety of dimensions. In particular, high child labor
districts might also have lower school quality, which could in turn attenuate the effects of
positive early life shocks. We address this concern in several ways. First, we note that while it
is plausible that alternative negative attributes of high child labor districts would attenuate
the positive effects of early life income shocks, it is difficult to explain why they would
lead these shocks to have a net negative effect on education and cognitive skills. Second,
we control for a battery of other local characteristics, including average incomes, literacy
rates, and measures of school quality, as well as household-specific socioeconomic controls
and household fixed effects. The inclusion of this rich set of controls has little effect on the
patterns that we observe. Third, we exploit an alternative, technological source of variation
in the demand for child labor: crop variation. Children have a comparative advantage at
growing sugar and cotton (Levy, 1985), and indeed, in our data, these are the two crops
that have the highest share of children as laborers. When we compare the effects of positive
early life rainfall in these districts to the effects in non-sugar/cotton producing districts or
use this variation to instrument for child labor, we find similar results. Fourth, we show that
the Mincerian returns to education are not lower in high child labor areas, suggesting that
lower educational investment is not simply driven by lower returns to schooling.
     This paper builds on the literature on human capital investment and dynamic comple-
mentarities (Cunha and Heckman, 2008), but takes into account an important feature of
developing countries: that children work (Basu and Pham, 1998; Basu, 1999; Edmonds and
Pavcnik, 2005). The idea that early and later life educational investments complement each
other has been directly tested in several different contexts (see footnote 1 for citations).3 In
low child labor areas, we find revealed preference evidence of dynamic complementarities,
as children who receive greater early life investments endogenously receive more education
   3
    A related literature primarily in developing countries estimates the extent to which parents invest un-
equally in their children in order to reinforce or mitigate early differences in human capital (Behrman et al.,
1994; Adhvaryu and Nyshadham, 2016; Dizon-Ross, 2019; Bharadwaj et al., 2018), whether due to dynamic
complementarities or other convexities in human capital returns, and finds mixed results.


                                                      3
later on. Akresh et al. (2017) find similar, positive effects of better early life rainfall on
later educational investments in Burkino Faso. However, we show that--in the presence of
child labor--parents may fail to invest more in education in response to positive early life
shocks, even in the presence of dynamic complementarities. Reduced educational investment
in response to positive early life shocks does not rule out dynamic complementarities in the
human capital production function.
    Our results contribute to a growing literature on the opportunity cost of schooling in
both high-income (Charles et al., 2018; Cascio and Narayan, 2019) and low-income countries
(Shah and Steinberg, 2017, forthcoming; Atkin, 2016). This literature has already shown
that shocks to the opportunity cost of schooling can reduce human capital investment. We
expand on this finding by linking it for the first time with the large literature on the long-
run importance of early childhood and even pre-natal investment (Heckman, 2007; Almond
and Currie, 2011; Currie and Vogl, 2013; Currie and RossinSlater, 2015; Attanasio et al.,
forthcoming; Garc´  ia et al., 2017). Consistent with this literature, we find that early life
circumstances can have a remarkably persistent effect on outcomes throughout adulthood
and even into the next generation. Early life investments that increase children's returns
to education but correspondingly increase the opportunity cost of schooling can negatively
affect long-term outcomes. We provide evidence that children and parents may inefficiently
underinvest in education in response to positive early life shocks.
    To guide the empirical analysis, Section 2 introduces a theoretical framework for human
capital investment and child labor in the presence of dynamic complementarities and derives
testable predictions. Section 3 provides further background on child labor in India and
describes the data used in this paper's analyses. Section 4 describes our empirical strategy.
Section 5 reports our primary results on children's schooling and work using a variety of
specifications. Section 6 reports the heterogeneous long-run effects of early life investment
on adult outcomes. Section 7 reports the results from a series of robustness tests. Section 8
discusses the results and provides evidence that parents are not choosing welfare-maximizing
education levels. Section 9 concludes.


2   Theoretical Framework

To develop testable predictions about the effects of early life human capital investment on
education and child labor, we develop a simple, partial equilibrium model. Intuitively, this
model brings together the theoretical literature on when children engage in child labor (e.g.
Basu and Pham, 1998) and the trade-off between child labor and human capital formation
(Basu, 1999; Dessy, 2000; Hazan and Berdugo, 2002) with the literature on dynamic com-


                                              4
plementarities (Cunha and Heckman, 2007). Doing so allows us to clarify the circumstances
under which positive early life human capital investments can reduce schooling, even in the
presence of dynamic complementarities in the human capital production function.
    The model captures the following intuition. If there are dynamic complementarities,
increased early life human capital investment positively affects the returns to later schooling
investment, incentivizing parents to invest more in later education. This is the standard effect
of dynamic complementarities posited by Cunha and Heckman (2007). However, the new
feature of our model is that in places where child labor is prevalent, early life investments also
affect the child wage, which is the opportunity cost of schooling. Thus, a novel prediction
of our model is that this countervailing force attenuates the positive effect of early life
investment in schooling. In extreme cases, early life investments increase the child wage
more than they increase the expected utility the parent derives from the increased return
to education, causing schooling and long-run wages to fall. Furthermore, if the parent is
imperfectly altruistic or she underestimates the size of dynamic complementarities relative
to the effect of early life human capital investments on wages, reductions in education due
to early life investments will be inefficient. We now formally derive these intuitions.

2.1    Set Up

The decision-maker in the model is a parent, and each parent has one child. The decision-
maker is indexed by her child's exogenous educational ability, , which is distributed accord-
ing to the function F and her type of district, d  {low, high}. d denotes whether a parent is
in a high or low child labor district. To simplify exposition, at the risk of abusing notation,
subscripts for these indices are suppressed when not relevant. There are three periods in the
child's life: early life, school age, and adulthood.  becomes observable in period 2, when a
child is old enough to attend school. In period 1, the parent decides how much to invest in a
child's early life human capital, h. In period 2, the parent makes a discrete decision whether
                                                                                  c
or not to educate the child, e  {0, 1}, or have the child work for a wage w2        ,d (h), which
depends on h and d. The discrete educational investment maps to the fact that children
either primarily work or attend school in our data, rather than moving between working and
education on a continuum.4 The parent's consumption in the first two periods ­ when the
parent is making human capital investment decisions ­ is explicitly included in the model.
In addition, the parent also places some weight on the child's third period adult utility.
This can be thought of as capturing both altruism and a reduced-form representation of the
parent's third period consumption, which is determined by the fraction of the child's third
   4
    This is a function of the way data is collected, which asks for a "primary activity" rather than collecting
a continuous measure, such as time spent in school and time spent working.


                                                      5
period utility that the parent captures as old age support. Suppressing the indices  and d,
a parent's preferences in period 1 are represented by

                  p
                 U1 (h) = u(cp                      p                 c c
                             1 (y1 , h)) + E max u(c2 (y2 , e, h)) + U (c3 (e, h)) ,
                                                     e


where cp         p                                                       c
         1 and c2 are the parent's consumption in periods 1 and 2, c3 is the child's adult
consumption in period 3, u is the parental utility function, U c is the child's adult utility,
which depends on educational and early life investments,  =  is the product of the
parent's discount factor  and  , where  captures both the parent's altruism toward the
child and her ability to resolve incomplete contracting problems by extracting utility from
the child in the third period, and the expectation is taken over realizations of . Both u and
U c are assumed to have diminishing marginal returns in consumption.
    Similarly, the parent's period 2 utility is given by

                                p
                               U2 (e, h) = u(cp                 c c
                                              2 (y2 , e, h)) + U (c3 (e, h)).


For simplicity, the model abstracts away from borrowing and saving.5 Then, parental con-
sumption in period 1 is equal to some exogenous income y1 net the cost of human capital
investment h. Parental consumption in period 2 is total income y2 net the cost of schooling
if e = 1 or plus the wages from child labor if e = 0. Thus,

                                     cp
                                      1 = y1 - ch h

                                     cp                c
                                      2 = y2 + (1 - e)w2,d (h) - ce e

                                     cc    c
                                      3 = w3 (e, h) + e


                                                                                           c
where ch is a cost of the human capital investment and ce is the cost of education. w3       (e, h)+e
                                                                                                  c
is what the parent believes to be the child's total adult wage, where the function w3               (e, h)
allows for a flexible relationship in adult wages between e and h and does not directly depend
on d, and the returns to education also depend on exogenous schooling ability .6 Parents
                                       c                    c             c                   c
may have incorrect beliefs about w3      (e, h), such that w3 (e, h) = w ~3 (e, h), where w ~3  (e, h) is
the true relationship. Following Cunha and Heckman (2008), parents perceive that there are
                                                                wc (1,h)     wc (0,h)
dynamic complementarities in the adult wage function if 3          h
                                                                         > 3    h
                                                                                      . This captures
the idea that early life investments in human capital make educational investments more
   5
     We relax this assumption in the empirical analysis and explicitly allow for the possibility that households
save by showing that the main results are robust to household fixed effects models, which compare siblings
who received different shocks.
   6
     The fact that adult wages do not depend on d is consistent with the idea that adults can migrate to
other labor markets.


                                                         6
productive.
   Before solving the model, we make several assumptions to simplify exposition. First,
                   c
we assume that w2    ,low (h) = 0, so that if child labor in a district is negligible, child wages
                                                                                 wc,high
are always equal to zero. In places where child labor is high, we assume 2         h
                                                                                         > 0. This
assumption captures the idea that early life human capital investments increase child wages.
We directly test this assumption in the data in the next section.

2.2   Propositions

We now solve for the parent's equilibrium investment decisions and relate them to changes
in first period income y1 .

Proposition 1. Denote h as the parent's equilibrium choice of h. If w2  c             c
                                                                          ,d (h) and w3 (e, h)
                                                          
have constant or diminishing marginal returns in h, then h
                                                         y1
                                                            > 0 for all d.

Proof. See Appendix A.

    The first proposition simply delivers the classic result that a positive income shock in
early life will increase early life human capital investment. The intuition for this prediction
is straightforward. When y1 increases, the marginal utility of first period consumption falls,
increasing the parent's incentive to invest in her child's human capital. This proposition is
consistent with the previous findings of Shah and Steinberg (2017) and Maccini and Yang
(2009), who show that an early life shock increases test scores and weight.
    Building on Proposition 1, the next set of propositions predict the key empirical results
in the paper ­ that early life shocks increase education rates in places with low child labor
and have smaller positive or even negative effects on education rates in places with high child
labor. Proposition 2 delivers a standard result in the dynamics complementarities literature.

Proposition 2. Denote d (y1 ) to be the share of children educated in a district of type d
                                wc (1,h)  wc (0,h)
given y1 . low
            y1
               (y1 )
                     > 0 only if 3
                                 h
                                         > 3
                                           h
                                                   .

Proof. See Appendix A.

    This proposition captures the fact that, in low child labor places, increased h only posi-
tively affects the parent's educational decisions through its effect on the returns to later life
educational investments. Therefore, if an early life shock increases educational investments
in low child labor markets, this is evidence in favor of the fact that early life investments
increase the returns to later educational investments.
    The remaining propositions introduce the novel predictions of this paper. Propositions
3a and b show that standard dynamic complementarity results can be reversed or attenuated

                                                7
by child labor. In high child labor markets, positive early life investments can have zero or
negative effects, despite their potential positive effect on the returns to education due to
dynamic complementarities.
   To introduce Proposition 3a, we first note that for a given value of h, the parent will
                                                  p (h,1)            p (h,0)
educate a child if U2p          p
                       (1, h)  U2 (0, h). Since U         > 0 and U          = 0, this relationship
exhibits single-crossing. Thus, for any combination of h and d, there exists a cutoff value
                                                       
d (h) for  where e = 1 for all children with   d        (h). Figure 1 illustrates this by plotting
                                                            
the ability distribution and showing that e = 1 if  > d      (h).
                          f (        
                              high (hhigh (y1 )))              high (y1 )       low (y1 )
Proposition 3a. If                   
                           f (low (hlow (y1 )))
                                                    < , then    y1
                                                                            <    y1
                                                                                          .

Proof. See Appendix A.

    This proposition indicates that a positive income shock increases education (and adult
wages) more in low child labor districts than high child labor districts, as long as an as-
sumpton is satisfied that increased returns to child labor dominate two other, second order
effects with ambiguous directions. The effect we expect to dominate is that an increase in
h increases the relative returns to education more in low child labor areas because, in high
                                                                        c
child labor areas, increasing h also increases the outside option, w2     ,high . The additional am-
biguous effects come from the fact that (1) the density of children on the margin of being
educated is different in high and low child labor regions since enrollment rates are different,
and (2) the derivative of adult wages with respect to early childhood investment may be
different in high and low child labor regions if underlying investment in h is different in these
regions. If underlying early life human capital investment rates are similar and the densities
                           
of the distribution at d    (hd (y1 )) are similar across these regions, these additional, second
order effects will be small.7
    Figure 1 illustrates the intuition for Proposition 3a. In both high and low child labor
                                                                                             
districts, the increase in y1 increases the relative returns to schooling, causing d         (hd )) to
                                   
fall. But low  falls more than high     because the relative returns to schooling increase more in
low child labor districts. The share of children whose educational outcomes are changed is
captured by the gray areas, which integrate over the ability distribution from the old to the
                          
new values of low   and high  . Even though the density at the cutoff is different in high and low
child labor districts, as long as it is not too much greater in high child labor districts, more
children will be affected in low child labor districts, where the integral is taken over a larger
set of values of . While Proposition 3a shows that the effects of early investment on the
   7                       f (      (h(y1 )))                                                
    The assumption that f (high              <  bounds how much greater the density at low       can be relatively
                               low (h(y1 )))
                                                     
to the density at high . That is, if the density at high is sufficiently high, it can lead the response to shocks
to be greater in high child labor places even though the change in the ability cutoff is smaller.


                                                          8
returns to child labor can attenuate the positive effects of early life investment on schooling,
the next proposition shows that, in extreme cases, early life investment can negatively affect
schooling.
                       c
                      w2         
                         ,high (h (y1 ))                                  high (y1 )
Proposition 3b. If           h
                                           is sufficiently great, then     y1
                                                                                       < 0.

Proof. See Appendix A.

    Proposition 3b shows that when the effect on parental utility of the increase in child
wages due to an increase in y1 is sufficiently large in high child labor places, it outweighs
the effect of the increase in the returns to education (weighted by the parents' altruism and
discount factor). Then, positive income shocks that increase early life investments can lead
to reduced education.
    Finally, our last two propositions consider some plausible circumstances under which
these reductions in education will be inefficient. These sources of inefficiency in educa-
tional investment appear in other work (for example, Banerjee (2004) on intergenerational
incomplete contracting and Jensen (2010) on systematic under-estimation of the returns to
schooling). Rather, we make the following two new contributions. First, we show that ­
in conjunction with the existence of child labor ­ these forces can cause increased early life
investments to have perverse effects and reduce total welfare. Second, as we will discuss in
subsequent sections, modeling these sources provides us with tests for whether reductions in
schooling in response to increases in early life human capital in high child labor districts are
inefficient. We view an educational investment decision as inefficient if it does not maximize
total welfare W2 (e; , h), which is the sum of the parent's and child's utilities (equivalent to
                    p
setting  = 1 in U2    (e, h)).
                                  wc (h,1)      w
                                                ~3c (h,1)
                                                                    c            c
Proposition 4a. If  < 1 or 3     h
                                      <           h
                                                            (where w3          ~3
                                                                      (h, 0) = w   (h, 0)), then an increase
in y1 may inefficiently reduce education.

Proof. See Appendix A.

Proposition 4a captures two intuitive circumstances under which the reductions in education
due to the increase in y1 (under Proposition 3b) may be inefficient. The first case  < 1
captures the idea that an imperfectly altruistic parent who cannot perfectly contract with her
child to capture the returns to her investments during childhood will underweight the increase
in a child's utility in the future relative to the increase in consumption today. Thus, an
increase in y1 will reduce the parent's returns to educating the child, even though the increase
                                                                                      wc (h,1)
in y1 increases the returns to education for total household utility. The second case 3  h
                                                                                               <
w  c (h,1)
  ~3
   h
           captures the idea that dynamic complementarities are hard to observe and even a

                                                       9
perfectly altruistic parent may underestimate them. Thus, the parent will underestimate the
increase in the returns to education for a child's adult wages due to an increase in y1 relative
to the increase in the child wages, again leading the reduction in education to be inefficient.
                                                      wc (h,1)  w~ c (h,1)
    The final proposition focuses on the case where 3    h
                                                               = 3 h
                                                                           and where an increase
in y1 increases the range of children for whom educational investment is efficient.
                        c (h,1)    ~ c (h,1)
                       w3          w                 W2 (1; ,h)       W2 (0; ,h)
Proposition 4b. If      h
                                = 3  h
                                               and      h
                                                                  >      h
                                                                                 ,   then there exists a value
                        
¯ such that for  > ¯,   h
                              < 0.

Proof. See Appendix A.

This proposition focuses on the case where an increase in h increases the net value of edu-
cating the marginal child more than it increases the value of the child working. In this case,
it would be efficient for the marginal parent to respond to an increase in h by investing in
education. If the parent is sufficiently altruistic or sufficiently able to contract with the child
to capture the return to her investment ( >         ¯ ), the value of  needed for a child to be
educated will fall and the marginal child will be educated. In other words, if  is sufficiently
high, the parent values the child's adult utility enough that she responds to the increase in
the returns to education by efficiently increasing educational investment. This is easy to see
in the extreme case where  = 1 and a parent is either perfectly altruistic or perfectly able
to contract with her child. In that case, education levels are never inefficient, and there will
never be an inefficient reduction in educational investment in response to an increase in h.
This proposition indicates that if there is incomplete contracting between parents and chil-
dren, we should see heterogeneity in the response to early income shocks across parent-child
pairs with different degrees of incomplete contracting problems.


3     Background and Data

3.1     Data Sources and Measurement

This paper utilizes a variety of datasets from India, which we describe below. These data
sources are summarized in Table 1. The summary statistics for our main outcome and
explanatory variables, as well as the industrial composition of districts are reported in Table
2.

3.1.1    Child Labor, School Attendance, Consumption, and District Level Controls

National Sample Survey, Schedule 10. We use the National Sample Survey (NSS) to
measure the main outcomes of interest: school attendance, work, and adult consumption.


                                                      10
The National Sample Survey is a repeated cross section of an average of 100,000 Indian
households a year, conducted by the Indian government. We use rounds 60, 61, 62, 64, 66,
and 68 (2004, 2004-5, 2005-6, 2007-8, 2009-10, 2011-12) in our analysis. We also restrict
the sample to include only rural households, since the mechanism through which rainfall
shocks affect rural incomes (increased crop yields) is well-established in the literature. In
contrast, wages in urban areas are likely to be less affected by rainfall shocks. We assume
that children are born in their district of residence, since cross-district migration in India is
low, particularly for children (Kone et al., 2018).
    The survey asks for the "primary activity" of each member in the household and includes
categories for school attendance, wage labor, salaried work, domestic work, and so on. We
define a child as "attending school" if her primary activity is listed as attends school and
"working" if her primary activity is any form of wage/salary labor, work with or without
pay at a "home enterprise" (usually a farm, but the data also includes other small family
businesses), or domestic chores. These two categories comprise most of the primary activ-
ities of children under 18, though there are other categories that are omitted, such as too
young/infirm for work (typically the very old and very young), and "other," which includes
begging and prostitution. In addition to using this variable to measure schooling and work-
ing, we also use it to generate a district-level measure of child labor. To create that measure
for a round t, we calculate the average of the fraction of children (aged 5-17) who report
their primary activity as working in each district/round, leaving out survey round t. We
also measure the degree of child labor by taking the share of survey years a district is above
median and in the top quintile for child labor (leaving out own-year), focusing on the former.
The NSS additionally asks respondents for their "principal industry," which we aggregate
to get measures of sector activity. For another source of variation in the prevalence of child
labor, for a survey in round t, we calculate the share of adult employment in cotton and
sugar production in a district (since those two crops have the highest proportion of child
workers), leaving out round t.
    The NSS Schedule 10 captures consumption by asking households to provide a consump-
tion diary over the past week. We sum over expenditures in the different categories to arrive
at a household consumption measure. We follow Deaton (1997) and calculate per capita
consumption in households with both adults and children by weighting children (who have
lower consumption needs) as one-third or one-half of an adult.
    To control for differences between high and low child labor districts, we also use the NSS
10 to generate additional district- and household-level control variables. Our district-level
controls consist of the average wage for adult wage-earners in the district, the share of adults
who work for wages, the share of male and female adults who are literate, the share who


                                               11
graduated primary school, and the share who have graduated from secondary school. Our
household-level control variables include a control for whether the male head of the household
is literate, whether he earns a wage, whether he graduated primary and secondary school,
household size, and total number of children in the household.

National Sample Survey, Schedule 1. We also supplement the NSS Schedule 10 with
the NSS Schedule 1 (Household Consumer Expenditure) from the same rounds and years.
This survey consists of a different cross-section of households and contains a detailed con-
sumption module. We primarily use measures of total household consumption, but addition-
ally calculate the share of consumption on food (to back out welfare using the logic of Engel
curves) and if the household uses a poor fuel source (coal, firewood, dung, or other). The
survey additionally asks children how many lunches they had at school in the past month,
which we use as an intensive margin measure of school attendance.

India Human Development Survey. For additional data on child labor wages and their
correlation with measures of child human capital, we turn to the India Human Development
Survey (IHDS), a panel dataset that was implemented in 2005 and 2012. The IHDS is
a nationally representative, multi-topic panel survey of 41,554 households in 1503 villages
and 971 urban neighborhoods across India. This survey measures child height, weight, and
cognitive abilities, and these data allow us to test the assumption that children with higher
human capital earn higher wages in the market. We mainly use the IHDS 2012 for our
analyses, but to look at the effects of lagged test scores, we augment it with the IHDS 2005.

Annual Status of Education Report. We further supplement the IHDS and the NSS
with data from ASER, the Annual Status of Education Report, which includes test scores
in math and reading for a large cross-section of children from almost every rural district
in India ­ including those who are out of school ­ from 2005­2014. Pratham, an Indian
NGO, began collecting ASER test score data in all rural districts in India in 2005. It is
collected from approximately 500,000 children per year regardless of whether they are out of
school every November. The math and writing sections of the ASER survey ask each child
four progressively more difficult questions. In each section, we calculate the sum of correct
questions.8

National Family Health Survey. We also investigate fertility outcomes and use the num-
ber of total children ever born from the National Family Health Survey (NFHS), which is a
   8
   The math section covers recognizing numbers 1-9, recognizing numbers 10-99, subtracting, and dividing.
The writing section covers recognizing letters, recognizing words, reading a paragraph, and reading a story.

                                                    12
large-scale, multi-round survey conducted in a representative sample of households through-
out India. We use a sample of adult women (aged 24-54) from Rounds 2 (1998-1999) and
4 (2015-2016) and restrict the sample to rural households. We focus on the sample that is
aged 24-54, because women under 24 may not have completed their education, and we do not
have rainfall data for women older than 54 in the earlier sample. We exclude round 3, since
it does not record district information, which we need to match the NFHS to the rainfall
data and focus on rounds 2 and 4 since the timing of these rounds matches the timing of our
other data sets.

3.1.2    Educational Quality: Unified District Information System for Education

To obtain measures of educational quality at the district-level, we draw on the 2005 round
of the Unified District Information System for Education (DISE), which was developed by
India's National University for Educational Planning and Administration. These data allow
us to observe the percent of schools with single classrooms and teachers, the percent with
student-teacher ratios greater than 60, the percent of primary schools with boys and girls
toilets, the percent with blackboards, the percent without buildings, and the average number
of textbooks per school at the district level, all of which we use as controls for school quality.

3.1.3    Variation in Human Capital: Yearly Gridded Rainfall

Our data on rainfall shocks come from the University of Delaware Gridded Rainfall Data
for 1970-2008. Following the earlier literature (Shah and Steinberg, 2017; Jayachandran,
2006), we define a "rainfall shock" as equal to one if rain is in the top 20th percentile for the
district, -1 if it is in the bottom 20th percentile, and 0 otherwise.9 We form an aggregate
rainfall shock measure by summing over the shocks when the child is in utero (-1), in her
first year of life (year of birth), and in her second year of life. Thus, the aggregate shock
variable ranges from -3 to +3. We match this data to children in all the various datasets
using their birth year and district.

3.1.4    Variation in the Importance of Rainfall: Irrigation

For a robustness test, we examine how the effects we estimate vary with the share of a
district's area that is irrigated. Since irrigation reduces the importance of rainfall, we expect,
if our effects are truly driven by rainfall, that they will be attenuated in districts with more
irrigation. For this analysis, we create district-level measures from the Global Irrigated
   9
    In India, though flooding does happen, more rain is almost always better for crop yields. See Jay-
achandran (2006) and Santangelo (2019) for more discussion of the direct relationship between rainfall and
outcomes.


                                                   13
and Area Mapping data on irrigation in South Asia at the beginning of the 21st century
assembled by Thenkabail et al. (2009).

3.2    Background on Child Labor in India

Officially, child labor for children aged 14 and under has been banned in India since 1986.
However, the ban covers only certain industries and has not been well enforced.10 Moreover,
agriculture and family-run businesses, the main employers of child labor, were exempted
from the ban. Beyond the various exemptions, the ban itself may have increased child labor
through negative income effects (Bharadwaj et al., 2013).
    Overall, child and adolescent labor are common in India, as is the case in many low-
income countries. According to our data from the National Social Sample Schedule 10, 9%
of children aged 5­17 reported working as their primary activity, while 26% of individuals
15­17 did so. UNICEF (2011) estimates that 28 million children in India aged 5-14 are
engaged in work.11 Figure 2 shows the variation in the percent of children 5-17 who report
working as their primary activity across Indian districts using the NSS data from 2004. The
most common industries for these children are agriculture and domestic duties, and children
both work in the labor market for pay and part-time at home or on family farms. Within the
Indian context, Shah and Steinberg (2017) show that child labor responds to productivity
shocks, suggesting that wages are an important determinant of whether children work.

3.3    Human Capital and Child Wages

We test whether children with greater human capital have a greater opportunity cost of
schooling, consistent with the key mechanisms in the theoretical framework. Table 3 reports
results from a regression of child wages (conditional on working for pay) in the IHDS 2012 on
height and lagged test scores. The sample that controls for lagged test scores only includes
children aged 15-17 in 2012, since lagged test scores are only available for children 8-11
in the 2005 survey. In both cases, we find a strong positive association. Consistent with
Case and Paxson (2008), height is positively correlated with wages, and a child who answers
one more math question correctly receives a 6% higher wage. While we caution that these
regressions cannot be interpreted as causal measures of the effect of human capital on the
  10
     Industries where child labor is banned include occupations involving the transport of passengers, catering
establishments at railway stations, ports, foundries, handling of toxic or inflammable substances, handloom or
power loom industry, and mines. Processes banned included hand-rolling cigarettes, making or manufacturing
matches, explosives, shelves, and soap, construction, automobile repairs, and the production of garments
(Bharadwaj et al., 2013).
  11
     For domestic work to count under this definition, a child must be engaged in domestic work for over 28
hours per week.


                                                      14
opportunity cost of schooling, both because they do not include children who do not work
for pay and because human capital does not vary exogenously, these descriptive results are
consistent with greater human capital increasing the opportunity cost of schooling. The
same mechanisms are likely to be important for children who work without wages (e.g. on
family farms). While the econometrician cannot observe opportunity costs in these cases
since wages are no longer equal to the opportunity cost of schooling, it is still likely that the
opportunity cost grows with human capital.

3.4    Early Life Rainfall and Human Capital

To test the implications of the model, we use early life rainfall shocks as a proxy for shocks
to early life human capital. The existing literature provides a strong argument that positive
rainfall shocks increase yields, increasing parental wages, as shown by Jayachandran (2006)
and Kaur (2019). Intuitively, and as we showed in Proposition 1, higher parental wages
should lead to higher early life investment. Maccini and Yang (2009) and Shah and Steinberg
(2017) provide evidence that this is the case. This investment could take many forms,
including increased nutrition for the child or for pregnant or breastfeeding mothers, increased
medical care during infancy, and more parental time spent fostering development.
     Figure 3 provides evidence for the relationship between early life rainfall and early life
human capital investment. The first panel of the figure shows the relationship between the
aggregate early life rainfall shock and height for children and adolescents aged 5 to 17 in the
IHDS 2012 separately for districts with above and below median child labor.12 This figure
plots the relationship using residual variation after conditioning on age and district fixed
effects. There is a clear positive relationship between early life rain and height in childhood,
which is indicative of increased health investments for children who experienced higher early
life rain. This effect is not differential for high and low child labor districts, indicating that
Proposition 1 holds in both cases. So, differences between the effects of early life rainfall on
medium and long-term outcomes across districts are unlikely to be driven by differences in
the effects of early life rainfall on human capital investment.
     Similarly, panel B shows the relationship between math and reading test scores in the
ASER data, respectively, and early life rain. Here, we restrict to children aged 5-7 in order
to minimize the impact of endogenous schooling investments on test scores. Again, there is a
positive relationship between test scores and early life rain in both high and low child labor
districts. Appendix Table A1 reports analogous regressions of height and math and reading
scores on the aggregate early life rainfall measure by high and low child labor districts.
  12
   A district is defined as having above median child labor if it had an above median share of children
working in the NSS round 68, the most proximate NSS round to the IHDS 2012.


                                                  15
Aggregate rainfall shocks are associated with improved early life human capital, and this
effect is not differential across high and low child labor districts. Altogether, the figures and
table suggest that early life rain is a significant shock to the early human capital stock.


4   Empirical Strategy

The theoretical framework predicts that the extent to which early human capital investments
will be reinforced by additional schooling investment will depend upon the opportunity cost
of children's time. In subsection 3.4, we established that rainfall shocks experienced in utero
and in the first two years of life provide exogenous variation in the stock of early human
capital. In the following sections, we estimate the different effects of early life rainfall shocks
on subsequent schooling investment by the prevalence of child labor.
    In our primary specifications, we estimate the following regression

           yidmtag = a + 1 ELRdta + 2 ELRdta × CLdt + dmt + a + g +               idmtag       (1)

where yidmtag is an outcome measure (i.e. working, being in school, test scores, consumption)
for individual i of gender g in district d in month m and year t at age a, ELRdta is individual
i's early life aggregate rainfall shock, CLdt is a measure of child labor in district d, dmt is a
district-month-year fixed effect, a is an age fixed effect, and g is a gender fixed effect. In
our primary tables, we report 1 and 2 using three separate measures of CLdt : a continuous
measure of the share of children working, a variable measuring the share of rounds the district
is above the median in child labor, and a variable for the share of rounds the district is in the
top quintile. We also report 1 estimated for all districts without a child labor interaction
term to capture the average effect of the aggregate early rainfall shock, and we report 1 + 2 ,
the total effect of a positive early rainfall shock in high child labor districts.
    District-month-year and age fixed effects ensure that the estimates are identified from
within-district and within-cohort variation. Thus, fixed differences across districts (such
as those that experience drought more often than others) will not drive the results. The
identifying assumption for 1 is that, conditional on country-level changes in rainfall patterns
over time, deviations from district-level average rainfall are not associated with other time-
varying district-level characteristics that may affect children's outcomes. This is the standard
identifying assumption from Shah and Steinberg (2017) and Maccini and Yang (2009).
    Interpreting 2 as capturing the interaction between child labor and early life rainfall
shocks requires the additional assumption that there is no important district-level charac-
teristic associated with child labor that also leads rainfall to have different effects in high
and low child labor districts. Because this assumption is strong, Section 7 will be devoted

                                                16
to a series of tests that increase our confidence that 2 is driven by child labor itself rather
than other district characteristics.
    One additional concern for the estimation of both 1 and 2 is that there is a direct
long-run effect of early life rainfall shocks on individuals' outcomes (e.g. if families use the
windfall to buy investment assets), which may not be fully controlled for by district/time
fixed effects. In an appendix specification, to account for this, we also estimate models with
household fixed effects. These models compare children in the same household who were
born in different years and control for any household-level unobservables, such as savings or
migration decisions.


5   Schooling and Child Labor Results

In this section, we test the key propositions of the model. Based on Proposition 2, we expect
that if there are dynamic complementarities, in districts with low child labor, early life shocks
will increase educational investment. In districts with high child labor, this effect will be
attenuated (Proposition 3a) and may even be reversed (Proposition 3b), so that early life
shocks decrease human capital investment.

Schooling and Work. Panel A of Table 4 reports the results from estimating equation
(1) where the outcome is an indicator variable for whether a child lists her primary activity
as working (columns 1-4), attending school (columns 5-8), or dropping out (columns 9-12),
and CL is either the continuous measure of child labor prevalence, the share variable for
above median district, or the share variable for living in a top-quintile district. The "total
effect" row at the bottom of the panel reports the aggregate effects of rainfall shocks in
districts whose share measure is equal to 1 (as opposed to the interaction effects). For all
the columns, consistent with Proposition 2, an increase in ELRdta reduces the likelihood of
working on average in low child labor districts. In contrast, as the prevalence of child labor
grows (column 2), this effect is attenuated, and the net effect on working becomes positive
in above median and top quintile districts (columns 3-4). The remaining columns report
symmetric results for attending school and dropping out. ELRdta has positive effects on
education on average and in low child labor districts, but these effects are reversed in the
above median child labor districts. Notably, the total effect's magnitude grows monotonically
in the prevalence of child labor. The first panel of Appendix Figure A1, which plots the total
effect of aggregate shocks by child labor quintile, provides further evidence of this monotonic
relationship.
    Figure 4 explores these effects by graphing the relationship between the residual varia-


                                               17
tion in our child labor and rainfall interaction variable and our outcomes of interest, after
accounting for the control variables in equation (1). These graphs provide further evidence
that the residual interactions between these two variables have strong, monotonic effects
on working, schooling, and dropping out. They also provide evidence that the relationship
between the early life rainfall shock aggregate and outcomes is roughly linear, consistent
with our choice of specification.
    The estimates in Panel A of Table 4 imply that one additional positive early life rainfall
shock in an always below top quintile child labor district decreases the likelihood a child aged
5­17 works by 0.7 percentage points (8%), increases the probability she attends school by 0.8
percentage points (1%) and reduces dropout by 0.2 percentage points (6%). Adding up the
enrollment effects over a child's life implies that total years of schooling increases by 0.1 years.
In contrast, in an always top quintile child labor district, a positive rainfall shock increases
work by 0.8 percentage points (8%), decreases schooling by 0.6 percentage points (0.7%) and
increases dropout by 0.8 percentage points (23%). Adding up the enrollment effects implies
a reduction in years of education of 0.07. To put these effect sizes into perspective, Duflo
(2001) finds that receiving one more school per 1,000 children in a district in Indonesia
increased male education by 0.12 years, and Muralidharan and Prakash (2017) find that
a bicycle program increased female secondary school enrollment by 5 percentage points in
India. Thus, the reduction in education caused by an additional positive early life rainfall
shock in a top-quintile district is on the order of one-half the effect of receiving another
school in Indonesia. The increase in inequality in enrollment outcomes between high and
low child labor districts due to this shock (1.5 percentage points) is roughly one-third the
effect of the bicycle program. Altogether, these effects are economically meaningful but not
enormous. Indeed, we would not expect a single positive rainfall shock in early childhood to
have extremely dramatic effects on a child's outcomes. However, by studying these shocks, we
hope to not only identify an economically important shifter of human capital investment but
also improve our understanding of households' human capital investment decision-making.
    Panel B of Table 4 uses the number of meals a child ate in school in the last 30 days as
an intensive margin measure of education. The results with this measure are similar. In low
child labor districts, rainfall shocks in early childhood increase the number of meals eaten at
school, while this effect becomes negative (albeit not statistically significant) in high child
labor districts. Interestingly, the effect sizes are similar whether the outcome is any meals
at school, greater than 10 meals at school, or greater than 20 meals, suggesting that most of
the effect on education is on the extensive rather than the intensive margin.
    In Appendix Table A2, we examine how early life shocks affect which sector children work
in. Panel A suggests the net increase in work in high child labor districts is concentrated in


                                                18
agriculture and retail. These are sectors that are known for high child labor. In contrast,
there is no aggregate increase in employment in manufacturing. Children do not appear to
be leaving school to pursue jobs in relatively high wage sectors like manufacturing. Panel B
further confirms that early life rainfall increases schooling in low child labor districts (and
reduces it in high child labor districts) at the expense of other types of work. On net, early
life rainfall has a positive and marginally significant total effect on household work in high
child labor districts (col 4).

Heterogeneity. We next examine several potentially important sources of heterogeneity
in the effects.
Age. Guided by the fact that older children are also more likely to be on the work margin,
we estimate the effects of ELRdta separately for children older and younger than age 13 in
Appendix Table A3. Panels B and C of Appendix Figure A1 plot the total effects of the
aggregate rainfall shocks by child labor quintile for older and younger children. For older
children, who are more likely to be on the margin of working, the effect of the shock on
schooling is negative, large, and significant. In the top quintile districts, for older children,
a positive shock increases work by 2.2 percentage points (8.5%) and decreases school by 2.4
percentage points (3%), roughly half the magnitude of the effects of the bicycle program
studied by Muralidharan and Prakash (2017). The results are consistent with the idea that
the effect of early life human capital on the opportunity cost of schooling is most important
when children are old enough to engage productively in child labor. For younger children,
the net effect of a shock on schooling in upper quintile districts is generally close to zero or
even positive, in line with the effects in low child labor districts.
Oldest Sons. Next, motivated by Propositions 4a and 4b, we examine heterogeneity by eldest
sons. From Proposition 4, we know that if parents are imperfectly altruistic, increased early
life investment may inefficiently reduce educational investment. This is because parents will
value the earnings from a child working, which they can expropriate today, more than the
gains to a child's future income, from which they may not benefit. If a child could contract
to share his future earnings with parents, parents would make efficient educational decisions.
     As Proposition 4 shows, if parents are imperfectly altruistic, we would expect the effects
of early life shocks to be more positive in high child labor places for children for whom
intergenerational incomplete contracting problems are likely to be small (e.g. when  in the
model is sufficiently high). Cultural traditions where specific children provide parents with
old age support are one informal mechanism to solve this incomplete contracting problem
(Bau, 2019) and can generate variation in incomplete contracting problems across children
in the same household. In India, oldest sons are expected to care for parents in their old age


                                               19
(Dyson and Moore, 1983; Gupta, 1987). Jayachandran and Pande (2017) provide evidence
that this is associated with son preference and greater investment in oldest sons. Since in-
complete contracting problems with oldest sons are likely to be smaller, we can test whether
the impact of early rainfall shocks depends on the strength of incomplete contracting prob-
lems by examining how these shocks interact with birth order among boys. In terms of the
model,  will be higher for oldest sons than other children, and as the model shows, when 
is sufficiently high, parents will not inefficiently reduce educational investment in response to
greater early life human capital investment. Thus, if we observe that early life rainfall shocks
have different effects on oldest sons versus other children in high child labor districts, this
provides evidence that parents are inefficiently reducing educational investment in response
to rainfall shocks for the other children.
    Table 5 allows early life rainfall shocks to have different effects on oldest sons versus
other children in high and low child labor districts, while Figure 5 reports the total effects
of early life rainfall shocks on children in above median districts by gender, age, and birth
order. The estimates reveal that while early life rainfall shocks reduce schooling and increase
work for non-oldest sons and all daughters older than 13 in high child labor districts, this
effect disappears or is reversed for oldest sons. In other words, oldest sons in high child labor
districts have a more similar response to early life rainfall to sons in low child labor districts.
Figure 5 also shows that this result is not simply driven by some other characteristic of being
the oldest child. Oldest girls do not experience the same benefits as oldest boys, and Table
5 Panel B shows that the interacted effect of early life shocks for older boys are robust to
(grouped) fixed effects for district, time, age, gender, and early life shocks.13 These results
provide evidence that reductions in education due to early life rainfall may be inefficient as
a result of incomplete contracting between parents and non-oldest sons and daughters.
Gender. Girls tend to receive less educational investment than boys in India. Appendix
Table A4 reports the effects of the rainfall shocks by gender. The total effects of early
life rainfall shocks in high child labor districts are indeed more pronounced for girls, who
respond to early life rainfall shocks by significantly increasing their likelihood of working and
significantly decreasing their likelihood of attending school. This result is consistent with
the findings in Figure 5, which shows that both oldest daughters and non-oldest daughters
over 13 are strongly affected by the rainfall shocks, while, among sons, only younger sons
above 13 exhibit the same pattern.
Caste. Lower caste individuals are also likely to have poorer educational outcomes and to
be more vulnerable to shocks in India. In Appendix Table A5, we allow for heterogeneity by
  13
    The identification for Table 5 Panel B compares the difference between high and low child labor districts
in the relative effect of early life shocks for boys of the same age who are and are not oldest sons.



                                                     20
whether the individual belongs to a scheduled caste or tribe. We again find that early life
rainfall shocks have more pronounced negative effects on lower caste individuals. Along with
the gender results, this points to the possibility that programs that increase early life human
capital can be inequality increasing--improving educational outcomes among the better off
but reducing them in the long-run for the most vulnerable.


6     Medium, Long-Term, and Intergenerational Effects

While ELRdta may decrease educational attainment in high child labor districts, it's not
clear that this reduction in education has negative long-term effects. In this section, we
examine whether this is the case using four sets of outcomes. In the first subsection, we
use the ASER data, which tests children aged 5­16, including dropouts, to estimate the
net effects of ELRdta in above median child labor districts on cognitive achievement by the
end of childhood. In the second subsection, we use longer-term measures from the NSS to
examine the heterogeneous effects of early life rainfall on adult outcomes. We first consider
the effect of rainfall on per capita adult consumption, focusing on consumption rather than
wages since, in rural India, few adults work for a wage. We then consider the effects of early
life shocks on other measures of household socioeconomic status, such as use of a fuel source
associated with poverty and percent of consumption spent on food. In the third subsection,
we estimate the differential effects of the early life rainfall shocks on adult fertility using data
from the NFHS. Finally, in the fourth section, we estimate the intergenerational effects of
early life rainfall shocks.

6.1    Medium-Term Effects on Cognitive Outcomes

To obtain age-specific estimates of the net effect of ELRdta on cognitive achievement and
dropout in the ASER data, we estimate analogous regressions to those in Table 4 except
with ASER test scores as the outcome. We fully interact the key variables of interest, CLdt ,
ELRdta , and their interaction, with indicator variables for age groups, using the share of
rounds the district has above median child labor as our measure of CLdt . For a given age
a, we calculate the net effect of ELRdta in high child labor districts by adding together the
coefficients on ELRdta × Iiage=a and CLdt × ELRdta × Iiage=a , where Iiage=a is an indicator
variable equal to 1 if a respondent is a years old. Figure 6 reports these net effects.
    Earlier in childhood, ELRdta increases cognitive skills in high child labor districts. But
by the end of childhood, a one-unit increase of ELRdta (equivalent to one extra good rainfall
year during the critical period) leads to a reduction in reading scores by 0.5 (one-third a
standard deviation) and of math scores of 0.4 (approximately one-half a standard deviation).


                                                21
Reading is on a scale of 0-4, and math is on a scale of 0-3. For comparison, with the caveat
that the small number of items on the ASER exams make comparisons in standard deviations
difficult, Singh (2016) shows that a year of learning in India is associated with a 0.4 standard
deviation increase in test scores. Thus, by the end of childhood, an increase in ELRdta leads
to a significant reduction in cognitive skills in districts where child labor is more prevalent
on the order of the effect of 1 less year of schooling. While this effect seems large, recalling
that it is the cumulative effect of the shock across all of childhood, the average yearly loss
in test scores is on the order of 0.04 standard deviations.

6.2    Long-Term Effects on Consumption

We next consider whether these negative, medium-term effects on cognitive skills translate
into lower consumption in the long-term. To do so, we re-estimate the specifications in Table
4 on a sample of adult male household heads (aged 25-54) with a measure of adult per capita
consumption as the outcome variable.14 Furthermore, since consumption data is available
from both the NSS Schedule 1 and 10 surveys, we pool these surveys to maximize statistical
power.
    Panel A of Table 6 reports the results. Per capita consumption is calculated by dividing
the household's total monthly consumption by the total number of adults and children.
Following Deaton (1997), children are treated as either one-third (columns 1-4) or one-half
an adult (columns 5-8). For both calculations, ELRdta increases long-run per capita adult
consumption in low child labor places, but this effect is completely eliminated in high child
labor districts, and the net effect is negative (though not significantly different from 0). In low
child labor districts, one additional positive rainfall shock increases per capita consumption
by 0.1-0.3%. In top quintile districts, it results in a reduction of roughly 0.2% (though the
standard errors get large).
    In Panel B, we turn to alternative measures of adult household socioeconomic status.
Columns 1­4 use data from the NSS Schedule 1 to examine whether the household uses a
fuel source associated with poverty (non-LPG, gobar gas, charcoal, kerosene, and electricity
sources, which consist of coke, coal, firewood and chips, dung cake, and others). Columns
5­8 use the share of a household's budget that is spent on food as the outcome variable (also
from the NSS Schedule 1). In both cases, ELRdta is again associated with better outcomes in
low child labor districts and worse outcomes in the high child labor districts, with significant
positive total effects on spending on food (+0.15%) in always highest quintile child labor
districts. Thus, we conclude that at best early life rainfall did not improve adult outcomes
  14
   The NSS directly asks if someone is the household head (or married to the household head). For
households with no reported head, we impute the oldest male as the head.


                                                22
and at worse, it may have reduced them in high child labor districts.

6.3   Long-Term Effects on Fertility

Using the NFHS data, we investigate the relationship between ELRdta and fertility outcomes
as another long-run outcome. We re-estimate equation (1) but with the number of total
children ever born as the dependent variable. We first test how early life rainfall impacts
the total number of children women aged 24-54 bear. Table 7 reports the results from this
exercise. We find that ELRdta reduces the total number of children born per woman by
approximately .02 children. Turning to the heterogeneous effects of positive early life shocks
in high and low child labor districts, we find that in below median districts, a one unit increase
in ELRdta decreases children born by 0.03 children. In high child labor districts, this positive
effect completely disappears. While these effects may appear small, it is striking that--at
least in low child labor districts--a single early rainfall shock can have such a meaningful
effect on fertility.

6.4   Intergenerational Effects

Finally, the NSS allows us to examine whether early life rainfall shocks have intergenerational
effects and whether these effects differ by the prevalence of child labor in a district. In Table
8, we estimate the effect of the household head's rainfall shock on a child (aged 5-17), allowing
for that shock's effects to depend on the prevalence of child labor. We control directly for the
early life shock (by district) for the child. We find evidence that the negative effects of the
early life shock in high child labor areas persist across generations. In always above median
districts, children of a household head who received an additional year of good rainfall in
early life in a high child labor district are 0.2 percentage points more likely to work (2%)
and 0.3 percentage points (0.2%) less likely to attend school. Adding up the effects over the
years, a one unit increase in the household head's ELRdta leads to a 0.036 reduction in the
child's years of education. While there is limited evidence on the intergenerational effects
of health and education interventions in low-income countries, one point of comparison is
an estimate of the intergenerational effect of the Indonesian INPRES school construction
program. Akresh et al. (2018) estimate that having a father who was young enough to be
exposed to the program and was born in a district that received 1 more school per 1,000
children increases years of schooling by 0.1. Our estimate of the reduction in a child's
education due to her father's positive rainfall shock (in a high child labor district) is about
one-third that magnitude.




                                               23
7     Robustness to Alternative Explanations

Having presented our key results, we now explore potential sources of omitted variable bias,
which may bias or complicate our interpretation of 2 . We evaluate the robustness of the
results in several ways. In the first subsection, we explore which characteristics predict child
labor. We then control for a variety of district-level covariates that may be associated with
the prevalence of child labor and may also lead ELRdta to have heterogeneous effects. Next,
to account for the possibility that positive values of ELRdta affect work and schooling through
savings, we control for household fixed effects and compare the outcomes of two children in
the same household at the same time. In the fourth subsection, we use an alternative,
technological source of variation in child labor ­ the production of sugar and cotton ­ as an
instrument for child labor and replicate the same patterns as in Table 4. Finally, in the last
subsection, we mention a series of additional robustness tests and extensions.

7.1    What Predicts Child Labor?

District-level school quality and socioeconomic status are candidate omitted variables that
may be related to the prevalence of child labor and may attenuate the positive effects of
ELRdta . Intuitively, if poverty drives the relationship between ability and schooling (for
instance, if parents cannot afford to send their higher ability children to more school) and
poverty is correlated with levels of child labor, then our estimates could be biased. Similarly,
less educated places and places with worse school quality may also lead high ability children
to attend relatively less school (for example, if they've already learned the skills that are
available to them). To explore the extent to which such biases may exist, in Table 9, we
measure the association of district-level education, socioeconomic status, school quality, and
crop variation measures with child labor. Column 1 regresses the child labor measure on
average adult wages, column 2 on an education index,15 column 3 on a school quality index,16
column 4 on the percent of adults who work in agriculture, and column 5 on the percent who
work in sugar and cotton. We include the final column not as a test for bias ­ we expect
sugar and cotton to predict child labor ­ but rather to establish whether this variation in
the crops grown by adults across districts, which is predominantly driven by differences in
climate and soil, may be a relevant instrument for child labor. The panels of the table repeat
  15
     To form this index, we standardize and average over the following measures from the NSS Schedule 10:
average adult literacy, share of adults who graduated primary school, and share of adults who graduated
secondary school.
  16
     To form this index, we standardize and average the following measures from the DISE 2005: share of
classrooms with more than 60 students (sign reversed to be negative), share of schools with girls' toilets,
share of schools with blackboards, share of schools with no building (sign reversed), average number of
textbooks at a school, and the number of schools per capita.


                                                    24
these regressions with our three main outcomes: the continuous measure of child labor, the
share of rounds the district is above the median, and the share of rounds in which it is in
the top quintile.
    Table 9 shows that adult wages and the education index are negatively correlated with
child labor. This should be mechanically true since child labor reduces schooling, and if
schooling has positive returns, this will reduce adult wages. While negatively correlated, the
relationship with adult wages is not large: a one standard deviation increase in the average
adult wage decreases the share of rounds a district is in the top quintile of child labor by
4.4 percentage points. Interestingly, across all three measures of child labor, there is no
relationship between the school quality index and child labor. This shows that high child
labor districts are not necessarily low school quality districts. The share of adults working
in agriculture (the most frequent sector for child labor) positively predicts child labor. For
all the significant predictors in columns 1-4, the relationship between the predictors and the
degree of child labor appears to be non-monotonic. Adult wages, the education index, and
share in agriculture are more strongly related to being an above median than a top quintile
district. This relationship already provides preliminary evidence that the correlation between
these variables and child labor cannot be driving the effects we have observed, which are
typically monotonic in the degree of child labor.
    Finally, column 5 establishes that adult employment in sugar and cotton is a strong pre-
dictor of child labor. The coefficients imply that moving from 0 to 100% adults employed in
sugar or cotton production increases the share of rounds that a district is a top quintile child
labor district by 79 percentage points. We will exploit this alternative source of variation in
child labor to further evaluate the robustness of the main results.

7.2   Controlling for Differences Across Districts

Given the potentially strong relationship between child labor and socioeconomic status/adult
education observed in Table 9, we examine whether our main estimates in Table 4 are robust
to the inclusion of controls for education, wages, socioeconomic status, and school quality at
both the district and household-level in Appendix Table A6. All these controls are interacted
with ELRdta . Columns 1 and 7 include both the average wage of adults (as in column 1 of
Table 9) but also include the share of adults who work for a wage. The education controls
in columns 2 and 8 consist of the same variables that formed the education index in Table 9.
The school quality controls in columns 3 and 9 include the same variables that formed the
school quality index, and in addition include controls from DISE for share of single teacher




                                              25
schools and share of single classroom schools.17 In columns 4 and 10, we include household
level controls from the NSS schedule 10: whether the male head of the household is literate,
whether he has completed primary and high school, whether he works for a wage, household
size, and number of children in the household. Finally, columns 5 and 11 include all the
controls together and columns 6 and 12 use lasso to select the most important subset of the
controls from the full set (Belloni et al., 2012). Thus, the controls included in Appendix
Table A6 are a superset of the variables used to predict child labor in the first 3 columns of
Table 9.
    Appendix Table A6 shows that the regressions results for 2 are nearly identical when
we include all of these additional household and district control variables to the main results
in Table 4.

7.3    Estimating Models with Household Fixed Effects

In our second robustness test, we include household fixed effects in equation (1) to account
for alternative channels through which shocks may have affected household's outcomes, such
as saving. Including fixed effects means that the estimates are identified by the gap in the
outcomes between two siblings who received different shocks in the same household and are
observed at the same time. Panel A of Appendix Table A7 shows that the main results are
robust to conditioning on household fixed effects.
    Panel B of Appendix Table A7 tests directly for within-household spillovers of rainfall
shocks across siblings. Using the sum of all shocks to siblings (with fixed effects for sibling
age and gender composition), there is no evidence that children go to school more if their
siblings are drawn out of school. There is weak evidence that siblings' positive early life
shocks on average lead children to go to less school, although the point estimates are an
order of magnitude smaller than the direct effects.

7.4    IV Strategy: Sugar and Cotton

Certain regions in India are particularly ideal for growing cotton or sugar cane due to agro-
climatic conditions such as average temperatures and rainfall, as well as soil requirements
(Krishna, 2014). Children are well-suited to help grow cotton and sugarcane, given the na-
ture of the tasks associated with planting, weeding, and harvesting. Cotton is notorious as a
child labor crop because it is low to the ground and very lightweight (Levy, 1985). Consistent
with this, in the NSS, cotton and sugar are the two crops that have the highest proportion
  17
    We did not include these variables in the school quality index because it is less clear, relative to vari-
ables denoting whether a school has more or less infrastructure/resources, whether these features of schools
negatively or positively impact school quality.


                                                     26
of workers under 18 (around one-fifth of workers in each crop are children at the start of our
sample). Therefore, we use variation in the prevalence of sugar and cotton ­ which in turn
relies on agroclimatic conditions ­ as an instrument for child labor.
    We use both the presence of any adult employment in sugar or cotton and the percent of
adult employment in sugar or cotton in the district as an instrument for child labor. Recall
Table 9 shows that the share of adults employed in sugar or cotton is a strong predictor
of child labor. In Panel A of Appendix Table A8, we report the reduced-form results, re-
estimating the results from Table 4 but replacing child labor with the cotton and sugar
measures. The results tell a similar story. On average, children who experience better
early life rainfall shocks are less likely to be working and more likely to be attending school.
However, in places with cotton and sugar, these effects are either attenuated or fully reversed.
In Panel B of Appendix Table A8, we instrument for the prevalence of child labor using adult
employment in sugar and cotton and again find very similar results. The pattern of estimates
is both quantitatively and qualitatively similar to the main OLS results.

7.5    Other Robustness Tests and Extensions

Appendix Tables A9-A12 report the results of additional robustness tests and extensions. In
Appendix Table A9, we show that the results are robust to the inclusion of early life shock-
age-gender and district-time fixed effects (Panel A) and the inclusion of separate fixed effects
for district, survey round, age, and gender (Panel B). Appendix Table A10 shows that the
negative effects of early life rainfall on schooling in high child labor places are concentrated in
districts with less irrigation, consistent with the intuition that rainfall shocks should matter
less for yields when areas are irrigated. Appendix Table A11 shows that the results are robust
to using the first round of data from the NSS (round 60) to classify which districts are high
child labor. Finally, Appendix Table A12 uses child labor measures at the district-caste and
district-gender level instead of the district level and replicates the same patterns as before.
If anything, the results are stronger, perhaps reflecting reduced measurement error.


8     Discussion: Are Parents Making Efficient Decisions?

We now consider whether children in high child labor districts are being made worse off by
experiencing a higher value of ELRdta . If this is the case, since ELRdta strictly increases
a child's early human capital, it may be that children and/or their parents are not making
efficient decisions about the trade-off between schooling and work. Recalling that early life
shocks do not reduce educational investments for oldest sons in high child labor districts,
there is already evidence that parents underinvest in education in response to positive early


                                                27
life shocks due to incomplete intergenerational contracting. In this section, we explore other
reasons parents may fail to invest in education in response to the positive rainfall shock. We
first test whether parents in high child labor districts are really forgoing the benefits of early
life shocks we see in low child labor districts or whether the returns to education are simply
lower in these districts. We find similar returns to education in high and low child labor
districts. Next we consider whether parents are unaware of the increased ability of children
who receive positive early life shocks, perhaps leading them to inefficiently fail to respond to
these shocks by investing in schooling (as discussed in the theoretical framework). Finally,
we use a back-of-the-envelope calculation to estimate what discount factor would rationalize
parents' educational investment decisions in high child labor districts and discuss whether
this value is consistent with efficient investment.

8.1   Different Returns to Education

Parents in high child labor areas may respond less positively to early life shocks in high
child labor areas because the returns to education are differentially low in these areas. To
evaluate if this is the case, we use the IHDS 2012 data to measure the effect of an additional
year of schooling on consumption in high and low child labor districts. With the caveat
that these Mincerian returns estimates may not be causal, the results reported in Appendix
Table A13 indicate that education has positive returns with each additional year increasing
consumption by 4 percent. Moreover, the interaction between education and the prevalence
of child labor is small, insignificant, and positive. Thus, the Mincerian returns to education
appear to be similar in high and low child labor areas.

8.2   Parental Perceptions

We next consider the possibility that parents do not realize that a positive early life shock
increases a child's returns to schooling, leading them to inefficiently underinvest in education.
This may be a larger problem in higher child labor districts, where parents themselves are less
educated and less able to assess a child's human capital. In Appendix Table A14, we regress
a parent's report of a child's ability on the early life rainfall shock and its interaction with
child labor to test whether parents' perceptions of children are affected by early life shocks,
and whether this is differential across high and low child labor districts (using IHDS data).
We find that parents report that children with positive early life rainfall shocks are higher
ability, and this is not differential by high and low child labor areas. Thus, we conclude
that parents are not failing to invest in education because they are unaware of the child's
increased early life human capital.


                                               28
8.3   Discount Factor Calibration

Finally, we calculate the minimum discount factor for which an altruistic parent would
rationally forgo the value of relative long-run consumption gains due to positive early life
rainfall shocks in low child labor places to obtain relative short run consumption gains from
positive early life rainfall shocks in high child labor places. If this discount factor is low, it
implies that parents are not both rational/fully-informed and perfectly altruistic and that
educational investment is inefficient. The long-run gains in low child labor places come
from increased education, which increases adult consumption. The short-run consumption
gains come from increased child labor and reduced educational investment, which lead to
more household consumption. This exercise requires strong assumptions. In particular, by
comparing present discounted Rupee pay-offs, we are implicitly assuming linear utility. We
are also likely to underestimate the gains to education by only focusing on long-run per capita
consumption. Appendix B provides the details of how we calibrate the discount factor.
    When we make the conservative assumption that there is no economic growth in the
future, we calculate that the discount factor ( ) is 0.91. This assumption leads to a higher
value for the discount factor since growth increases the pay-off to education in levels (and
thus increases the consumption children forgo in the future by working). We can compare
this estimate of  to two benchmarks. First, 0.91 is below estimates of the social discount
factor, which is thought to be between 0.95 (in low-income countries) and 0.97 (in high-
income countries) (Haacker et al., 2020). Second, India's interest rate of 5-7% during the
sample period implies a discount factor on the order of 0.93-0.95. Thus, the implied discount
factor if parents are perfectly altruistic and fully informed appears to be somewhat low.
Moreover, even if this discount factor is correct for the household, given the social discount
rate, it suggests that from the perspective of policymakers, parents fail to undertake socially
efficient educational investments.
    In the more realistic world where we allow for moderate growth, the calibrated discount
factor falls further. A 1% growth rate leads to a discount factor of 0.90, and allowing for a
5% growth rate (which is closer to India's current growth rates) leads to a discount factor
of 0.87. These estimates are even farther from the benchmarks discussed above and further
suggest that reductions in educational investment are inefficient. They also highlight an
additional potentially important cause of these inefficiencies: parents may not be able to
anticipate economic growth and its effects on the returns to education. If parents "estimate"
the returns to education by observing the level difference in income between uneducated and
educated individuals when they are making their decision, they implicitly assume growth
rates of 0, and will systematically underestimate the returns to education.



                                               29
9   Conclusion

Interventions that increase early childhood investment may be a powerful tool for increasing
educational attainment and ultimately setting children on a better life trajectory. However,
such policies can have counterintuitive effects in low-income countries, where child labor is
common. We provide new evidence that early life investments increase child wages, increas-
ing the attractiveness of child labor. Furthermore, we document the fact that while early
life investments positively affect educational outcomes in places where child labor is low,
consistent with the existence of dynamic complementarities, this effect is attenuated and
even reversed in places where child labor is high.
     Our results speak to the need for targeting policies to local conditions. Using our esti-
mates from the ASER data and scaling them by the population of children 5-16 in India
in 2014 shows that a policy that simulates the effect of a positive early childhood rainfall
shock can have very different and economically meaningful effects across districts. Among
high child labor districts, such a policy would lead to 334,770 additional dropouts. Yet,
among low child labor districts, such a policy would have net positive effects, reducing total
dropouts by 381,036. While a one size fits all policy would have relatively little effect on total
dropouts, it would increase inequality in dropout across districts. Targeted policymaking
could harness the educational benefits of early life investment across both types of districts.
     This is particularly important since, in places where child labor is the highest, early life
interventions not only reduce long-term educational attainment and cognitive skills, but also
negatively affect adult socioeconomic status and increase adult fertility. The positive and
negative effects of early life investment are also transmitted across generations. Moreover,
the fact that early life investment increases the opportunity cost of schooling appears to be
particularly important for the most vulnerable, such as women and members of scheduled
castes. In the absence of targeting or complementary policies, policies that increase early
life investment can increase inequality in the presence of child labor.
     These results have important implications both for policymakers interested in increasing
educational outcomes and for researchers interested in identifying the parameters of the
human capital production function. For the former, early life investment coupled with other
complementary policies such as conditional cash transfers may be the best way to increase
education if early life investments also affect the opportunity cost of schooling. For the latter,
the results suggest that researchers, particularly those working on low-income countries, must
take into account how the child human capital stock affects the opportunity cost of schooling,
as well as the benefits of schooling.




                                               30
References

Adhvaryu, Achyuta, Anant Nyshadham, Teresa Molina, and Jorge Tamayo, "Helping
 Children Catch Up: Early Life Shocks and the PROGRESA Experiment," Working Paper 24848,
 National Bureau of Economic Research July 2018.

   and , "Endowments at Birth and Parents' Investments in Children," Economic Journal, June
  2016, 126 (593), 781­820.

Agostinelli, Francesco and Matthew Wiswall, "Estimating the Technology of Children's Skill
 Formation," Working Paper 22442, National Bureau of Economic Research July 2016.

Aizer, Anna and Flavio Cunha, "The Production of Human Capital: Endowments, Investments
  and Fertility," 2012. NBER Working Paper No. 18429.

Akresh, Richard, Daniel Halim, and Marieke Kleemans, "Long-term and intergenerational
 effects of education: Evidence from school construction in Indonesia," 2018.

  , Emilie Bagby, Daien de Walque, and Harounan Kazianga, "Child Labor, Schooling,
  and Child Ability," Technical Report 2017.

Almond, Douglas and Janet Currie, "Killing Me Softly: The Fetal Origins Hypothesis,"
  Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2011, 25 (3), 153­72.

Ashraf, Nava, Natalie Bau, Nathan Nunn, and Alessandra Voena, "Bride Price and
 Female Education," Journal of Political Economy, 2020, 128 (2), 591­641.

Atkin, David, "Endogenous Skill Acquisition and Export Manufacturing in Mexico," American
  Economic Review, August 2016, 106 (8), 2046­2085.

Attanasio, Orazio, Costas Meghir, and Emily Nix, "Human Capital Development and
  Parental Investment in India," Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming.

Banerjee, Abhijit V, "Educational Policy and the Economics of the Family," Journal of Devel-
 opment Economics, 2004, 74 (1), 3­32.

Basu, Kaushik, "Child Labor: Cause, Consequence, and Cure, with Remarks on International
 Labor Standards," Journal of Economic literature, 1999, 37 (3), 1083­1119.

   and Van Pham, "The Economics of Child Labor," American Economic Review, 1998, 88 (3),
  412­27.

Bau, Natalie, "Can Policy Change Culture? Government Pension Plans and Traditional Kinship
 Practicess," CEPR Working Paper No. DP13486, 2019.

Behrman, Jere R, Mark R Rosenzweig, and Paul Taubman, "Endowments and the Allo-
 cation of Schooling in the Family and in the Marriage Market: The Twins Experiment," Journal
 of Political Economy, 1994, 102 (6), 1131­1174.

Belloni, Alexandre, Daniel Chen, Victor Chernozhukov, and Christian Hansen, "Sparse
 Models and Methods for Optimal Instruments With an Application to Eminent Domain," Econo-
 metrica, 2012, 80 (6), 2369­2429.

                                             31
  , Victor Chernozhukov, Christian Hansen, and Damian Kozbur, "Inference in High-
  Dimensional Panel Models With an Application to Gun Control," Journal of Business & Eco-
  nomic Statistics, 2016, 34 (4), 590­605.

Bharadwaj, Prashant, Juan Pedro Eberhard, and Christopher A. Neilson, "Health at
 Birth, Parental Investments, and Academic Outcomes," Journal of Labor Economics, 2018, 36
 (2), 349­394.

  , Leah K Lakdawala, and Nicholas Li, "Perverse Consequences of Well Intentioned Regula-
  tion: Evidence from India's Child Labor Ban," Journal of the European Economic Association,
  2013.

Cascio, Elizabeth U and Ayushi Narayan, "Who Needs a Fracking Education? The Edu-
 cational Response to Low-Skill Biased Technological Change," Working Paper 21359, National
 Bureau of Economic Research, Revised February 2019.

Case, Anne and Christina Paxson, "Stature and Status: Height, Ability, and Labor Market
 Outcomes," Journal of Political Economy, June 2008, 116 (3), 499­532.

Charles, Kerwin Kofi, Erik Hurst, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo, "Housing Booms and
 Busts, Labor Market Opportunities, and College Attendance," American Economic Review, 2018,
 108 (10), 2947­2994.

Cunha, Flavio and James J. Heckman, "The Technology of Skill Formation," American Eco-
 nomic Review, 2007, 97 (2), 31­47.

  and , "Formulating, Identifying and Estimating the Technology of Cognitive and Noncognitive
  Skill Formation," Journal of Human Resources, 2008, 43 (4), 738­82.

Currie, Janet and Maya RossinSlater, "EarlyLife Origins of LifeCycle WellBeing: Research
 and Policy Implications," Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 2015, 34 (1), 208­242.

  and Tom Vogl, "Early-Life Health and Adult Circumstance in Developing Countries," Annual
  Review of Economics, 2013, 5 (1), 1­36.

Deaton, Angus, The Analysis of Household Surveys: a Microeconometric Approach to Develop-
 ment Policy, The World Bank, 1997.

Dessy, Sylvain E., "A Defense of Compulsive Measures Against Child Labor," Journal of Devel-
 opment Economics, 2000, 62 (1), 261­275.

Dheeravath, Venkateswarlu, Prasad S Thenkabail, G Chandrakantha, P Noojipady,
 GPO Reddy, Chandrashekhar M Biradar, Murali K Gumma, and Manohar Velpuri,
 "Irrigated Areas of India Derived using MODIS 500 m Time Series for the Years 2001­2003,"
 ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, 2010, 65 (1), 42­59.

Dizon-Ross, Rebecca, "Parents' Beliefs About Their Children's Academic Ability: Implications
  for Educational Investments," American Economic Review, 2019, 109 (8), 2728­65.

Duflo, Esther, "Schooling and Labor Market Consequences of School Construction in Indonesia:
 Evidence from an Unusual Policy Experiment," The American Economic Review, 2001, 91 (4),
 795.

                                             32
Duque, Valentina, Maria Rosales-Rueda, and Fabio Sanchez, "How Do Early-Life Shocks
 Interact with Subsequent Human Capital Investments? Evidence from Administrative Data,"
 2020. Working Paper.

Dyson, Tim and Mick Moore, "On Kinship Structure, Female Autonomy, and Demographic
 Behavior in India," Population and Development Review, 1983, pp. 35­60.

Edmonds, Eric V, "Child labor," Handbook of Development Economics, 2007, 4, 3607­3709.

Edmonds, Eric V. and Nina Pavcnik, "Child Labor in the Global Economy," Journal of
 Economic Perspectives, 2005, 19 (1), 199­220.

Garc´
    ia, Jorge Luis, James J. Heckman, Duncan Ermini Leaf, and Prados, "Quantifying
 the Life-Cycle Benefits of a Prototypical Early Childhood Program," IZA Discussion Papers,
 Institute of Labor Economics (IZA) May 2017.

Gilraine, Mike, "School Accountability and the Dynamics of Human Capital Formation," 2017.

Gupta, Monica Das, "Selective Discrimination Against Female Children in Rural Punjab, India,"
 Population and Development Review, 1987, 13 (1), 77­100.

Haacker, Markus, Timothy B Hallett, and Rifat Atun, "On Discount Rates for Economic
 Evaluations in Global Health," Health Policy and Planning, 2020, 35 (1), 107­114.

Hazan, Moshe and Binyamin Berdugo, "Child Labor, Fertility, and Economic Growth," The
 Economic Journal, 2002, 112 (482), 810­828.

Heckman, James J., "The Economics, Technology, and Neuroscience of Human Capability For-
 mation," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2007, 104 (33), 13250­13255.

Jayachandran, Seema, "Selling Labor Low: Wage Responses to Productivity Shocks in Devel-
  oping Countries," Journal of Political Economy, 2006, 114 (3), 538­575.

   and Rohini Pande, "Why Are Indian Children So Short? The Role of Birth Order and Son
  Preference," American Economic Review, September 2017, 107 (9), 2600­2629.

Jensen, Robert, "The (Perceived) Returns to Education and the Demand for Schooling," The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2010, 125 (2), 515­548.

Johnson, Rucker C. and C. Kirabo Jackson, "Reducing Inequality through Dynamic Com-
  plementarity: Evidence from Head Start and Public School Spending," American Economic
  Journal: Economic Policy, 2019, 11 (4), 310­349.

Kaur, Supreet, "Nominal Wage Rigidity in Village Labor Markets," American Economic Review,
 October 2019, 109 (10), 3585­3616.

Knudsen, Eric I., James J. Heckman, Judy L. Cameron, and Jack P. Shonkoff, "Eco-
 nomic, Neurobiological and Behavioral Perspectives on Building America's Future Workforce,"
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2006, 103 (27), 10155­10162.

Kone, Zovanga L, Maggie Y Liu, Aaditya Mattoo, Caglar Ozden, and Siddharth
 Sharma, "Internal Borders and Migration in India," Journal of Economic Geography, 2018,
 18 (4), 729­759.

                                             33
Krishna, Kowligi R, Agroecosystems: Soils, Climate, Crops, Nutrient Dynamics and Productiv-
 ity, Apple Academic Press, 2014.

Levy, Victor, "Cropping Pattern, Mechanization, Child Labor, and Fertility Behavior in a Farm-
  ing Economy: Rural Egypt," Economic Development and Cultural Change, 1985, 33 (4), 777­791.

Maccini, Sharon and Dean Yang, "Under the Weather: Health, Schooling, and Economic
 Consequences of Early-Life Rainfall," American Economic Review, June 2009, 99 (3), 1006­26.

Malamud, Ofer, Cristian Pop-Eleches, and Miguel Urquiola, "Interactions Between Family
 and School Environments: Evidence on Dynamic Complementarities?," NBER Working Papers
 22112 March 2016.

Muralidharan, Karthik and Nishith Prakash, "Cycling to school: Increasing secondary school
 enrollment for girls in India," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2017, 9 (3), 321­
 50.

Ortiz-Ospina, Esteban and Max Roser, "Child Labor," Our World in Data, 2020.
 https://ourworldindata.org/child-labor.

Rossin-Slater, Maya and Miriam W¨     ust, "What Is the Added Value of Preschool for Poor
 Children? Long-Term and Intergenerational Impacts and Interactions with an Infant Health
 Intervention," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, forthcoming.

Santangelo, Gabriella, "Firms and Farms: The Local Effects of Farm Income on Firms Demand,"
  Cambridge Working Papers in Economics 1924, Faculty of Economics, University of Cambridge
  January 2019.

Sayre, Rebecca K, Amanda E Devercelli, Michelle J Neuman, and Quentin Wodon,
  Investing in early childhood development: review of the World Bank's recent experience, The
  World Bank, 2015.

Shah, Manisha and Bryce Millett Steinberg, "Drought of Opportunities: Contemporaneous
  and Long Term Impacts of Rainfall Shocks on Human Capital," Journal of Political Economy,
  April 2017, 125 (2), 527­561.

   and , "Workfare and Human Capital Investment: Evidence from India," Journal of Human
  Resources, forthcoming, pp. 1117­9201R2.

Singh, Abhijeet, "Learning more with every year: School year productivity and international
  learning divergence," Journal of the European Economic Association, 2016.

Thenkabail, Prasad S, Chandrashekhar M Biradar, Praveen Noojipady, Venkateswarlu
 Dheeravath, Yuanjie Li, Manohar Velpuri, Muralikrishna Gumma, Obi Reddy P
 Gangalakunta, Hugh Turral, Xueliang Cai et al., "Global irrigated area map (GIAM),
 derived from remote sensing, for the end of the last millennium," International Journal of Remote
 Sensing, 2009, 30 (14), 3679­3733.

UNICEF, "The Situation of Children in India: A Profile," New Delhi: UNICEF, 2011.




                                               34
                                                            Figures


                                      Figure 1: Illustration of Proposition 3a




Notes: This figure illustrates the intuition for Proposition 3a. a       
                                                                   low (hlow ) denotes the cutoff innate ability above which a child
is educated in a low child labor district for a given first period human capital investment h                      
                                                                                                 low , and ahigh (hhigh ) denotes the
cutoff for high child labor districts. The graph illustrates how these cutoffs change as a function of shocks to first period income
y1 . The gray shaded areas represent the children who were not educated before and become educated as a result of the change
in y1 .




                                                                35
                           Figure 2: Child Labor Prevalence by District, 2004




Notes: This figure shows a map of the districts of India, shaded by the prevalence of child labor, which is defined as the
proportion of children aged 5-17 who report working in the market, in domestic work, or for a home enterprise as their primary
activity.
Source: NSS Schedule 10 (2004).




                                                             36
               Figure 3: Effect of Early Life Shocks on Height and Early Test Scores
                                           (a) Height Age 5-17 (IHDS)




                                        (b) Test Scores Age 5-7 (ASER)




Notes: Each panel plots the relationship between residual outcomes (y-axis) and residual early life shocks × child labor.
Residuals are calculated after controlling for fixed effects for district and age. A district is defined as above median if it had
above the median level of child labor in the NSS Round 68 (the most proximate NSS round to the IHDS 2012).
Source: IHDS (2012) and ASER (2005-2014).




                                                               37
Figure 4: Local Polynomial Relationships Between Schooling and Early Life Shocks × Child
Labor
                                                    (a) Works (NSS)




                                             (b) Attends School (NSS)




                                             (c) Dropped Out (ASER)




Notes: Each panel plots the relationship between residual outcomes (y-axis) and residual early life shocks × child labor.
Residuals are calculated after controlling for fixed effects for month × year × district as well as fixed effects for age × gender
× early life shocks. The local polynomial is based on an Epanechnikov kernel function with Stata's default bandwidth. The
shaded region reflects the 95% confidence interval.
Source: NSS Schedule 10 (2004-2012) and ASER (2005-2014).




                                                               38
              Figure 5: Total Effect of Early Life Shocks by Gender and Birth Order




Notes: This figure plots the total effect of early life shocks in above-median child labor districts. The coefficients are all
calculated in one regression, which has the standard fixed effects in the tables (gender, age, and district/month/year), as well
as additional indicators for identity (each child falls into exactly one of the six categories). Standard errors are clustered at the
district level.
Source: NSS Schedule 10 (2004-2012).




      Figure 6: Total Effect of Early Life Rainfall in High Child Labor Districts By Age
                                                    (a) Cognitive Skill




Notes: This figure plots the total effect of early life shocks in above-median child labor districts, separately by each age. The
coefficients are from one joint regression, and the regressions have the standard fixed effects in the tables (gender, age, and
district/month/year). Standard errors are clustered at the district level.
Source: ASER (2005-2014).




                                                                39
                                                          Tables


                                                Table 1: Data Sources

  Data Source                                             Type              Years                Variables Used
  National Sample Survey (NSS) Schedule 1              Repeated           2004-2012                 Consumption
                                                      Cross-Section
  National Sample Survey (NSS) Schedule 10             Repeated           2004-2012            Average child labor
                                                      Cross-Section                              Primary activity
                                                                                                   Consumption
                                                                                              Socioeconomic status
                                                                                                    Education
                                                                                          Family size/number of children
  National Family Health Survey (NFHS)                 Repeated         1998 and 2015                 Fertility
                                                      Cross-Section
  Annual Status of Education Report (ASER)             Repeated           2005-2014                 Dropout
                                                      Cross-Section                          Math and reading scores
  India Human Development Survey (IHDS)                 HH Panel          2005 and                  Child wages
                                                                            2012                  Anthropometrics
                                                                                                    Math scores
  University of Delaware Gridded Rainfall Data            District        1970-2008                 Rain shocks
                                                           Panel
  Global Irrigated Area Mapping                       Cross-Section          2001                     Irrigation
  Unified District Information System (DISE)          Cross-Section          2005           Education quality measures
Notes: This table reports all the data sources (and the key variables from those data sources) used in this paper.




                                                              40
                                  Table 2: Summary Statistics

                                                                          Mean Value (Std. Dev.)

 NSS Schedule 10 (Employment) for Children 5­17
 Primary Activity Works                                                            0.09 (0.294)
 Attends School                                                                    0.81 (0.386)
 NSS Schedule 1 (Consumption) for Children 5­17
 Ate At Least 1 Meal in School                                                     0.24 (0.429)
 Ate At Least 10 Meals in School                                                   0.22 (0.420)
 Ate At Least 20 Meals in School                                                   0.15 (0.360)
 NSS Schedule 1 and 10, Household-level
 ln(Consumption per adult + 1/3 kids)                                              7.07   (0.590)
 ln(Consumption per adult + 1/2 kids)                                              6.98   (0.595)
 Basic Cooking Fuel                                                                0.79   (0.407)
 Share of Expenditure on Food                                                      0.57   (0.116)
 ASER for Children 5­16
 Dropped Out                                                                       0.03 (0.184)
 Math Score                                                                        0.92 (0.733)
 Read Score                                                                        2.48 (1.549)
 IHDS
  ln(wage)                                                                         2.55 (0.532)
  Parental Assessment of Ability (0-3)                                             1.96 (0.544)
  Height (cm)                                                                      135 (19.511)
 District Characteristics
 NSS Schedule     10
 Share Adults     in Agriculture                                                   0.46   (0.202)
 Share Adults     in Sugar/Cotton                                                  0.01   (0.051)
 Share Adults     in Retail & Hotels                                               0.04   (0.033)
 Share Adults     in Manufacturing                                                 0.04   (0.055)
 Global Irrigated Area Mapping
 Share Irrigated                                                                   0.56 (0.348)

 Notes: This table contains summary statistics for our main outcomes, explanatory variables, and key district
characteristics.
Source: NSS Schedules 1 and 10 (2004-2012); ASER (2005-2014); IHDS (2012); Global Irrigated Mapping
data (2001).




                                                    41
       Table 3: Hedonic Wage Regression for Children

                                      (1)             (2)            (3)
                                                  ln(wage)
 Height (cm)                      0.0069***                0.0064**
                                   (0.002)                  (0.003)
 Lagged Math Score                                0.057*** 0.054**
                                                   (0.022)  (0.024)
 Mean Outcome                        2.53            2.56           2.54
 Number Districts                     270            235            211
 Number Observations                 1307            766            604
 Notes: This table reports the association between size, cognitive skill, and
ln(earnings) conditional on working in the IHDS. Column 1 includes all chil-
dren with wages, while columns 2 and 3 are restricted to children 15-17. All
columns include district/round, age, and gender fixed effects. The outcome data
are drawn from the IHDS 2012. The IHDS 2005 is used to provide information
on lagged math scores from when an individual was 8-11.
Source: IHDS (2005, 2012).




                                     42
                                                             Table 4: Effect of Early Life Shocks on Schooling

                                                (1)           (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)         (7)         (8)         (9)         (10)        (11)         (12)
                                                                                                A. Primary Activity
                                                       Primary Activity Works (NSS)                           Attends School (NSS)                             Dropped Out (ASER)

       Early Life Rain                      -0.0045***     -0.017***   -0.013***    -0.007***    0.005***      0.019***   0.015***     0.008***   -0.00003     -0.006***   -0.004***   -0.002***
                                             (0.0009)       (0.002)     (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.002)    (0.002)      (0.001)   (0.0003)      (0.0009)    (0.0006)    (0.0004)
       Early Life Rain
       ... × Child Labor                                    0.130***                                          -0.130***                                        0.064***
                                                             (0.024)                                           (0.024)                                          (0.009)
       ... × (Above Median) Child Labor                                0.016***                                           -0.018***                                        0.008***
                                                                        (0.003)                                            (0.003)                                         (0.0012)
       ... × (Top Quintile) Child Labor                                             0.016***                                          -0.015***                                         0.012***
                                                                                     (0.004)                                           (0.004)                                           (0.001)
       Mean Outcome                            0.095         0.095      0.095        0.095         0.817        0.817       0.817       0.817      0.035         0.035       0.035        0.035
       Total Effect                                                    0.003**      0.008**                                -0.003*     -0.006*                             0.003***     0.008***
       SE of Total Effect                                              (0.001)      (0.003)                                (0.001)     (0.003)                              (0.000)      (0.001)
       Number Districts                         574           574        574          574           574          574        574          574         559          559         559         559
       Number Observations                    486,699       486,699    486,699      486,699       486,699      486,699    486,699      486,699    7,608,681    7,608,681   7,608,681   7,608,681
43




                                                                                                     B. Meals
                                                        Any Meals at School (NSS)                           10 Meals at School (NSS)                         20 Meals at School (NSS)

       Early Life Rain                       0.008***       0.020***   0.018***     0.012***     0.0074***     0.018***   0.016***     0.011***   0.002**      0.010***    0.008***     0.004***
                                              (0.001)        (0.004)    (0.003)      (0.002)      (0.001)       (0.003)    (0.003)      (0.002)   (0.001)       (0.002)     (0.002)      (0.001)
       Early Life Rain
       ... × Child Labor                                   -0.120***                                          -0.110***                                        -0.077***
                                                            (0.033)                                            (0.032)                                          (0.026)
       ... × (Above Median) Child Labor                                -0.019***                                          -0.018***                                        -0.012***
                                                                        (0.004)                                            (0.004)                                          (0.003)
       ... × (Top Quintile) Child Labor                                             -0.019***                                         -0.017***                                         -0.008*
                                                                                     (0.005)                                           (0.005)                                          (0.004)
       Mean Outcome                            0.243         0.243       0.243        0.243        0.228        0.228        0.228       0.228     0.153         0.153        0.153       0.153
       Total Effect                                                      -0.001       -0.006                                -0.001      -0.0061                              -0.003      -0.004
       SE of Total Effect                                               (0.002)      (0.004)                               (0.002)     (0.0045)                             (0.002)     (0.003)
       Number Districts                         574           574        574          574           574          574        574          574        574           574        574          574
       Number Observations                    540,554       540,554    540,554      540,554       540,554      540,554    540,554      540,554    540,554       540,554    540,554      540,554

     Notes: This table shows estimates of 1 and 2 from equation 1, with fixed effects for age, gender, and month/year/district (there is no month reported in the ASER data).
     The analysis includes all children between the ages of 5 and 17. The total effect row reports the total effect of a 1 unit increase in the aggregate rainfall shock in a district for
     whom the share rounds above median or the share rounds in the top quintile variable is equal to 1 (depending on the specification). Standard errors are clustered by district.
     Source: NSS Schedule 1 and 10 (2004-2012) and ASER (2005-2014).
                      Table 5: Effect of Early Life Shocks on Schooling for Oldest Sons

                                                   (1)         (2)         (3)                (4)        (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)
                                                                     A. Primary Activity
                                                               Primary Activity Works (NSS)                       Attends School (NSS)

Early Life Rain                                 -0.002***   -0.016***   -0.012***          -0.006***   0.004***   0.018***    0.014***    0.007***
                                                 (0.001)     (0.002)     (0.001)            (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.001)
Early Life Rain
... × Oldest son                                -0.007***     -0.001     -0.003**          -0.005***   0.005***     0.003      0.003*     0.005***
                                                 (0.001)     (0.002)      (0.001)           (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.002)     (0.001)     (0.001)
... × Child Labor                                           0.140***                                              -0.140***
                                                             (0.025)                                               (0.025)
... × Child Labor × Oldest son                              -0.056**                                                0.023
                                                             (0.022)                                               (0.029)
... × (Above Median) Child Labor                                        0.018***                                              -0.019***
                                                                         (0.003)                                               (0.003)
... × (Above Median) Child Labor × Oldest son                           -0.007***                                               0.003
                                                                         (0.002)                                               (0.003)
... × (Top Quintile) Child Labor                                                           0.018***                                       -0.015***
                                                                                            (0.004)                                        (0.004)
... × (Top Quintile) Child Labor × Oldest son                                               -0.007*                                         0.0002
                                                                                            (0.004)                                        (0.005)
Mean Outcome                                      0.095       0.095        0.095             0.095      0.817       0.817       0.817       0.817
Mean Outcome, Oldest Sons                         0.077       0.077        0.077             0.077      0.848       0.848       0.848       0.848
Total Effect, Not-Oldest Sons                                            0.006***          0.012***                           -0.004**    -0.007**
SE of Total Effect, Not-Oldest Sons                                       (0.002)           (0.004)                            (0.001)     (0.003)
Total Effect, Oldest Sons                                                -0.005**            -0.001                             0.002       -0.002
SE of Total Effect, Oldest Sons                                           (0.002)           (0.004)                            (0.002)     (0.005)
Number Districts                                  574         574          574               574         574        574         574         574
Number Observations                             486,699     486,699      486,699           486,699     486,699    486,699     486,699     486,699
                                                           B. With Additional Fixed Effects
                                                for District × Round × Age × Sex × Early Life Rain
                                                               Primary Activity Works (NSS)                       Attends School (NSS)
Early Life Rain
... × Oldest son                                -0.003***     0.002      0.0006              -0.001    0.002**     -0.003       -0.001      0.000
                                                 (0.001)     (0.002)     (0.001)            (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.002)      (0.002)     (0.001)
... × Child Labor × Oldest son                              -0.060***                                             0.072**
                                                             (0.021)                                              (0.030)
... × (Above Median) Child Labor × Oldest son                           -0.008***                                             0.009**
                                                                         (0.002)                                              (0.003)
... × (Top Quintile) Child Labor × Oldest son                                              -0.008**                                        0.011*
                                                                                            (0.003)                                        (0.006)
Mean Outcome                                      0.095       0.095       0.095              0.095      0.817       0.817       0.817       0.817
Mean Outcome, Oldest Sons                         0.077       0.077       0.077              0.077      0.848       0.848       0.848       0.848
Number Districts                                  574         574          574               574         574        574         574         574
Number Observations                             465,076     465,076      465,076           465,076     465,076    465,076     465,076     465,076

Notes: This table shows estimates of 1 and 2 from equation 1, with fixed effects for age, gender, and month/year/district.
Oldest sons are imputed as the oldest male in the household who reports being a child (or grandchild) of the household head.
Oldest sons are demographically different than other children, since they are older (and male). Panel B includes fixed effects
for District/Month/Year/Age/Sex/Early Life Shocks, so the remaining variation compares oldest sons to not-oldest boys of the
same age (as a result, we do not report the effect of early life shocks or the total effect of early life shocks for oldest sons, since
the former is absorbed by the fixed effects). The total effect rows report the total effect of a 1 unit increase in the aggregate
rainfall shock in a district for whom the share rounds above median or the share rounds in the top quintile variable is equal to
1 (depending on the specification) for oldest and non-oldest sons. Standard errors are clustered by district.
Source: NSS Schedule 10 (2004-2012).




                                                                           44
                      Table 6: Effect of Early Life Shocks on Household Consumption

                                       (1)         (2)        (3)           (4)        (5)       (6)         (7)          (8)
                                                 A. Household Consumption
                                    ln(Consumption Per Adult + 1/3 * kids) (NSS)     ln(Consumption Per Adult + 1/2 * kids) (NSS)

 Early Life Rain                     0.001**    0.004***   0.003***      0.002***    0.001*    0.004***   0.002***      0.001**
                                     (0.000)     (0.001)    (0.001)       (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.001)    (0.001)      (0.000)
 Early Life Rain
 ... × Child Labor                              -0.034**                                       -0.034**
                                                 (0.014)                                        (0.014)
 ... × (Above Median) Child Labor                          -0.004**                                       -0.003**
                                                            (0.001)                                        (0.001)
 ... × (Top Quintile) Child Labor                                         -0.004*                                       -0.004*
                                                                          (0.002)                                       (0.002)
 Mean Outcome                         7.070       7.070      7.070         7.070      6.980     6.980       6.980        6.980
 Total Effect                                              -0.00058       -0.0017                         -0.00076      -0.0021
 SE of Total Effect                                        (0.0011)       (0.002)                         (0.0011)      (0.002)
 Number Districts                      574         574       574           574         574       574        574           574
 Number Observations                 421,770     421,770   421,770       421,770     421,770   421,770    421,770       421,770
                                             B. Indirect Measures of Consumption
                                                Poor Fuel Source (NSS)                             Food Share (NSS)

 Early Life Rain                    -0.002***   -0.004**   -0.003***     -0.003***    0.000    -0.0009*   -0.0007**     -0.0003
                                     (0.000)     (0.001)    (0.001)       (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)      (0.000)
 Early Life Rain
 ... × Child Labor                                0.026                                        0.009*
                                                 (0.018)                                       (0.005)
 ... × (Above Median) Child Labor                            0.003                                        0.001***
                                                            (0.002)                                        (0.000)
 ... × (Top Quintile) Child Labor                                        0.006**                                        0.001*
                                                                         (0.003)                                        (0.000)
 Mean Outcome                         0.791       0.791      0.791         0.791      0.573     0.573       0.573        0.573
 Total Effect                                               -0.0003       0.0029                          0.0009**      0.0015*
 SE of Total Effect                                         (0.001)       (0.002)                          (0.000)      (0.000)
 Number Districts                      574         574       574           574         574       574        574           574
 Number Observations                 225,916     225,916   225,916       225,916     225,916   225,916    225,916       225,916

Notes: This table shows estimates of 1 and 2 from equation 1, with fixed effects for age of the household head, and
month/year/district. Each household is in the data once, and their exposure is coded as the male household head's exposure.
Household heads are either reported household heads, married to the reported household head (if the head is female), or if
neither exist, the oldest male under the age of 55. Poor Fuel Source is the primary source of energy for cooking, and it includes:
coal, firewood and chips, dung cake, and others. Households whose heads are under 24 (and therefore, may not have completed
their education) are not included. The total effect row reports the total effect of a 1 unit increase in the aggregate rainfall shock
in a district for whom the share rounds above median or the share rounds in the top quintile variable is equal to 1 (depending
on the specification). Standard errors are clustered by district.
Source: NSS Schedule 1 and 10 (2004-2012).




                                                                    45
                               Table 7: Effect of Early Life Shocks on Fertility

                                                                 (1)           (2)             (3)                (4)
                                             Number of Children (NFHS)
              Early Life Rain                                 -0.017***    -0.026***     -0.027***            -0.019***
                                                               (0.004)      (0.006)       (0.005)              (0.004)
              Early Life Rain
              ... × Child Labor                                             0.146**
                                                                            (0.071)
              ... × (Above Median) Child Labor                                            0.023***
                                                                                           (0.007)
              ... × (Top Quintile) Child Labor                                                                   0.010
                                                                                                                (0.009)
              Mean Outcome                                      2.840        2.840           2.840                2.840
              Total Effect                                                                  -0.005               -0.009
              SE of Total Effect                                                           (0.006)              (0.008)
              Number Districts                                  559           554            554                 554
              Number Observations                             432,061       427,710        427,710             427,710

              Notes: This table shows estimates of 1 and 2 from equation 1, with fixed effects for age, and
             year/district. Number of children is calculated as total children ever born. The total effect row
             reports the total effect of a 1 unit increase in the aggregate rainfall shock in a district for whom the
             share rounds above median or the share rounds in the top quintile variable is equal to 1 (depending
             on the specification). Standard errors are clustered by district.
             Source: NFHS Round 2 (1998-1999) and Round 4 (2015-2016).


                           Table 8: Intergenerational Effect of Early Life Shocks

                                           (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)        (5)            (6)          (7)        (8)
                                             Primary Activity Works (NSS)                        Attends School (NSS)

 Early Life Rain (Head)                 0.0009*    -0.0018*      -0.0010    -0.0000    -0.0009        0.0024       0.0017     0.0004
                                        (0.0005)   (0.0010)     (0.0007)   (0.0005)   (0.0007)       (0.0016)     (0.0011)   (0.0008)
 Early Life Rain (Head)
 ... × Child Labor                                  0.026**                                          -0.030*
                                                    (0.011)                                          (0.017)
 ... × (Above Median) Child Labor                               0.003**                                           -0.004*
                                                                (0.001)                                           (0.002)
 ... × (Top Quintile) Child Labor                                           0.003                                             -0.004
                                                                           (0.002)                                           (0.003)
 Mean Outcome                             0.095      0.095       0.095      0.095      0.817          0.817         0.817      0.817
 Total Effect                                                   0.002**    0.003*                                  -0.002*    -0.004
 SE of Total Effect                                             (0.001)    (0.002)                                (0.0016)   (0.003)
 Number Districts                         574         577         577        577        574            577          577        577
 Number Observations                    465,076     465,305     465,305    465,305    465,076        465,305      465,305    465,305

Notes: This table shows estimates of 1 and 2 from equation 1, with fixed effects for age of the household head,
month/year/district, age, gender, and the direct effect of early life shocks for the children. Exposure is imputed with that
of the male household head. Household heads are either reported household heads, married to the reported household head,
or if neither exist, the oldest male under the age of 55. The total effect row reports the total effect of a 1 unit increase in the
aggregate rainfall shock in a district for whom the share rounds above median or the share rounds in the top quintile variable
is equal to 1 (depending on the specification). Standard errors are clustered by district.
Source: NSS Schedule 10 (2004-2012).



                                                                46
                                Table 9: What Predicts Child Labor?

                                                      (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)
                                            A. Mean Child Labor
 Average Adult Wage                               -0.011***
                                                   (0.0011)
 Education Index                                                 -0.033***
                                                                  (0.0016)
 School Quality Index                                                           0.0021
                                                                               (0.0042)
 Percent Adults Work in Agriculture                                                         0.048***
                                                                                            (0.0096)
 Percent Adults Work in Sugar/Cotton                                                                      0.150***
                                                                                                           (0.036)
 Mean Outcome                                        0.096         0.096         0.096        0.096         0.096
 Number Observations                                  556           556           556          556           556
                                          B. Above Median Labor
 Average Adult Wage                               -0.086***
                                                   (0.007)
 Education Index                                                 -0.230***
                                                                  (0.0097)
 School Quality Index                                                            0.025
                                                                                (0.032)
 Percent Adults Work in Agriculture                                                         0.350***
                                                                                             (0.072)
 Percent Adults Work in Sugar/Cotton                                                                      1.090***
                                                                                                           (0.230)
 Mean Outcome                                        0.500         0.500         0.500        0.500         0.500
 Number Observations                                  556           556           556          556           556
                                       C. Top Quintile Child Labor
 Average Adult Wage                               -0.044***
                                                   (0.0048)
 Education Index                                                 -0.140***
                                                                  (0.011)
 School Quality Index                                                            0.029
                                                                                (0.024)
 Percent Adults Work in Agriculture                                                         0.180***
                                                                                             (0.049)
 Percent Adults Work in Sugar/Cotton                                                                      0.790***
                                                                                                           (0.240)
 Mean Outcome                                        0.201         0.201         0.201        0.201         0.201
 Number Observations                                  556           556           556          556           556

 Notes: This table reports coefficients from regressions of measures of child labor on district characteristics. An
observation is a district. "Mean wages" is the average adult (age 25-60) wage reported in the NSS, "Percent of Adults
in Agriculture" is the percent of adults (age 25-60) who report their primary industry as agriculture in the NSS, and
"Percent of Adults in Sugar/Cotton" is the percent of adults (age 25-60) who report cultivating either sugar or cotton
in the NSS. The "Education Index" includes average literacy, average female literacy, and average primary school
completion rate from the NSS. The "School Quality Index" includes the percent of schools with a girls' toilet, the
percent of school with a blackboard, the average number of textbooks per school, the (negative) percent of schools
with more than 60 students per classroom, the (negative) percent of schools with no building from the DISE, and the
number of schools per capita. Both indices are calculated by standardizing the components and taking their average.
Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.
Source: NSS Schedule 10 (2004-2012) and DISE (2005). 47
Appendix Figures


Figure A1: Effect of Early Life Rainfall on Schooling Within Each Quintile of Child Labor
Prevalence
                                           (a) All Children (Ages 5-17)




                                             (b) Older Children (> 13)




                                           (c) Younger Children ( 13)




Notes: Districts are categorized by their leave-out mean quintile of child labor intensity. This figure then plots the total effect
of early life shocks within each quintile. Panel (a) includes all children jointly, Panel (b) focuses on older children (>13), and
Panel (c) on younger children ( 13). The coefficients in Panel (a) are all calculated in one regression, and Panels (b) and
(c) are calculated from the same regression. The regressions have the standard fixed effects in the tables (gender, age, and
district/month/year). Standard errors are clustered by district.
Source: NSS Schedule 10 (2004-2012).




                                                               48
     Appendix Tables


                                               Table A1: Effect of Early Life Shocks on Height and Early Test Scores

                                                          (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)         (9)         (10)        (11)       (12)

                                                                    Height (IHDS)                              Math Score (ASER)                               Reading Score (ASER)


                     Early Life Rain                    0.260***    0.110    0.240**    0.200**    0.016***    0.011**     0.010**     0.013***    0.011***       0.013      0.014*     0.011**
                                                         (0.075)   (0.110)   (0.099)    (0.086)     (0.002)    (0.005)     (0.004)      (0.002)     (0.003)      (0.010)     (0.007)    (0.005)
                     Early Life Rain
                     ... × Child Labor                             2.490**                                       0.037                                            -0.012
                                                                   (1.250)                                      (0.046)                                          (0.088)
                     ... × (Above Median) Child Labor                         0.029                                          0.009                                            -0.004
                                                                             (0.130)                                        (0.006)                                          (0.012)
                     ... × (Top Quintile) Child Labor                                   0.290**                                          0.009                                           0.001
                                                                                        (0.130)                                         (0.007)                                         (0.014)

                     Mean Outcome                         128       128         128        128      0.493       0.493        0.493       0.493      1.110         1.110       1.110      1.110
                     Total Effect                                            0.270***   0.490***                           0.020***    0.022***                               0.009      0.013
49




                     SE of Total Effect                                       (0.100)    (0.100)                            (0.003)     (0.005)                              (0.006)    (0.012)

                     Number Districts                     342       342        342        342         562         559         559         559         562          559         559        559
                     Number Observations                 27,219    27,219     27,219     27,219    1,770,010   1,763,023   1,763,023   1,763,023   1,770,010    1,763,023   1,763,023   1763023


     Notes: This table shows estimates of 1 and 2 from equation 1 for children aged 5-17, with fixed effects for age, gender, and year/district. The total effect row reports the
     total effect of a 1 unit increase in the aggregate rainfall shock in a district for whom the share rounds above median or the share rounds in the top quintile variable is equal to
     1 (depending on the specification). Standard errors are clustered by district.
     Source: IHDS (2012) and ASER (2005-2014).
                                                          Table A2: Effect of Early Life Shocks on Activity

                                                 (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)            (6)            (7)           (8)          (9)           (10)
                                                                                      A. Sector (NSS)
                                                   Agriculture               Retail/Hotels                Other Services               Manufacturing                   Other

       Early Life Rain                         -0.0006    -0.0043***     0.000035       -0.000051    -0.000022    -0.00012***    -0.00066***    -0.0013***      -0.0040     0.0087
                                              (0.00067)    (0.0011)     (0.000030)     (0.000051)   (0.000024)     (0.000040)     (0.00023)      (0.00044)     (0.0031)    (0.0061)
       Early Life Rain
       ... × (Above Median) Child Labor                    0.0076***                   0.00017**                   0.00021***                     0.0013*                  -0.019**
                                                            (0.0021)                   (0.000089)                  (0.000062)                    (0.00070)                 (0.0092)
       Mean Outcome                             0.033        0.033        0.0003         0.0003       0.0002         0.0002          0.007         0.007        0.579        0.579
       Total Effect                                        0.0032**                    0.00012**                   0.000082**                    0.000016                  -0.011**
       SE of Total Effect                                  (0.0013)                    (0.00006)                   (0.000038)                    (0.00040)                  (0.005)
       Number Districts                          574          574           574           574           574            574            574           574          567         567
       Number Observations                     486,699      486,699       486,699       486,699       486,699        486,699        486,699       486,699       41,019      41,019
50




                                                                                     B. Location (NSS)
                                                  Goes to School            Household Work                Salaried Work             Casual Wage Labor                  Other

       Early Life Rain                       0.0059***     0.015***      -0.0017**     -0.0061***   -0.00051***   -0.00077***     -0.0023***    -0.0057***     -0.0015*     -0.0025
                                              (0.0011)     (0.0021)      (0.00080)      (0.0014)     (0.00012)     (0.00021)       (0.00042)     (0.00061)    (0.00090)    (0.0017)
       Early Life Rain
       ... × (Above Median) Child Labor                    -0.018***                   0.0089***                    0.00053*                     0.0069***                  0.0020
                                                            (0.0033)                    (0.0024)                    (0.00030)                     (0.0012)                 (0.0027)
       Mean Outcome                             0.817         0.817        0.072         0.072         0.003           0.003         0.020          0.020       0.087        0.087
       Total Effect                                         -0.0033*                    0.0028*                      -0.00025                      0.0012                  -0.00048
       SE of Total Effect                                   (0.0018)                    (0.0015)                    (0.00017)                     (0.0008)                 (0.0015)
       Number Districts                          574          574           574           574           574            574            574           574          574         574
       Number Observations                     486,699      486,699       486,699       486,699       486,699        486,699        486,699       486,699      486,699     486,699

     Notes: This table shows estimates of 1 and 2 from equation 1, with fixed effects for age, gender, and month/year/district. The total effect row reports the total effect of a 1
     unit increase in the aggregate rainfall shock in a district for whom the share rounds above median or the share rounds in the top quintile variable is equal to 1 (depending on
     the specification). Standard errors are clustered by district.
     Source: NSS Schedule 10 (2004-2012).
                            Table A3: Effect of Early Life Shocks on Schooling by Age

                                              (1)           (2)           (3)       (4)          (5)          (6)         (7)         (8)
                                                     Primary Activity Works (NSS)                          Attends School (NSS)

 Early Life Rain                           -0.0068***    -0.017***   -0.014***   -0.0093***   0.0085***     0.017***   0.015***    0.010***
                                            (0.0010)      (0.0031)    (0.0021)    (0.0013)     (0.0013)     (0.0032)   (0.0024)    (0.0016)
 Early Life Rain
 ... × > 13                                0.0068***       -0.0010     0.0026     0.0047*     -0.0073***     0.0066    0.00057      -0.0038
                                            (0.0022)      (0.0059)    (0.0040)    (0.0026)     (0.0023)     (0.0058)   (0.0040)    (0.0027)
 ... × Child Labor                                        0.10***                                          -0.086***
                                                           (0.029)                                           (0.027)
 ... × Child Labor × > 13                                   0.089                                           -0.15***
                                                           (0.058)                                           (0.057)
 ... × (Above Median) Child Labor                                     0.013***                                         -0.013***
                                                                      (0.0033)                                          (0.0036)
 ... × (Above Median) Child Labor × > 13                               0.0096                                           -0.017**
                                                                      (0.0070)                                          (0.0072)
 ... × (Top Quintile) Child Labor                                                0.012***                                          -0.0090**
                                                                                 (0.0044)                                           (0.0043)
 ... × (Top Quintile) Child Labor × > 13                                           0.014                                            -0.021**
                                                                                 (0.0098)                                           (0.0100)
 Mean Outcome                                0.095         0.095        0.095      0.095        0.817        0.817       0.817        0.817
 Mean Outcome, >13                           0.258         0.258        0.258      0.258        0.703        0.703        0.703       0.703
 Total Effect, 13                                                     -0.00018     0.003                                 0.0021      0.0013
 SE of Total Effect, 13                                               (0.0017)   (0.0038)                               (0.002)     (0.0035)
 Total Effect, > 13                                                   0.012***   0.022***                              -0.014***   -0.024***
 SE of Total Effect, > 13                                              (0.004)    (0.008)                               (0.004)      (0.008)
 Number Districts                             574           574         574         574          574          574        574         574
 Number Observations                        486,699       486,699     486,699     486,699      486,699      486,699    486,699     486,699


Notes: This table shows estimates of 1 and 2 from equation 1 by age, with fixed effects for age, gender, and
month/year/district. The total effect rows report the total effect of a 1 unit increase in the aggregate rainfall shock in a
district for whom the share rounds above median or the share rounds in the top quintile variable is equal to 1 (depending on
the specification). Standard errors are clustered by district.
Source: NSS Schedule 10 (2004-2012).




                                                                     51
                       Table A4: Effect of Early Life Shocks on Schooling by Gender

                                              (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)         (7)          (8)
                                                    Primary Activity Works (NSS)                         Attends School (NSS)

 Early Life Rain                           -0.0082***   -0.019***   -0.016***   -0.011***   0.0090***    0.021***    0.018***     0.012***
                                            (0.0011)     (0.0029)    (0.0021)    (0.0014)    (0.0013)    (0.0032)    (0.0024)     (0.0016)
 Early Life Rain
 ... × Girl                                0.0080***     0.0049*    0.0068***   0.0072***   -0.0066***     -0.0052   -0.0058***   -0.0065***
                                            (0.0013)    (0.0027)     (0.0019)    (0.0015)    (0.0015)     (0.0031)    (0.0020)     (0.0016)
 ... × Child Labor                                      0.110***                                         -0.130***
                                                         (0.027)                                           (0.030)
 ... × Child Labor × Girl                                 0.032                                             -0.014
                                                         (0.028)                                           (0.035)
 ... × (Above Median) Child Labor                                   0.015***                                         -0.018***
                                                                    (0.0033)                                          (0.0038)
 ... × (Above Median) Child Labor × Girl                             0.0024                                            -0.0015
                                                                    (0.0036)                                          (0.0041)
 ... × (Top Quintile) Child Labor                                               0.015***                                          -0.015***
                                                                                (0.0044)                                           (0.0049)
 ... × (Top Quintile) Child Labor × Girl                                         0.0036                                            -0.00019
                                                                                (0.0054)                                           (0.0065)
 Mean Outcome                                0.095        0.095        0.095      0.095       0.817        0.817        0.817        0.817
 Mean Outcome, Girls                         0.123        0.123        0.123      0.123       0.790        0.790        0.790        0.790
 Total Effect, Boys                                                  -0.00057    0.0035                                0.00015      -0.0032
 SE of Total Effect, Boys                                            (0.0018)   (0.0037)                              (0.0022)     (0.0042)
 Total Effect, Girls                                                0.0086***   0.014***                             -0.0071***   -0.0098**
 SE of Total Effect, Girls                                           (0.0026)    (0.005)                              (0.0025)     (0.0049)
 Number Districts                             574          574         574         574         574         574          574          574
 Number Observations                        486,699      486,699     486,699     486,699     486,699     486,699      486,699      486,699


Notes: This table shows estimates of 1 and 2 from equation 1 by gender, with fixed effects for age, gender, and
month/year/district. The total effect rows report the total effect of a 1 unit increase in the aggregate rainfall shock in a
district for whom the share rounds above median or the share rounds in the top quintile variable is equal to 1 (depending on
the specification). Standard errors are clustered by district.
Source: NSS Schedule 10 (2004-2012).




                                                                    52
                       Table A5: Effect of Early Life Shocks on Schooling by Caste

                                               (1)           (2)             (3)        (4)          (5)         (6)        (7)         (8)
                                                      Primary Activity Works (NSS)                            Attends School (NSS)

 Early Life Rain                            -0.0053***    -0.013***    -0.011***     -0.0074***   0.0060***   0.016***   0.014***    0.0082***
                                             (0.0010)      (0.0027)     (0.0020)      (0.0013)     (0.0014)   (0.0034)   (0.0026)     (0.0018)
 Early Life Rain
 ... × SC/ST                                  0.0023      -0.0097**    -0.0050*       -0.00078    0.000053      0.0073    0.0038      0.0022
                                             (0.0016)      (0.0038)    (0.0028)       (0.0020)    (0.0020)    (0.0047)   (0.0037)    (0.0025)
 ... × Child Labor                                        0.084***                                            -0.11***
                                                            (0.026)                                            (0.029)
 ... × Child Labor × SC/ST                                0.120***                                             -0.072*
                                                            (0.035)                                            (0.041)
 ... × (Above Median) Child Labor                                      0.012***                                          -0.016***
                                                                       (0.0032)                                           (0.0040)
 ... × (Above Median) Child Labor × SC/ST                              0.014***                                            -0.0068
                                                                       (0.0045)                                           (0.0055)
 ... × (Top Quintile) Child Labor                                                     0.011**                                        -0.012**
                                                                                      (0.0045)                                       (0.0048)
 ... × (Top Quintile) Child Labor × SC/ST                                             0.014**                                         -0.0094
                                                                                      (0.0058)                                       (0.0066)
 Mean Outcome                                 0.095         0.095        0.095         0.095        0.817       0.817       0.817      0.817
 Mean Outcome, SC/ST                          0.109         0.109         0.109        0.109        0.790       0.790       0.790      0.790
 Total Effect, not SC/ST                                                0.00067       0.0039                               -0.0022    -0.0037
 SE of Total Effect, not SC/ST                                          (0.0019)     (0.0039)                             (0.0021)   (0.0039)
 Total Effect, SC/ST                                                   0.0096***     0.017***                            -0.0053**   -0.011**
 SE of Total Effect, SC/ST                                              (0.0027)      (0.005)                             (0.0027)    (0.005)
 Number Districts                              574          574              574        574          574         574       574          574
 Number Observations                         486,699      486,699          486,699    486,699      486,699     486,699   486,699      486,699


Notes: This table shows estimates of 1 and 2 from equation 1, with fixed effects for age, gender, month/year/district, and
caste. The total effect rows report the total effect of a 1 unit increase in the aggregate rainfall shock in a district for whom
the share rounds above median or the share rounds in the top quintile variable is equal to 1 (depending on the specification).
Standard errors are clustered by district.
Source: NSS Schedule 10 (2004-2012).




                                                                      53
                                              Table A6: Effect of Early Life Shocks Including Additional Controls

                                            (1)         (2)             (3)           (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)           (9)           (10)        (11)        (12)
                                                                 Primary Activity Works (NSS)                                                   Attends School (NSS)

      Early Life Rain                      0.0051     0.0042          -0.0097      -0.0081***    0.011     -0.033***    -0.0061     0.0053         -0.0011      0.011***      -0.014      0.024
                                          (0.0043)    (0.015)        (0.0087)       (0.0025)    (0.015)     (0.012)    (0.0048)     (0.025)       (0.0098)      (0.0031)     (0.022)     (0.016)
      Early Life Rain
      ... × (Above Median) Child Labor   0.0076**    0.013***        0.018***      0.014***     0.012***   0.016***    -0.0068**   -0.016***     -0.021***      -0.018***   -0.015***   -0.019***
                                         (0.0031)    (0.0037)        (0.0030)      (0.0029)     (0.0034)   (0.0033)     (0.0031)    (0.0048)      (0.0032)       (0.0033)    (0.0041)    (0.0040)
      Mean Outcome                         0.924       0.924          0.924          0.924       0.924      0.924        0.043       0.043         0.043         0.043        0.043      0.043
54




      Additional Controls                 Income     Education    School Quality    HH Info       All      LASSO        Income     Education   School Quality   HH Info        All      LASSO
      Number Districts                      574         562            562            574         562        562         574          562           562           574         562         562
      Number Observations                 486,442     475,769        475,769        486,699     475,512    475,677     486,442      475,769       475,769       486,699     475,512     475,677

     Notes: This table shows estimates of 1 and 2 from equation 1, with fixed effects for age, gender, month/year/district, including rich controls. Additional district or household
     characteristics are interacted with early life shocks and included as additional controls, as described in the text. "Income controls" consist of average adult wages and share of
     the population that works for a wage. "Education controls" consist of average adult literacy, share of adults that graduated primary school, and share of adults who graduated
     secondary school. "School quality controls" consist of share of classrooms with more than 60 students, share of schools with girls' toilets, share of schools with blackboards,
     share of schools with no building, average number of textbooks at a school, number of schools per capita, share of single teacher schools, and share of single classroom schools.
     "Household controls" consist of a control for if the male head is literate, whether he completed primary and secondary school, whether he works for a wage, household size,
     and number of child. The full controls include all the controls above. "LASSO" selects the controls from the full set following the post-double-selection approach proposed by
     Belloni et al. (2012, 2016) (the main fixed effects are always included). Standard errors are clustered by district. Standard errors are clustered by district.
     Source: NSS Schedule 10 (2004-2012) and DISE (2005).
                          Table A7: Effect of Early Life Shocks Within Households

                                       (1)           (2)         (3)            (4)        (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)
                                                    A. Household Fixed Effects
                                               Primary Activity Works (NSS)                         Attends School (NSS)

 Early Life Rain                    -0.0041***    -0.014***   -0.011***    -0.0066***   0.0050***   0.013***    0.011***    0.0067***
                                     (0.00094)     (0.0024)    (0.0017)     (0.0012)     (0.0011)   (0.0028)    (0.0022)     (0.0014)
 Early Life Rain
 ... × Child Labor                                 0.10***                                          -0.087***
                                                   (0.024)                                           (0.026)
 ... × (Above Median) Child Labor                             0.013***                                          -0.013***
                                                              (0.0030)                                           (0.0035)
 ... × (Top Quintile) Child Labor                                          0.013***                                         -0.0087**
                                                                           (0.0044)                                          (0.0043)
 Mean Outcome                         0.095         0.095        0.095        0.095       0.817       0.817       0.817       0.817
 Total Effect                                                   0.0025       0.0063                              -0.0013     -0.002
 SE of Total Effect                                            (0.0019)     (0.0039)                            (0.0019)    (0.0036)
 Number Districts                      574           574         574            574        574         574        574          574
 Number Observations                 410,097       410,097     410,097        410,097    410,097     410,097    410,097      410,097
                                         B. Number of Early Life Shocks of Siblings
                                               Primary Activity Works (NSS)                         Attends School (NSS)

 Early Life Rain                    -0.0039***    -0.015***   -0.011***    -0.0069***   0.0049***   0.016***    0.013***    0.0075***
                                     (0.00092)     (0.0023)    (0.0017)     (0.0011)     (0.0012)   (0.0029)    (0.0023)     (0.0015)
 Early Life Rain
 ... × Child Labor                                 0.120***                                         -0.12***
                                                    (0.023)                                          (0.025)
 ... × (Above Median) Child Labor                             0.015***                                          -0.017***
                                                              (0.0029)                                           (0.0035)
 ... × (Top Quintile) Child Labor                                           0.015***                                        -0.013***
                                                                             (0.0042)                                        (0.0043)
 Sibling Early Life Rain            -0.00066**     -0.00090   -0.00092**   -0.00077**   0.00090**     0.0013     0.00094    0.0012***
                                     (0.00027)    (0.00057)    (0.00042)    (0.00030)   (0.00036)   (0.00080)   (0.00058)   (0.00042)
 Sibling Early Life Rain
 ... × Child Labor                                  0.0030                                           -0.0048
                                                   (0.0059)                                         (0.0083)
 ... × (Above Median) Child Labor                              0.00065                                          -0.00019
                                                              (0.00079)                                         (0.0011)
 ... × (Top Quintile) Child Labor                                           0.00069                                          -0.0015
                                                                            (0.0011)                                        (0.0015)
 Mean Outcome                         0.089         0.089        0.089       0.089        0.821       0.821        0.821      0.821
 Total Effect                                                 0.0036**     0.0085**                              -0.0036*    -0.0056
 SE of Total Effect                                            (0.0018)     (0.0037)                             (0.0019)   (0.0035)
 Total Spillover Effect                                        -0.00027    -0.000075                              0.00074   -0.00031
 SE of Total Spillover Effect                                 (0.00054)    (0.00096)                            (0.00073)   (0.0013)
 Number Districts                      574           574         574            574        574         574        574          574
 Number Observations                 440,835       440,835     440,835        440,835    440,835     440,835    440,835      440,835

Notes: This table shows estimates of 1 and 2 from equation 1, with fixed effects for age, gender, month/year/district,
comparing children within the same household. Panel A also includes fixed effects for households. Panel B instead calculates
the total household shock of the siblings (as in Table A15), with additional fixed effects for the household composition of the
siblings and estimates the effects of siblings' shocks on own outcomes. The sample is restricted to children aged 5-17. The total
effect rows report the total effect of a 1 unit increase in the aggregate rainfall shock in a district for whom the share rounds
above median or the share rounds in the top quintile variable is equal to 1 (depending on the specification). Standard errors
are clustered by district.
Source: NSS Schedule 10 (2004-2012) and DISE (2005).




                                                                 55
                                                 Table A8: Effect of Early Life Shocks in Sugar/Cotton Districts

                                                         (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)          (6)           (7)           (8)          (9)
                                                                                                  A. Reduced form
                                                        Primary Activity Works (NSS)                        Attends School (NSS)                    Dropped Out (ASER)

           Early Life Rain                           -0.0045***     -0.0052***     -0.0072***     0.0060***      0.0062***     0.0084***     -0.000030      -0.00012      -0.00075
                                                      (0.00096)      (0.0010)       (0.0012)       (0.0011)       (0.0012)      (0.0014)     (0.00038)     (0.00040)     (0.00046)
           Early Life Rain
           ... × Sugar/Cotton                                         0.028**                                       -0.0085                                  0.0027
                                                                      (0.011)                                       (0.013)                                 (0.0042)
           ... × Has Sugar/Cotton                                                  0.0071***                                   -0.0063***                                0.0019**
                                                                                    (0.0020)                                    (0.0023)                                 (0.00087)
           Mean Outcome                                 0.095          0.095          0.095          0.817           0.817        0.817         0.035        0.035         0.035
           Total Effect                                                             -0.00015                                     0.0021                                   0.0012
           SE of Total Effect                                                       (0.0016)                                    (0.0018)                                 (0.0007)
           Number Districts                              574            574            574           574              574         574            559          559           559
56




           Number Observations                         486,788        486,788        486,788       486,788          486,788     486,788       7,609,826    7,609,826     7,609,826
                                                                                                            B. IV
                                                        Primary Activity Works (NSS)                        Attends School (NSS)                    Dropped Out (ASER)

           Early Life Rain                           -0.0045***      -0.025***      -0.021***     0.0060***           0.012    0.020***      -0.000030       -0.0021     -0.0061**
                                                      (0.00096)       (0.0086)       (0.0049)      (0.0011)         (0.0094)   (0.0053)      (0.00038)      (0.0032)      (0.0026)
           Early Life Rain
           ... × Child Labor                                          0.21**                                         -0.065                                  0.020
                                                                      (0.089)                                       (0.097)                                 (0.030)
           ... × (Above Median) Child Labor                                         0.033***                                   -0.029***                                 0.011**
                                                                                    (0.0098)                                    (0.010)                                  (0.0049)
           Mean Outcome                                 0.095          0.095          0.095          0.817           0.817        0.817         0.035        0.035         0.035
           First Stage F statistic                                      22              35                            22           35                        20.8          27.7
           Total Effect                                                              0.012**                                    -0.0089*                                 0.0052**
           SE of Total Effect                                                        (0.005)                                    (0.0054)                                 (0.0023)
           Number Districts                              574            574            574           574              574         574            559          559           559
           Number Observations                         486,788        486,699        486,699       486,788          486,699     486,699       7,609,826    7,608,681     7,608,681

     Notes: This table shows estimates of 1 and 2 from equation 1, with fixed effects for age, gender, month/year/district, exploiting variation in sugar and cotton. Panel A shows
     the reduced form effect of sugar cotton production. Panel B instead uses sugar and cotton production as an IV for child labor, instrumenting for mean child labor with the
     share of adults, and above median & top quintile with an indicator for any sugar/cotton production. The analysis includes all children between the ages of 5 and 17. The total
     effect row reports the total effect of a 1 unit increase in the aggregate rainfall shock in a district for whom the share rounds above median or the share rounds in the top quintile
     variable is equal to 1 (depending on the specification). Standard errors are clustered by district.
     Source: NSS Schedule 10 (2004-2012).
                                      Table A9: Effect of Early Life Shocks with Inclusion of Additional Fixed Effects

                                               (1)           (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)         (9)        (10)         (11)         (12)
                                                         A. Fixed Effects for Early Life Shocks × Age × Gender & District ×Time
                                                           Primary Activity Works (NSS)                         Attends School (NSS)                             Dropped Out (ASER)

      Early Life Rain
      ... × Child Labor                                   0.160***                                         -0.160***                                       0.070***
                                                           (0.026)                                          (0.023)                                        (0.0094)
      ... × (Above Median) Child Labor                                0.020***                                         -0.020***                                       0.0094***
                                                                      (0.0032)                                          (0.0030)                                        (0.0012)
      ... × (Top Quintile) Child Labor                                            0.021***                                         -0.019***                                        0.012***
                                                                                  (0.0041)                                          (0.0039)                                        (0.0016)
      Mean Outcome                                          0.095       0.095        0.095                   0.817       0.817       0.817                  0.035        0.035        0.035
      Number Districts                                       574         574         574                      574        574          574                     559         559          559
      Number Observations                                  486,693     486,693     486,693                  486,693    486,693      486,693                7,608,681   7,608,681    7,608,681
                                                          B. Separate Fixed Effects for District, Survey Round, Age, and Gender
                                                      Primary Activity Works (NSS)                         Attends School (NSS)                            Dropped Out (ASER)
57




      Early Life Rain                      -0.0044***     -0.018***   -0.013***   -0.0077***   0.0061***   0.020***    0.016***    0.0092***    -0.00021 -0.0062***    -0.0043***   -0.0025***
                                            (0.00097)      (0.0024)    (0.0017)    (0.0012)     (0.0011)   (0.0026)    (0.0019)     (0.0014)   (0.00034) (0.00087)      (0.00064)    (0.00041)
      Early Life Rain
      ... × Child Labor                                    0.14***                                         -0.14***                                        0.058***
                                                           (0.024)                                          (0.024)                                        (0.0081)
      ... × (Above Median) Child Labor                                0.018***                                         -0.019***                                       0.0075***
                                                                      (0.0030)                                          (0.0032)                                        (0.0011)
      ... × (Top Quintile) Child Labor                                            0.017***                                         -0.016***                                        0.010***
                                                                                  (0.0043)                                          (0.0042)                                        (0.0013)
      Mean Outcome                            0.095         0.095        0.095      0.095        0.817       0.817       0.817       0.817      0.035       0.035        0.035        0.035
      Total Effect                                                    0.0049***   0.0096**                             -0.0036*    -0.0066*                            0.0032***    0.0076***
      SE of Total Effect                                               (0.0019)   (0.0038)                             (0.0019)    (0.0036)                             (0.0006)     (0.0011)
      Number Districts                         574           574         574         574          574         574        574          574         559         559         559          559
      Number Observations                    486,883       486,883     486,883     486,883      486,883     486,883    486,883      486,883    7,608,681   7,608,681   7,608,681    7,608,681

     Notes: This table shows estimates of 1 and 2 from equation 1, with different fixed effects than in the main tables. Panel A includes finer fixed effects for the early life shock
     by age by gender, as well as district/month/year. As a result, the total effect is not reported, since the baseline rainfall effect (in low child labor districts) is absorbed by the
     former set of fixed effects. Panel B includes a coarser set of fixed effects, for District, Round, Age, and Gender separately. The analysis includes all children between the ages
     of 5 and 17. The total effect row reports the total effect of a 1 unit increase in the aggregate rainfall shock in a district for whom the share rounds above median or the share
     rounds in the top quintile variable is equal to 1 (depending on the specification). Standard errors are clustered by district.
     Source: NSS Schedule 10 (2004-2012).
                          Table A10: Effect of Early Life Shocks in Irrigated Districts

                                                             (1)          (2)           (3)            (4)             (5)              (6)             (7)         (8)
                                                                    Primary Activity Works (NSS)                                  Attends School (NSS)

 Early Life Rain                                          -0.010***    -0.018***     -0.0086***     -0.017***       0.017***      0.024***         0.014***      0.022***
                                                           (0.0022)     (0.0031)      (0.0018)       (0.0025)       (0.0024)      (0.0035)         (0.0021)      (0.0031)
 Early Life Rain
 ... × Share Irrigated                                    0.0099***     0.013***                                    -0.020***     -0.022***
                                                           (0.0031)     (0.0047)                                     (0.0032)      (0.0049)
 ... × High Irrigation                                                               0.0067***      0.0095***                                      -0.013***     -0.015***
                                                                                      (0.0021)       (0.0030)                                       (0.0025)      (0.0039)
 ... × (Above Median) Child Labor                                       0.024***                     0.021***                     -0.022***                      -0.021***
                                                                        (0.0060)                     (0.0046)                      (0.0065)                       (0.0052)
 ... × (Above Median) Child Labor × Share Irrigated                     -0.018**                                                    0.016*
                                                                        (0.0090)                                                   (0.0090)
 ... × (Above Median) Child Labor × High Irrigation                                                 -0.012**                                                      0.011*
                                                                                                    (0.0058)                                                     (0.0065)
 Mean Outcome                                               0.095        0.095         0.095          0.095           0.817            0.817         0.817         0.817
 Mean Outcome, Over Half Irrigated                          0.105        0.105         0.105          0.105           0.796            0.796         0.796         0.796
 Total Effect, Below Half Irrigated                                                                  0.0046                                                        0.001
 SE of Total Effect, Below Half Irrigated                                                           (0.0034)                                                     (0.0035)
 Total Effect, Above Half Irrigated                                                                  0.002                                                        -0.0029
 SE of Total Effect, Above Half Irrigated                                                           (0.0022)                                                     (0.0021)
 Number Districts                                            573          573           576            573             573              573           576          573
 Number Observations                                       485,847      485,847       486,177        485,847         485,847          485,847       486,177      485,847


Notes: This table shows estimates of 1 and 2 from equation 1, with fixed effects for age, gender, month/year/district by
district irrigation. Measures of irrigation are either the share of cropland irrigated, or an indicator variable for > 50% irrigated.
The analysis includes all children between the ages of 5 and 17. The total effect rows report the total effect of a 1 unit increase
in the aggregate rainfall shock in a district for whom the share rounds above median is equal to 1. Standard errors are clustered
by district.
Source: NSS Schedule 10 (2004-2012) and Global Irrigated Area Mapping (2001).




Table A11: Effect of Early Life Shocks Using the First Round of NSS to Categorize Districts

                                               (1)           (2)            (3)               (4)             (5)               (6)               (7)             (8)
                                                       Primary Activity Works (NSS)                                          Attends School (NSS)

 Early Life Rain                            -0.0045***    -0.012***     -0.0081***      -0.0061***      0.0059***            0.013***          0.0099***       0.0073***
                                             (0.00096)     (0.0020)      (0.0013)        (0.0010)        (0.0011)            (0.0021)           (0.0017)        (0.0013)
 Early Life Rain
 ... × Child Labor                                         0.063***                                                      -0.064***
                                                            (0.016)                                                       (0.015)
 ... × (Above Median) Child Labor                                        0.0080***                                                            -0.0087***
                                                                          (0.0020)                                                             (0.0023)
 ... × (Top Quintile) Child Labor                                                       0.0087***                                                              -0.0075***
                                                                                         (0.0028)                                                               (0.0027)
 Mean Outcome                                 0.095         0.095           0.095         0.095              0.817            0.817               0.817           0.817
 Total Effect                                                            -0.000059        0.0026                                                 0.0011         -0.00022
 SE of Total Effect                                                       (0.0015)       (0.0026)                                               (0.0015)        (0.0023)
 Number Districts                              574           562            562            562             574                 562                562             562
 Number Observations                         486,699       482,138        482,138        482,138         486,699             482,138            482,138         482,138

Notes: This table shows estimates of 1 and 2 from equation 1, with fixed effects for age, gender, month/year/district. The
analysis includes all children between the ages of 5 and 17. The total effect rows report the total effect of a 1 unit increase in
the aggregate rainfall shock in a district for whom the share rounds above median is equal to 1.
Source: NSS Schedule 10 (2004-2012).




                                                                                58
                            Table A12: Effect of Early Life Shocks Using Finer Variation to Determine Child labor Prevalence

                                              (1)           (2)         (3)         (4)           (5)        (6)         (7)         (8)          (9)         (10)         (11)         (12)
                                                                                            A. By District & Gender
                                                     Primary Activity Works (NSS)                          Attends School (NSS)                             Dropped Out (ASER)

       Early Life Rain                    -0.0045***     -0.016***   -0.014***   -0.0087***    0.0059***   0.017***   0.015***    0.0100***    -0.000030   -0.0054***   -0.0040***   -0.0023***
                                           (0.00096)      (0.0018)    (0.0016)    (0.0011)      (0.0011)   (0.0021)   (0.0019)     (0.0014)    (0.00038)    (0.00066)    (0.00057)    (0.00040)
       Early Life Rain
       ...× Child Labor                                  0.12***                                           -0.12***                                        0.053***
                                                         (0.017)                                            (0.017)                                        (0.0062)
       ... × (Above Median) Child Labor                              0.019***                                         -0.019***                                         0.0076***
                                                                     (0.0028)                                          (0.0028)                                         (0.00096)
       ... × (Top Quintile) Child Labor                                          0.023***                                         -0.022***                                          0.011***
                                                                                 (0.0037)                                          (0.0036)                                          (0.0012)
       Mean Outcome                          0.095         0.095       0.095       0.095         0.817      0.817       0.817       0.817        0.035       0.035         0.035       0.035
       Total Effect                                                  0.0055***   0.014***                             -0.0039**   -0.012***                             0.0037***    0.0085***
       SE of Total Effect                                             (0.0018)    (0.003)                              (0.0016)    (0.003)                               (0.0007)     (0.0011)
       Number Districts                       574          573          573         573           574        573        573          573          559         559          559          559
       Number Observations                  486,699      485,980      485,980     485,980       486,699    485,980    485,980      485,980     7,608,681   7,582,758    7,582,758    7,582,758
59




                                                                                            B. By District & SC/ST
                                                     Primary Activity Works (NSS)                          Attends School (NSS)

       Early Life Rain                    -0.0045***     -0.015***   -0.013***   -0.0075***    0.0059***   0.016***   0.016***    0.0092***
                                           (0.00096)      (0.0019)    (0.0017)    (0.0011)      (0.0011)   (0.0022)   (0.0021)     (0.0014)
       Early Life Rain
       ... × Child Labor                                 0.11***                                           -0.11***
                                                         (0.019)                                            (0.019)
       ... × (Above Median) Child Labor                              0.018***                                         -0.020***
                                                                     (0.0030)                                          (0.0033)
       ... × (Top Quintile) Child Labor                                          0.017***                                         -0.019***
                                                                                 (0.0042)                                          (0.0042)
       Mean Outcome                          0.095         0.095       0.095       0.095         0.817      0.817       0.817        0.817
       Total Effect                                                  0.0048**    0.0099***                            -0.0042**   -0.0094***
       SE of Total Effect                                            (0.0019)     (0.0038)                             (0.0019)    (0.0035)
       Number Districts                       574          573          573         573           574        573        573          573
       Number Observations                  486,699      473,276      473,276     473,276       486,699    473,276    473,276      473,276

     Notes: This table shows estimates of 1 and 2 from equation 1, with fixed effects for age, gender, month/year/district. District classifications use the leave-out mean by gender
     (panel A) or caste (panel B), as described in the text. The analysis includes all children between the ages of 5 and 17. We exclude ASER in Panel B, since it does not include
     caste data. The total effect rows report the total effect of a 1 unit increase in the aggregate rainfall shock in a district for whom the share rounds above median is equal to 1.
     Standard errors are clustered by district.
     Source: NSS Schedule 10 (2004-2012) and ASER (2005-2014).
                                           Table A13: Mincerian Regressions

                                       (1)        (2)        (3)                (4)               (5)            (6)       (7)        (8)
                                     ln(Consumption Per Adult + 1/3*kids) (IHDS)                ln(Consumption Per Adult + 1/2*kids) (IHDS)

 Years of School                     0.038***   0.038***   0.037***           0.038***          0.041***    0.040***     0.039***   0.040***
                                     (0.0012)   (0.0023)   (0.0018)           (0.0014)          (0.0013)    (0.0023)     (0.0019)   (0.0014)
 Years of School
 ... × Child Labor                              0.0013                                                       0.0086
                                                (0.028)                                                      (0.028)
 ... × (Above Median) Child Labor                           0.0020                                                        0.0026
                                                           (0.0022)                                                      (0.0022)
 ... × (Top Quintile) Child Labor                                              0.0030                                                0.0035
                                                                              (0.0025)                                              (0.0026)
 Mean Outcome                          10.1       10.1        10.1              10.1              10.0           10.0      10.0       10.0
 Total Effect                                              0.039***           0.041***                                   0.042***   0.044***
 SE of Total Effect                                         (0.001)            (0.002)                                    (0.001)    (0.002)
 Number Districts                      343        343        343                343               343         343          343        343
 Number Observations                  52,239     52,239     52,239             52,239            52,239      52,239       52,239     52,239

Notes: This table reports observational Mincerian relationship between years of schooling and consumption, testing for hetero-
geneity by district-level measures of child labor, and restricting the sample to household heads. Standard errors are clustered
by district.
Source: IHDS (2012) and NSS Schedule 10 (2004-2012).




                       Table A14: Effect of Early Life Shocks on Parental Perceptions

                                                                        (1)               (2)              (3)            (4)
                                                                        Parental Assessment (0-3) (IHDS)

                      Early Life Rain                              0.022***           0.025*              0.016         0.022**
                                                                    (0.007)           (0.015)            (0.012)        (0.009)
                      Early Life Rain
                      ... × Child Labor                                                -0.047
                                                                                      (0.200)
                      ... × (Above Median) Child Labor                                                    0.009
                                                                                                         (0.015)
                      ... × (Top Quintile) Child Labor                                                                   -0.001
                                                                                                                        (0.017)
                      Mean Outcome                                    1.950              1.950            1.950          1.950
                      Total Effect                                                                      0.025***         0.021
                      SE of Total Effect                                                                 (0.010)        (0.014)
                      Number Districts                                341                341              341            341
                      Number Observations                            10,194             10,194           10,194         10,194

                  Notes: This table reports the effect on parental perception of children's ability (on a scale from
                 0-3), with fixed effects for age, gender, and year/district. The analysis includes all children
                 between the ages of 5 and 17. The total effect rows report the total effect of a 1 unit increase
                 in the aggregate rainfall shock in a district for whom the share rounds above median is equal
                 to 1. Standard errors are clustered by district.
                 Source: IHDS (2012).




                                                                   60
Table A15: Effect of Early Life Shocks on Household Consumption When Affected Individ-
uals are Children

                                       (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)
                                    ln(Consumption Per Adult + 1/3 * kids) (NSS)    ln(Consumption Per Adult + 1/2 * kids) (NSS)


 Total HH Early Life Rain           -0.003***   -0.006***   -0.004***   -0.003***   -0.003***   -0.005***   -0.004***   -0.003***
                                     (0.000)     (0.001)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.001)     (0.000)     (0.000)
 Total HH Early Life Rain
 ... × Child Labor                              0.033***                                        0.030***
                                                 (0.012)                                         (0.011)
 ... × (Above Median) Child Labor                           0.003**                                         0.0033**
                                                            (0.001)                                          (0.001)
 ... × (Top Quintile) Child Labor                                         0.002                                           0.002
                                                                         (0.001)                                         (0.001)
 Mean Outcome                         7.040       7.040       7.040       7.040       6.930       6.930       6.930       6.930
 Total Effect                                               -0.0014*     -0.0013                             -0.0013     -0.0013
 SE of Total Effect                                          (0.000)     (0.001)                             (0.000)     (0.001)
 Number Districts                      577        577         577         577          577        577         577         577
 Number Observations                1,028,042   452,382     452,382     452,382     1,028,042   452,382     452,382     452,382

Notes: This table reports the effect on consumption for households as a function of early life shocks and district characteristics.
Each household is in the data once, and their exposure is calculated as the sum of early life shocks of children in the household
between the ages of 5 and 17. We include fixed effects for the gender and age composition of the household. The total effect
rows report the total effect of a 1 unit increase in the aggregate rainfall shock in a district for whom the share rounds above
median is equal to 1. Standard errors are clustered at the district level.
Source: NSS Schedule 10 (2004-2012).




                                                                 61
                            Appendix A: Mathematical Appendix

Proof of Proposition 1.
                                     c                     c  c
Define V = E maxe u(y2 - ce e + w2     ,d (h)(1 - e)) +  (U (w3 (e, h)) + e) , where the expec-
tation is taken over realizations of . Then, in period 1, the parent solves

                                          max u(y1 - ch h) + V (h),
                                           h


where  is the discount rate. From the first order condition, h must satisfy

                                                              V (h )
                                     -ch u (y1 - ch h ) +            = 0,
                                                               h
          h
To sign   y1
             ,   differentiate this expression with respect to y1 and re-arrange to get

                                     h          ch u (y1 - ch h )
                                        =                       2 V (h )
                                                                         .
                                     y1   c2             
                                           h u (y1 - ch h ) +     h

          h
To sign   y1
             ,   note that ch u (y1 - ch h ) < 0 and c2             
                                                      h u (y1 - ch h ) < 0 since ch > 0 and u < 0.
                                                       2 V (h )                2 V (h )
Then, the only term that remains to sign is              h
                                                                .   To sign      h2
                                                                                        ,   observe that

                                                         c       
 2 V (h )                                         
                                                        w2 ,d (h )
                                                                     2
          = E u ( y 2 - c e e +  w c
                                   2,d ( h )(1 - e ))                  (1 - e )
   h2                                                      h
                                                                 
                                                  
                                                      2 w2c
                                                            ,d (h )
                                  c
            + u (y2 - ce e + w2,d (h )(1 - e ))                     (1 - e )
                                                         h2
                                                  c 
                                               w3  (e , h ) 2                                   c 
                                                                                             2 w3 (e , h )
            +  U c (w3   c
                           (h , e ) + e )                        + (U c (w3 c 
                                                                             (e , h ) + e )                              ,
                                                   h                                            h2
                                                                                    2 wc (h)            2 wc (h)
where e is the equilibrium choice of e. This expression is < 0 if h   3
                                                                       2   0 and h     2
                                                                                        2  0.
              
Therefore, hy1
               > 0.
                                                                  p           p
Proof of Proposition 2. For a given h, a child drops out if U2      (0, h)  U2  (1, h). Substi-
tuting in the values for consumption, this expression can be rewritten as

                         c                           c  c               c  c
                 u(y2 + w2 ,d (h)) - u(y2 - ce )   (U (w3 (h, 1) + ) - U (w3 (h, 0))).                             (2)

                                                                                                wc (h )    
The derivative of the LHS with respect to y1 is LHS y1
                                                        = u (y2 + w2c
                                                                      (h )) 2h,d h
                                                                                 y1
                                                                                    , which
                                                                                    RHS
is equal to 0 in low child labor places by assumption. The derivative of the RHS is y1 =
                         wc (h ,1)                          wc (h ,0)    
 U c (w3 c
           (h , 1) + ) 3h h    y1
                                    - U c (w3 c
                                                (h , 0)) 3h hy1
                                                                 . From diminishing marginal
returns, U c (w3 c
                   (h, 1) + ) < U c (w3
                                      c
                                        (h, 0)), so for the RHS to be increasing, we need that
   c
w3 (h,1)       c
            w3 (h,0)
   h
         > h . This expression implies that, for an early life shock to increase education

                                                      62
rates in low child labor areas, there are dynamic complementarities between e and h.
   Before proof Proposition 3a, we define Assumption A1.
Assumption A1.
                                                     
                                                 f (high (hhigh (y1 )))
                                               >     
                                                                        ,
                                                  f (low (hlow (y1 )))


where
                                                                w3c (0,h )
                                             c (1,h )                   low U c (w c (0,h ))
                                            w3                      y1              3    low
                                               y1
                                                   low
                                                           -      U c (w3c (1,h )+ )
                                                                               low     low
             =                                                    wc        (h    )    w3c (0,h     )
                                                c                   2,high high                high          c (h
                   c (1,h
                  w3     high )
                                      u   (y2 +w2 ,high (hhigh ))       y1
                                                                                    +       y1
                                                                                                      Uc   (w3   high ,0))
                      y1
                                  -                                  c    c             
                                                                  U (w3 (1,hhigh )+high )


Proof of Proposition 3a.
                                                                            d (hd (y1 ))                                
                                                                                                                    d (hd (y1 ))
Observe that d (h                 
                 d (y1 )) = 1-F (d (hd (y1 ))). Therefore,                     y1
                                                                                          =  - f (   
                                                                                                    d ( hd ( y 1 ))   y1
                                                                                                                                 .
               (h (y ))                                                                p                       p
To solve for d yd1 1 , note that d (hd (y1 )) is                 characterized by U2     (0, h                       
                                                                                              d (y1 )) = U2 (1, hd (y1 )),
which can be rewritten as

                  c                            c  c                   c  c      
          u(y2 + w2 ,d (hd )) - u(y2 - ce ) - U (w3 (1, hd ) + d ) + U (w3 (0, hd )) = 0

                                                                                                                             
Applying the implicit function theorem to this expression, we arrive at an expression for                                     d
                                                                                                                             y1
                                                                                                                                :

                                                                       wc (h )           wc (0,h )
          d
               wc (1, hd)
                                     c
                            u (y2 + w2 ,d (hd ))
                                                  2,d d
                                                  y1
                                                         + 3     y1
                                                                    d       c
                                                                      U c (w3 (0, hd ))
             =- 3         +
          y1    y1                            U c (w3c
                                                       (1, h       
                                                            d ) + d )

                                               d (h (y1 ))                                  
                                                                                        d (h (y1 ))
Substituting this expression into                y1
                                                              = -f (d (hd (y1 ))          y1
                                                                                                    ,      we find that

                                                                   wc (0,h      )
             low (hlow (y1 ))
                                            c
                                           w3 (1, hlow )
                                                            3
                                                              y1
                                                                 low
                                                                      U c (w3c
                                                                               (hlow , 0))                        
                              =                          -                                                     f (low )
                 y1                           y1           U c (w3c
                                                                    (1, h          
                                                                         low ) + low )



                                                                                   c                     c (0,h
                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                  w2 ,high (hhigh )     w3     high )
high (hhigh (y1 ))       wc (1, hhigh )
                                                      u (y2 +     c
                                                                 w2      ( h
                                                                    ,high high ))                   +                 Uc       c
                                                                                                                             (w3 (hhigh , 0))
                     =    3                       -
                                                                                        y1                  y1                                  
        y1                        y1                                          U c (w3   c
                                                                                          (1, h          
                                                                                                high ) + high )

                              
                         × f (high )

                                  (h (y ))
Thus, lowy   (h (y1 ))
               1
                       > high
                            y1
                               1
                                 under Assumption A1. To provide intuition for when
Assumption A1 is satisfied, when h        
                                   d and d are sufficiently similar across the two types
of districts,  > 1. This is because the additional term in the denominator, u (y2 +


                                                                63
               w2c (h
 c                ,d high )
w2 ,high (hhigh )) y1
                            >         0, indicating that the denominator is smaller than the numer-
                                                               f (   (h(y1 )))
ator. If  low and high  sufficiently similar, f (high
                           are                     (h(y )))  1 and Assumption A1 will be
                                                           1
                                                  low
satisfied.
                                        high (hhigh (y1 ))                                   
                                                                                      high (hhigh (y1 ))
Proof of Proposition 3b. Recall that         y1
                                                           = - f ( high high
                                                                       ( h   ( y 1 ))      y1
                                                                                                         ,
           
where f (high ) > 0 and

                                                                     wc            wc (0,h     )
    high
             c
            w3 (1, hhigh )
                                      c
                             u (y2 + w2 ,high (hhigh )) y1
                                                          2,high                  c
                                                                  +  3 y1high u (w3 (0, hhigh ))
         =-                +                                                                     .
    y1          y1                              U c (w3 c
                                                          (1, h           
                                                                 high ) + high )

        high (hhigh (y1 ))            high                           high
Then,        y1
                             < 0 if   y1
                                             > 0. Rearranging        y1
                                                                             > 0 shows that this satisfied if

      c (1,h                                          c (0,h
                                                                                           
     w3     high )                                   w3     high )
         y1
                   Uc     c
                        (w3 (1, h         
                                 high ) + high ) -       y1
                                                                   Uc     c
                                                                        (w3 (0, hhigh ))       h
                                                                                                    -1      c
                                                                                                           w2 (hhigh )
                                                                                                         <             .
                                           c
                                  u (y2 + w2 (hhigh ))                                         y1             h

Proof of Proposition 4a. Returning to the proof of Proposition 2, an increase in y1 will
cause child labor to increase if the derivative of the LHS of equation (2) is greater than the
                                                                
derivative of the RHS for the marginal child whose ability is d  (hd (y1 )). This is true if
                        c           
                       w2 ,d (h ) h                        wc (h, 1) h                   wc (h, 0) h
u (y2 +    c
          w2 ,d (h))                   U c (w3
                                             c
                                               (h , 1) +  ) 3           - U c (w3
                                                                                c
                                                                                  (h, 0)) 3           .
                        h         y1                        h        y1                   h        y1
                                                                                              (3)

                         c      c
Substituting  for  and w
                       ~3  for w3 , this is efficient if
                        c           
                       w2 ,d (h ) h                         w~ c (h, 1) h                    w~ c (h, 0) h
         c
u (y2 + w2 ,d (h))                     U c (w
                                            ~3c
                                                (h , 1) +  ) 3             - U c (w
                                                                                  ~3c
                                                                                      (h, 0)) 3             .
                        h         y1                           h        y1                      h        y1
                                                                                                   (4)

                                                                     wc (h,1)      ~ c (h,1)
                                                                                   w
Now consider each of our two cases. If  < 1 and 3          h
                                                               = 3   h
                                                                          ,  >  and the RHS
of equation (4) is greater than that of equation (3). This implies that there is a range of
values over which equation (3) is satisfied while equation (4) is not and therefore, changes in
educational investment are inefficient. If  =  , inefficiency will occur for a given h if the
left-side of equation (4) is greater than the left-side of equation (3) (since the right sides of
the equations are the same). With some algebra, we can see this will be the case if

                                      ~ c (h , 1)/h
                                      w               U c (w3c
                                                               (h , 1) +  )
                                                    >        c
                                                                            .
                                      wc (h , 1)/h    U c (w
                                                           ~3  (h , 1) +  )

Thus, as long as this condition is satisfied, inefficiency will occur. This condition is intuitive:

                                                          64
a larger increase in wages due to an increase in h pushes parents toward educating their
children (left-side), but this is offset by the fact that the higher wage decreases the marginal
value of more income (right side). That is, it is satisfied as long as the substitution effect
dominates the income effect. If there is no diminishing marginal utility of consumption
(utility is linear), this expression is always satisfied.
                                              
Proof of Proposition 4b. Note that           h
                                                < 0 if

                   c           
                  w2 ,d (h ) h                         wc (h, 1) h                   wc (h, 0) h
         c
u (y2 + w2 (h))                 <  U c (w3
                                         c
                                           (h , 1) +  ) 3           - U c (w3
                                                                            c
                                                                              (h, 0)) 3           .
                   h         y1                         h        y1                   h        y1
                                                                                           (5)

By assumption,
                      c           
                     w2 ,d (h ) h                         w~ c (h, 1) h                    w~ c (h, 0) h
         c
u (y2 + w2 ,d (h))                   U c (w
                                          ~3c
                                              (h , 1) +  ) 3             - U c (w
                                                                                ~3c
                                                                                    (h, 0)) 3             ,
                      h         y1                           h        y1                      h        y1

so equation (5) is satisfied if  = 1. Additionally, the RHS of equation (5) is strictly
increasing in  , while the LHS does not depend on  . Thus, there is single-crossing in  ,
                                         
indicating there exists a ¯ above which h
                                          < 0.




                                                  65
                Appendix B: Details of Discount Factor Calibration

    We model the parent as choosing between the high and low child labor stream of consump-
tion when a child is 13, which is when education and working outcomes deviate between high
and low child labor districts. The increase in consumption from an early life unit increase
in aggregate rainfall in a high child labor place is given by

                                           6
                                                  t ch ,
                                          t=0


where  is the discount factor, and ch is the change in consumption per capita for a
household when the child is between 13 and 18 in a high child labor district relative to a low
child labor district. In a low child labor district, the relative payoff from the rainfall shock
occurs due to increased consumption in adulthood, which is represented by

                                           T
                                                  t cl ,
                                           t=7


where cl is the relative change in per capita consumption of the child in his adulthood in a
low child labor district and T is the last year that the adult experiences consumption gains.
    The results in Table 6, which estimate the long-run effects of rainfall shock on adult
male's consumption, can be used to estimate cl . The level value of cl is just given by
converting the log per capita effect of a unit increase in rainfall in a low relative to a high
child labor district into a level effect using average consumption. To be consistent with Table
6, we assume no long-run decline in consumption until the age of 25, and none after the age
of 54.
    To calibrate ch , we can estimate the effects of rainfall shocks on per capita consumption
by high and low child labor districts during the affected individual's childhood. The results
of these regressions are reported in Appendix Table A15 and accord with the results earlier
in the paper. Specifically, we calculate the sum of early life shocks for all children in a
household, and see its effect on household consumption, controlling for the demographic
make-up of the household. In low child labor places, early life rainfall shocks reduce per
capita household consumption, consistent with children investing in human capital instead
of working. In high child labor places, this effect is significantly attenuated. Using these
estimates, we calculate ch the same way as we calculated cl . With these estimates in
hand, we can now solve for the maximum  for which 6                 t
                                                               t=0  c 
                                                                       h       T    t  l
                                                                               t=7  c . Since
geometric sums have a closed-form solution, setting the left and right side of this equation
equal results in one equation with one unknown.

                                                 66
