                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    A UNIFYING APPROACH TO MEASURING CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND
                             ADAPTATION

                                        Antonio Bento
                                        Noah S. Miller
                                      Mehreen Mookerjee
                                      Edson R. Severnini

                                      Working Paper 27247
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27247


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2020




We thank Max Auffhammer, Karen Clay, Teevrat Garg, Michael Greenstone, Amir Jina, Matt
Kahn, Andrea La Nauze, Margarita Portnykh, Lowell Taylor, and seminar participants at
Carnegie Mellon, Columbia, Penn State, UC-Davis, UCLA, UCSD, University of Chicago
{ EPIC, AERE Summer Conference, SEEPAC Research Workshop: Advances in Estimating
Economic Effects from Climate Change Using Weather Observations (SIEPR ­ Stanford
University), International Workshop on Empirical Methods in Energy Economics, and the
Northeast Workshop on Energy Policy and Environmental Economics, for invaluable comments
and suggestions. The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from the Berkman fund,
Heinz College, and Wilton E. Scott Institute for Energy Innovation at Carnegie Mellon
University. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Antonio Bento, Noah S. Miller, Mehreen Mookerjee, and Edson R. Severnini. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
A Unifying Approach to Measuring Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation
Antonio Bento, Noah S. Miller, Mehreen Mookerjee, and Edson R. Severnini
NBER Working Paper No. 27247
May 2020
JEL No. C51,Q53,Q54

                                         ABSTRACT

We develop a unifying approach to estimating climate impacts and adaptation, and apply it to
study the impact of climate change on local air pollution. Economic agents are usually
constrained when responding to daily weather shocks, but may adjust to long-run climatic
changes. By exploiting simultaneously variation in weather and climatic changes, we identify
both the short- and long-run impacts on economic outcomes, and measure adaptation directly as
the difference between those responses. As a result, we identify adaptation without making
extrapolations of weather responses over time or space, and overcome prior studies' biases in the
estimates of climate adaptation.

Antonio Bento                                   Mehreen Mookerjee
Sol Price School of Public Policy               College of Business
and Department of Economics                     Zayed University
University of Southern California               Dubai 19282
Los Angeles, CA 90089-0626                      United Arab Emirates
and NBER                                        mehreenmookerjee@gmail.com
abento@usc.edu
                                                Edson R. Severnini
Noah S. Miller                                  Carnegie Mellon University
Sol Price School of Public Policy               4800 Forbes Ave #2114B
University of Southern California               Pittsburgh, PA 15213
Los Angeles, CA 90089                           ersevernini@gmail.com
nsmiller@usc.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w27247
                                          I.    Introduction

Failure to achieve climate mitigation goals puts increasing pressure on climate adaptation
strategies.1 Therefore, it is crucial to develop methods to measuring climate impacts and
adaptation, and examine heterogeneity in adaptive response. Inspired by the macroeconomic
literature on the effects of unanticipated versus anticipated shocks on the economy (e.g.,
Lucas, 1972, 1976), the labor literature on the importance of distinguishing transitory versus
permanent income shocks in the estimation of intergenerational mobility (e.g., Solon, 1992,
1999), and the properties of the Frisch-Waugh-Lovell theorem (Frisch and Waugh, 1933;
Lovell, 1963), we develop a novel, unifying approach to measuring climate impacts and
adaptation. The proposed approach is then applied to study the impact of climate change
on ambient "bad" ozone concentration in U.S. counties over the period 1980-2013.
       The pioneer cross-sectional approach to estimate the impact of climate change on eco-
nomic outcomes (e.g., Mendelsohn, Nordhaus and Shaw, 1994; Schlenker, Hanemann and
Fisher, 2005) has relied on permanent, anticipated components behind meteorological con-
ditions, but suffers from omitted variable bias. In contrast, the panel fixed-effects approach
(e.g., Deschenes and Greenstone, 2007; Schlenker and Roberts, 2009) exploits transitory,
unanticipated weather shocks, and deals with that bias, but identification of climate effects
using weather variation is not trivial. Estimates of climate impacts based on cross-sectional
studies are inclusive of adaptation, whereas those from fixed effects are not. Naturally, in the
absence of a unifying approach that simultaneously exploits both variation in unexpected
weather and long-run climatic changes, influential studies have proposed measuring adap-
tation as the difference between the estimates of impacts in fixed-effects and cross-sectional
approaches (e.g., Dell, Jones and Olken, 2009, 2012, 2014). While this measure of adaptation
is rather intuitive and theoretically sound, if one relies on biased cross-sectional estimates of
climate impacts, this derived measure will likely be biased as well.
   1
    According to the Fifth Assessment Report from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC,
2013), the warming of the climate system is unequivocal, and global temperatures are likely to rise from 1.5
to 4 degree Celsius over the 21st century, depending on the emissions scenario.


                                                     1
       Our unifying approach overcomes these key challenges of the literature, and allows for
the estimation of the short- and long-run impacts simultaneously, in the same equation. As
a result, our approach enables a straightforward test for the statistical significance of the
measure of adaptation. Further, our approach to identifying adaptation addresses two other
shortcomings from existing approaches.2 First, it recovers a measure of adaptation directly
from the jointly estimated effects of weather and climate. In contrast, a common approach
in the literature tackles adaptation indirectly, by flexibly estimating economic damages due
to weather shocks, then assessing climate damages by using shifts in the future weather
distribution predicted by climate models (e.g., Deschenes and Greenstone, 2011).
       Second, and analogous to the Lucas Critique (Lucas, 1976), it overcomes the challenges of
identifying adaptation by comparing the profiles of weather responses across time and space,
under the assumption that preferences are constant across those dimensions. Barreca et al.
(2016), for example, compare the mortality effects of temperature extremes in the first and
second half of the twentieth century to conclude that U.S. residents adapted to extreme heat.
They point to the diffusion of air conditioning as a key driver of adaptation, but unobserved
changes in consumers' preferences for new technologies may have also played a role. More
recently, Auffhammer (2018a), Carleton et al. (2019), and Heutel, Miller and Molitor (forth-
coming) allow for differences across locations in the current relationship between temperature
and economic outcomes when dealing with adaptation. But again, unobserved differences
in preferences, beliefs, and the experience with the local climate may affect adaptive behav-
ior, potentially making it imprecise the assignment of a profile of temperature responses to
another place solely based on observed attributes and the future weather distribution (e.g.,
Olmstead and Rhode, 2011; Bleakley and Hong, 2017).3 Instead, we identify adaptation by
   2
      All this literature takes climate variation as given, under the assumption that relatively small spatial
units of analysis can be thought of as "climate takers" rather than "climate setters." Notwithstanding, there
is a literature that carries out analyses at a global scale, and accounts for the bi-directional feedback between
climate and the economy (e.g., Kaufmann, Kauppi and Stock, 2006; Pretis, 2020).
    3
      One way to address this issue is to use experimental or quasi-experimental variation in those attributes
in order to causally capture the extent to which they offset weather effects. One example is Garg, McCord
and Montfort (2020), who leverage quasi-experimental variation in eligibility to a cash transfer program in
Mexico to identify how income may mitigate the temperature-homicide relationship.


                                                       2
comparing how economic agents in the same location respond to weather shocks ­ which by
definition limit opportunities to adapt ­ with their own response to climatic changes, which
should incorporate adaptive behavior.
       Our approach has two key elements. The first is the decomposition of meteorological
variables into two components: long-run trends and weather shocks, the latter defined as
deviations from those trends. This decomposition is meant to have economic content. It
is likely that individuals and firms respond to information on climatic variation they have
observed and processed over the years. In contrast, economic agents may be constrained
to respond to weather shocks, by definition. Our measure of adaptation is the difference
between those two responses by the same economic agents.4 In our application, we take ad-
vantage of high-frequency data, and decompose temperature into a monthly moving average
incorporating information from the past three decades, often referred to as climate normal,
and a deviation from that lagged 30-year average.5 Although our choice of the 30-year mov-
ing average follows from the climatology literature, in principle any method filtering weather
data at some temporal frequency should work (e.g., Baxter and King, 1999; Christiano and
Fitzgerald, 2003). The 30-year moving average is purposely lagged in our empirical frame-
work to reflect all the information available to individuals and firms up to the year prior to
the measurement of the outcome variables.6 We then compare the jointly estimated short-
and long-run effects to provide a measure of adaptive responses by economic agents.
       The second essential element of our approach is indeed identifying responses to weather
shocks and longer-term climatic changes in the same estimating equation. Our unifying
   4
     Alternatively, Shrader (2020) leverages differences in responses to forecasts and realizations of weather
to measure adaptation, requiring the assumption of forward-looking behavior. Because economic agents may
be myopic or inattentive (e.g., Gabaix and Laibson, 2006; Reis, 2006a,b), we are agnostic about how agents
process and use the information from the past. Also, although we focus on adaptive behavior, we are agnostic
about the true impacts. There may be adaptation or intensification effects (Dell, Jones and Olken, 2014).
   5
     Climate normals are, by definition, 30-year averages of weather variables such as temperature. The
monthly frequency for the moving averages in our empirical decomposition is without loss of generality. All
we need is a time frame that economic agents can easily remember information from the past. In any case,
our robustness checks using daily moving averages provide nearly identical results.
   6
     A graphical representation of our decomposition has been illustrated for Los Angeles county in 2013 in
Figure 3, and over the entire sample period of 1980-2013 in Appendix A Figure A8.



                                                      3
approach bridges two strands of the climate-economy literature.7 We exploit simultane-
ously meteorological variation to identify the causal impact of weather shocks on economic
outcomes, and climatological variation to identify the causal effect of longer-term observed
climatic changes. The meteorological variation exploited in the estimation is random changes
in weather, similar to most of the literature relying on the fixed-effects approach. The clima-
tological variation, however, is new and relies on within-season changes in monthly 30-year
moving averages. Intuitively, it works as if the "climate experiment" randomly assigns the
average June temperature to April or May in the same location, for example. We are able to
leverage both sources of variation in the same estimating equation because of the properties
of the Frisch-Waugh-Lovell theorem. The deseasonalization embedded in the fixed-effects
approach is equivalent to the construction of weather shocks as deviations from long-run
trends as a first step. Furthermore, there is no need to deseasonalize the outcome variable
to identify the impact of those shocks (Lovell, 1963, Theorem 4.1, p.1001).8 As a result,
we do not need to include highly disaggregated time fixed effects in the final econometric
model; thus, we are able to also exploit variation that evolves slowly over time to identify
the impacts of longer-term climatic changes.
       This paper proceeds as follows: Section II provides an overview of the two previous
methodological approaches used to identify climate impacts, proposes our unifying approach
and the resulting measure of adaptation, and explains the conceptual framework that we use
to decompose meteorological variables into long-term trends and contemporaneous weather
shocks. Section III provides a detailed background on ozone formation and its close relation-
ship with weather, describes our data, and presents our empirical framework. Section IV
reports our main findings, and examines the robustness of our estimates. Section V further
explores aspects of heterogeneity. Finally, Section VI concludes.
   7
     For reviews of this literature, see Dell, Jones and Olken (2014), Carleton and Hsiang (2016), Hsiang
(2016), Massetti and Mendelsohn (2018), Auffhammer (2018b), and Kolstad and Moore (2020).
   8
     In contrast, inspired by Dell, Jones and Olken (2009, 2012, 2014), Burke and Emerick (2016) adopt a
"long differences" approach to quantify longer-run adjustment to climate change that requires smoothing out
the variables in both sides of the equation. In the methods section, we show that their approach is nested
within ours.


                                                    4
             II.    Prior Methods and Our Unifying Approach to Measuring
                          Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation


                                             A.    Prior Methods

Prior literature on estimating climate impacts and adaptation has usually relied on two ap-
proaches. The first is the cross-sectional approach (e.g., Mendelsohn, Nordhaus and Shaw,
1994; Schlenker, Hanemann and Fisher, 2005), which exploits permanent, anticipated com-
ponents behind meteorological conditions, leveraging climate variation across locations to
estimate climate impacts inclusive of adaptation, but suffers from omitted variable bias. The
other is the panel fixed-effects approach (e.g., Deschenes and Greenstone, 2007; Schlenker
and Roberts, 2009), which deals with that bias but identifies the effect of transitory, unantic-
ipated weather shocks, exclusive of adaptation, making the transition to estimated climate
effects nontrivial.9 By using either the short- or long-run variation behind meteorological
conditions to identifying climate impacts, those research designs trade off key assumptions.
More recent literature (e.g., Dell, Jones and Olken, 2009, 2012, 2014; Burke and Emerick,
2016) has proposed various hybrid approaches for combining these two strands of the liter-
ature, but face issues of their own (Kolstad and Moore, 2020).
      The cross-sectional (CS) approach estimates the following equation:


                                   yi = CS xi + (ci + ui ) = CS xi + vi ,                                      (1)

where yi is an outcome variable measured at location i, and is affected by the climatological
variable of interest, xi ­ typically taken as temperature. ci represents the vector of all
time-constant unobserved covariates that are correlated to xi , while ui reflects the standard
idiosyncratic error term. Thus, if ci is non-empty and cov (xi , ci ) = 0, ^CS suffers from

omitted variable bias (OVB).
      The panel fixed-effects (FE) approach instead estimates the following equation:
  9
      Only in certain conditions weather variation exactly identifies the effects of climate (Hsiang, 2016).




                                                        5
                                   yit = F E xit + ci + t + uit ,                            (2)

where the outcome variable, yit , and climatic variable of interest, xit , are now additionally
measured at some recurring time interval t. By averaging each variable in equation (2) for
each unit i over time, we obtain:


                                    y
                                    ¯i = F E x
                                             ¯ i + ci + ¯ it + u
                                                               ¯i ,                          (3)

                  T
      ¯i  1/T
where y           t=1   yit , and the other variables are defined similarly. Subtracting equation
(3) from equation (2), we highlight the source of variation in the identification of F E :


                           (yit - y
                                  ¯i ) = F E (xit - x
                                                    ¯i ) + t + (uit - u
                                                                      ¯i ),                  (4)

where t  (t - ¯ it ). Because (xit - x
                                     ¯i ) is the deviation of observed temperature from
its local long-run value, F E is clearly identified from temperature shocks. Thus, in this
approach, although most OVB problems are resolved by the ci terms cancelling out, ^F E

now identifies the impact of meteorological, rather than climatological, phenomena.
   Recently, focus has expanded from simply estimating climate impacts to estimating adap-
tation to climate change. Some authors have noted that CS identifies climate impacts in-
clusive of any adaptation, while F E , by its nature, identifies meteorological impacts which
can be taken as an approximation of climate impacts exclusive of any adaptation (e.g., Dell,
Jones and Olken, 2009, 2012, 2014; Burke and Emerick, 2016). Thus, they propose measur-
ing adaptation as the difference between ^F E and ^CS . Although this principle to recovering

a measure of adaptation is accurate, this approach faces two empirical challenges. First, to
the extent that OVB impacts ^CS in the cross-sectional model, this will translate directly

into bias in the estimate of climate adaptation. Second, even if an unbiased estimate of CS
could be obtained, ^CS and ^F E arise from two different estimating equations. While OLS,

equation by equation, allows us to easily test hypotheses about the coefficients within an



                                                  6
equation, it does not provide a convenient way for testing hypotheses involving coefficients
from different equations. Thus, in practice, we must resort to seemingly unrelated regression
(SUR) models to explicitly test whether the measure of adaptation is statistically distin-
guishable from zero. Recall that a SUR system is a set of equations that has cross-equation
error correlation, that is, the error terms in the regression equations are correlated. Also re-
call that SUR estimation usually amounts to feasible generalized least squares with a specific
form of the variance-covariance matrix. Hence, further structural assumptions are needed
for statistical inference of the measure of adaptation.


                                      B.    Our Unifying Approach

Our unifying approach nests both of these strands of the climate-economy literature in the
same estimating equation. It simultaneously identifies both long-run climatological impacts
and short-run meteorological shocks, and thus allows for an explicitly testable measure of
adaptation in the spirit of prior comparisons between short- and long-run effects (e.g., Dell,
Jones and Olken, 2009, 2012, 2014; Burke and Emerick, 2016). Specifically, we begin by
posing the ideal estimating equation, although infeasible:


                              yit = W (xit - x
                                             ¯i ) + C x
                                                      ¯i + ci + t + uit .                                  (5)

Here, W would identify the effect of meteorological (weather) shocks, while C would identify
the effect of changes in climatological trends. Unfortunately, C cannot be identified because
x
¯i is perfectly collinear with ci . We therefore propose the following feasible approximation
of the ideal equation:


                             yit = W (xit - xid ) + C xid + ci + t + uit ,                                 (6)

where d represents some longer time period over which climate trends would vary.10 By
  10
     Observe that for simplicity, and to keep the comparison with those two strands of the literature as clear
as possible, our unifying approach uses a linear specification, which should capture the first-order effects of
potentially nonlinear responses.


                                                      7
averaging each variable in equation (6) for each cross-sectional unit i over time, we obtain:


               y       xi - x
               ¯i = W (¯    ¯ i ) + C x
                                      ¯ i + ci + ¯ ti + u
                                                        ¯i = C x
                                                               ¯ i + ci + ¯ ti + u
                                                                                 ¯i ,           (7)

                                T
                   ¯i  1/T
where, once again, y            t=1   yit , and the other variables are defined similarly. Subtract-
ing equation (7) from equation (6), we highlight the source of variation that allows for the
identification of both W and C :


                 (yit - y
                        ¯i ) = W (xit - xid ) + C (xid - x
                                                         ¯i ) + t + (uit - u
                                                                           ¯i ),                (8)

where, once again, t  (t - ¯ ti ). Thus, in equation (8) we can observe that ^W is identified

from temperature shocks, therefore approximately equivalent to ^F E , whereas ^C is identified

from climatic changes, approximately equivalent to ^CS , though now critically free from a

number of OVB concerns. We thus naturally define adaptation as the difference ^W - ^C .

Because both coefficients of interest are estimated in a single equation, statistical inference
on the measure of adaptation is straightforward. Observe that this measure leverages the
behavioral responses of the same economic agents to both weather shocks and climatic
changes. We do not need to extrapolate responses to weather realizations over time or
space to account for adaptation, as it has been done in the literature (e.g., Deschenes and
Greenstone, 2011; Barreca et al., 2016; Auffhammer, 2018a; Carleton et al., 2019; Heutel,
Miller and Molitor, forthcoming). In addition, we do not have to assume forward-looking
behavior in order to obtain a measure of adaptation, as in Shrader (2020). Our measure
is agnostic about how economic agents process and use the information from the past. It
does not matter whether agents are forward-looking, inattentive (e.g., Reis, 2006a,b), or
myopic(e.g., Gabaix and Laibson, 2006), for example; our measure is informative either way.
   Notice that because (xid - x
                              ¯i ) in equation (8) varies slowly over time, we propose replac-
ing t with s , where s is defined as a longer time frame relative to the temporal unit of
observation t. For example, if t represents days, s could be a season of the year. This is for
simplicity, model parsimony, and clarity in the exposition. In practice, researchers will be


                                                  8
able to exploit variation under a much richer set of time fixed effects.11 Additionally, observe
that while ^C is identified from this within-season variation in long-run climate, ^W is iden-

tified using the short-run deviations from this longer-run value, (xit - xid ). Constructing the
regression model in this way attenuates the need to saturate the econometric specification
with high-frequency time fixed effects.
    In a panel data approach, we would usually include time fixed effects at the level of
the temporal unit of analysis to deseasonalize the time series, and control for observed and
unobserved macroeconomic factors, before uncovering the causal effects of interest. From the
Frisch-Waugh-Lovell theorem, however, we know that the deseasonalization embedded in the
highly-saturated model is equivalent to the use of deviations in the final regression model
(Frisch and Waugh, 1933; Lovell, 1963). Moreover, although equation (8) is instructive
regarding variable decomposition, we do not need to transform the outcome variable to
identify W (Lovell, 1963, Theorem 4.1, p.1001), which preserves all the variation in yit for
the estimation of all parameters of interest. Therefore, by decomposing xit into its long-run
and short-run components, we are also able to exploit variation that evolves slowly over time
by including only lower-frequency time fixed effects in s . Using seasonal rather than monthly
or daily fixed effect allows us to take advantage of how climate varies across different months
or days within a season and location. Intuitively, we exploit how economic agents respond
when April temperature in a particular area is assigned the May temperature, for instance.
In fact, several researchers have pointed out that with climate change, springs could start
earlier and falls could last longer in some locations (e.g., Zhang and Wang, 2016).
    Alternative recent advancements in the literature, termed "hybrid approaches" by Kol-
stad and Moore (2020), have similarly aimed to address the issues inherent in either the
cross-sectional or fixed-effects approaches. The long-differences method (Burke and Emer-
ick, 2016) is one such a hybrid that addresses the OVB issues in the cross-sectional approach
  11
     Later, in the application of our unifying approach to the impact of climate change on ambient ozone
concentration, we will demonstrate this point by exploiting a much more granular set of fixed effects in the
econometric specification.



                                                     9
while still identifying long-run climatological impacts rather than short-run effects of me-
teorological shocks. This approach is, in essence, a special case of our unifying approach
in which both the dependent and independent variables are similarly transformed to reflect
long-run changes. As in our approach, the long-differences method estimates the impact of
long-run climate variation in xid on an outcome variable, although this variable now also
only varies at a lower temporal frequency by construction, and should thus be thought of as
yid rather than yit . Again, the reason why we do not transform the dependent variable in the
same way in our approach is to allow for the identification of the short-term weather effect
in the same estimating equation. That is feasible because the Frisch-Waugh-Lovell theo-
rem does not require the transformation of the dependent variable in order to identify that
coefficient of interest (Lovell, 1963, Theorem 4.1, p.1001). Empirically, the long-differences
approach recasts the fixed-effects approach, equation (2), using two long time periods, a and
b, each spanning n years, with some number of gap years, g , between the midpoints of both
periods such that all years in the final sample are exclusive to one period.12 For each of these
two periods a cross-sectional model is constructed as in equation (1):


                                     y
                                     ¯ia = a x
                                             ¯ia + ¯ a + (ci + u
                                                               ¯ia ),                             (9a)

                                     y
                                     ¯ib = b x
                                             ¯ib + ¯ b + (ci + u
                                                               ¯ib ),                             (9b)



      ¯ia  1/n
where y              ta   yit , the same holds for y
                                                   ¯ib , and the other variables are defined similarly.
Taking the "long difference" (LD) of equation (9a) from (9b), we obtain:


                        yib - y
                       (¯                 xib - x
                              ¯ia ) = LD (¯     ¯ia ) + (¯b - ¯ a ) + (¯
                                                                       uib - u
                                                                             ¯ia ).               (10)

                                                      ¯ib - x
       Note that since a and b are g years separated, x     ¯ia reflects the long-run variation
in xi , and can be rewritten as xid - x
                                      ¯i , just as in equation (6), and all other variables can
  12
    For example, Burke and Emerick (2016) use the years 1978-1982 and 1998-2002 in constructing their
two time periods, such that n = 5 and g = 20.




                                                   10
be rewritten similarly. Additionally, as the long-differences approach makes use of only two
periods, it is algebraically the same as a two-period fixed-effects model, and equation (10)
can be rewritten to highlight the source of variation that allows for the identification of LD :


                          (yid - y
                                 ¯i ) = LD (xid - x
                                                  ¯i ) + d + (uid - u
                                                                    ¯i ),                      (11)

where d  (d - ¯ id ). Thus, in equation (11) we can observe that ^LD is identified from

climatic changes in the same way as ^C in equation (8).



    C.   Decomposition of Meteorological Variables: Climate Trends vs. Weather Shocks

As mentioned above and seen in equation (6), implementing our approach requires that we
first decompose xit into its long-run component, xid , and its short-run deviation from this
value, (xit - xid ). A similar idea has been used in macroeconomics to measure business
cycles since the seminal contribution of Bums and Mitchell (1946),13 and in the literature
of intergenerational mobility following Solon's (1992) seminal work. In Solon's context,
observed income is noisy: it includes a permanent and a transitory component. To establish
a relationship between permanent income of sons and fathers, Solon proposes averaging
fathers' income for a number of years to reduce the errors-in-variables bias. Importantly,
the averaging is not needed for sons income, the dependent variable (Lovell, 1963, Theorem
4.1, p.1001). We proceed in a similar way: we decompose only meteorological variables, not
the main economic outcomes of interest. Illustrating the decomposition with temperature
(T emp), we can express it as:


                                   T emp = T empC + T empW ,                                   (12)

where T empC represents climate patterns, and T empW ( T emp - T empC ) deviations from
those long-run patterns. Again, this decomposition highlights the two sources of variation
  13
     See, for example, Hodrick and Prescott (1981, 1997), Baxter and King (1999), and Christiano and
Fitzgerald (2003).



                                                11
that have been used in the climate-economy literature. T empC and T empW in the decom-
position above are associated with different sets of information. On the one hand, T empC
includes climate patterns that economic agents can only gather by experiencing weather
realizations over a long period of time, and can be thought of as the "climate normal" tem-
perature. On the other hand, T empW represents weather shocks, which by definition are
revealed to economic agents virtually at the time of the weather realization. Now, usually
one adjusts to something they happen to know by experience. Therefore, adaptation can
be measured as the difference between responses to changes in T empC relative to effects of
weather shocks T empW . This is analogous to Lucas' powerful insight that economic agents
respond differently depending on the set of information that is available to them. Lucas
(1977), for instance, provides an example of a producer that makes no changes in production
or works less hard when facing a permanent increase in the output price, but works harder
when the price increase is transitory.
   Two types of variation are often associated with a changing climate: changes in averages,
and changes in the frequency of extreme weather events (IPCC, 2013). For simplicity, and
to keep the comparison with prior approaches as simple as possible, our temperature decom-
position focuses on increases in averages, not on variability. In fact, in the following section
we show that our weather data, comprised of the comprehensive set of national weather
monitors, suggests a gradual increase in average temperature, but evidence that the mag-
nitude of temperature shocks, defined as deviations from the 30-year moving averages, are
relatively stable over time, and narrowly bounded. Therefore, in our approach, dispersion
shows up only implicitly in the sense that long-run trends take into account the frequency
and intensity of daily temperature extremes. It is imperative to recognize, however, that
variability may be crucial in some settings. Kala (2019), for example, studies adaptation
under different learning models. Hence, variance of climatological variables is a key element
of her framework.
   It is also important to emphasize that this decomposition does not make any assumption


                                              12
on how individuals and firms process and use the information from the past. Forward-
looking agents, as considered by Shrader (2020), will respond optimally to all information at
hand when deciding the degree of adaptation. Myopic and inattentive agents (e.g., Gabaix
and Laibson, 2006; Reis, 2006a,b), on the other hand, may find it costly to absorb and
process all the information at all times, and may respond only to partial information or only
sporadically. Our measure of adaptation is agnostic to either type of behavior; the goal of
our approach is to empirically assess the economic and statistical significance of adaptation,
regardless of how economic agents make decisions on whether to adapt, or the extent of
adaptation.


        III.   Empirical Application: Climate Impacts on Ambient Ozone

We apply our novel, unifying approach to measure climate impacts on ambient ozone con-
centration, and adaptation, and examine the heterogeneity in adaptive behavior. The appli-
cation is particularly ideal for four reasons. First, ozone is not emitted directly into the air,
but rather rapidly formed by Leontief-like chemical reactions between nitrogen oxides (NOx)
and volatile organic compounds (VOCs) in the presence of sunlight and warm temperatures.
Hence, meteorological conditions do matter in determining surface ozone levels, and climate
change may increase ozone concentration in the near future (e.g., Jacob and Winner, 2009).
Furthermore, ozone is rapidly destroyed during the night; thus, correlation between ambient
concentrations across two consecutive days is limited. Second, nationwide high-frequency
data on ambient ozone and meteorological conditions are publicly available for a long period
of time in the United States: we use daily measurements for the typical ozone season from
1980-2013. Third, our "climate experiment" is quite simple to understand in the ozone con-
text, as the ozone season varies by state and usually consists of only six months (typically
April-September), but concerns are mounting that longer spring and fall would expand the
ozone season in some states (e.g., Zhang and Wang, 2016). Fourth, this is a highly policy-
relevant issue. The so-called "climate penalty" on ozone means that climate change might

                                               13
deteriorate air quality in the near future, with important implications for public health and
labor productivity.14
       In this section, we present the data used in our analysis ­ we utilize information from
two major sources of data15 ­ and the empirical strategy to carry out the estimation of the
impacts of weather shocks and longer-term climatic changes on ambient ozone concentration.


                                                A.    Data

Weather Data -- For meteorological data, we use daily measurements of maximum temper-
ature as well as total precipitation from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administra-
tions's Global Historical Climatology Network databse (NOAA, 2014). This dataset provides
detailed weather measurements at over 20,000 weather stations across the country for the
period 1950-2013. Figure 1 presents the yearly temperature fluctuations and overall climate
trend in the US as measured by these monitors, relative to a 1950-1979 baseline average
temperature, while Figure A1, in Appendix A, illustrates the geographical location of the
complete sample of weather stations from 1950-2013. Figure 2, by comparison, depicts the
variation and trend of our decomposed temperature variables, T empC and T empW , between
1980 and 2013 for the comprehensive set of national weather monitors, indicating that while
average temperature has been gradually increasing since the 1980's, temperature variability
has remained relatively stable.16 These weather stations are typically not located adjacent
to the ozone monitors. Hence, we develop an algorithm to obtain a weather observation
at each ozone monitor in our sample.17 Table A1, in Appendix A, reports the summary
statistics for daily temperature and our decomposed variables, for each year in our sample
from 1980-2013.
  14
     Exposure to ambient ozone has been causally linked to asthma hospitalization, pharmaceutical expen-
ditures, mortality, and labor productivity (e.g., Neidell, 2009; Moretti and Neidell, 2011; Graff Zivin and
Neidell, 2012; Deschenes, Greenstone and Shapiro, 2017).
  15
     For further details regarding the construction of the final dataset for our analysis, see Appendix A.1.
  16
     Figures A2 and A3 in Appendix A present similar figures using a semi-balanced sample of monitors, and
our final sample of weather monitors once matched to ozone monitors.
  17
     We detail the steps taken in Appendix A.1 as well as conduct robustness checks on the sensitivity of our
results to changes in the algorithm in Appendix B.1.


                                                     14
       Ozone Data -- For ground-level ozone concentrations, we use daily readings from the
nationwide network of the EPA's air quality monitoring stations. In our preferred specifi-
cation we use an unbalanced panel of ozone monitors.18 Appendix A Figure A4 illustrates
the evolution of ambient ozone concentrations over our sample period for both the full un-
balanced panel of monitors, as well as a smaller balanced panel. Figure A5, in Appendix A,
depicts the evolution of our sample of ozone monitors over the three decades in our data,
and illustrates the expansion of the network over time. Table A2, in Appendix A, describes
some features of the sample of ozone monitors used in our analysis, for every year between
1980 and 2013.

       Consolidating information from the above sources, we reach our final unbalanced sample
of ozone monitors over the period 1980-2013. Appendix A Figure A6 illustrates the proximity
of our final sample of ozone monitors to the matched weather stations.
       We carry out the analysis focusing on the effect of daily maximum temperature on daily
maximum ozone concentration since 1980. We choose this relationship because increases
in temperature are expected to be the principal factor driving increases in ambient ozone
concentrations (Jacob and Winner, 2009). Indeed, data on ozone and temperature from our
sample, plotted in Appendix A Figure A7, highlights the close correlation between these
two variables. Interestingly, we see that not only does contemporaneous temperature have
an effect on ambient ozone, but the long-term temperature trend also seems to be affecting
it, although perhaps to a lesser extent. We leverage both relationships in the empirical
framework we now describe.


                                         B.    Empirical Strategy

Decomposition of Meteorological Variables: An Empirical Counterpart -- Focusing on tem-
perature (T emp), our primary variable of interest, we express it around ozone monitor i
  18
       We discuss the reasoning for this approach as well as our results using a balanced panel in Appendix
B.1.



                                                     15
in day t of month m and year y , and decompose it into T empC and T empW as in Section
II. We define T empC as the 30-year monthly moving average (MA) of past temperatures.19
To make this variable part of the information set held by economic agents at the time that
the outcome of interest is measured, we lag it by one year. For example, the 30-year MA
associated with May 1982 is the average of May temperatures for all years in the period
1952-1981. Therefore, economic agents should have had at least one year to respond to
unexpected changes in climate normals at the time ambient ozone is measured. We average
temperature over 30 years because it is how climatologists usually define climate normals,
and because we wanted individuals and firms to be able to observe climate patterns for a long
period of time, enough to potentially make adjustments.20 We use monthly MAs because it
is likely that individuals recall climate patterns by month, not by day of the year. Indeed,
meteorologists on TV and social media often talk about how a month has been the coldest
or warmest in the past 10, 20, or 30 years, but not how a particular day of the year has
deviated from the trend.21 T empW represents weather shocks and is defined as the deviation
of the daily temperature from the lagged 30-year monthly MA. By definition, these shocks
are revealed to economic agents only at the time ambient ozone is being measured. Thus, in
this case agents may have had only a few hours to adjust, limiting their ability to respond to
such unexpected temperatures.22 Figure 3 provides an illustrative example of our preferred
   19
      Our decomposition of meteorological variables into a 30-year moving average (trend) and deviations
from it (shocks), as discussed in Section II, is a data filtering technique to separate the "signal" from the
"noise." This should not be confused with a moving-average model of climate change.
   20
      It is possible, however, that agents form beliefs regarding expected climate over much shorter and more
recent time windows (e.g., Kaufmann et al., 2017), or that organizational inertia slows the rate at which
firms adapt to a changing climate (e.g., Kelly and Amburgey, 1991). In our robustness checks we provide
similar estimates using 3- 5- 10- and 20-year moving averages, as well as longer lag lengths between the
contemporaneous weather shock and the defined climate normal.
   21
      As another robustness check, we use daily instead of monthly moving averages, discussed further in the
following subsection. Economic agents, however, may still associate a day with its corresponding month
when making adjustment decisions.
   22
      Because precise weather forecasts are made available only a few hours before its realization, economic
agents may have limited time to adjust prior to the ozone measurement. This might be true even during
Ozone Action Days (OAD). An OAD is declared when weather conditions are likely to combine with pollution
emissions to form high levels of ozone near the ground that may cause harmful health effects. Individuals
and firms are urged to take action to reduce emissions of ozone-causing pollutants, but usually only a day in
advance or in the same day. Unlike what happens in a few developing countries, however, neither production
nor driving is forced to stop in those days, limiting the impact of short-run adjustments. In the robustness


                                                     16
decomposition in Panel A, compared to a traditional fixed-effect decomposition in Panel B,
using data for Los Angeles in 2013.23

    Econometric Model -- Given the decomposition of meteorological variables into two
sources of variation, our parsimonious econometric specification to estimate the impact of
temperature on ambient ozone is the following:


              Ozoneit = W T empW           C
                               it + C T empit + Xit  + Zi sy + i + rsy +                   it ,        (13)

where i represents an ozone monitor located in NOAA climate region r, and t stands for
day, s for season (Spring or Summer), and y for year. As mentioned in the prior section, our
analysis focuses on the most common ozone season in the U.S. ­ April to September ­ in the
period 1980-2013.24 The dependent variable Ozone captures daily maximum ambient ozone
concentration. T emp's represent the two components of the decomposition proposed for
meteorological variables.25 The matrix of additional control covariates X contains a similar
decomposition of precipitation26 as well as a binary indicator variable for whether a county
is out of compliance with the Clean Air Act ambient ozone standard.27 Z represents time-
invariant covariates (latitude and longitude of ozone monitors), which are interacted with
season-by-year fixed effects in our econometric specification to control for differential trends
associated with topographical and other geographical features of a location,  represents
monitor fixed effects,  NOAA climate region-by-season-by-year fixed effects,28 and                       an
checks, we find no evidence of any additional adaptation occurring due to OAD announcements. That is,
short-run adjustments, if any, do not seem large enough to be comparable to what happens in the long run.
   23
      Figure A8, in Appendix A, illustrates this same concept but over the entire 34-year sample period.
   24
      Table A3 in Appendix A lists the official Ozone season by state following USEPA (2006).
   25
      We also explore the nonlinear effects of temperature on ozone in Appendix B.1
   26
      Although Dawson, Adams and Pandisa (2007) find it to be less important than temperature, Jacob and
Winner (2009) point out that higher water vapor in the future climate may decrease ground-level ozone
concentration. Our estimates are in line with those authors' assessment, and are available upon request.
   27
      The Clean Air Act nonattainment county designation is a binary status for counties not complying with
the National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS) for ambient ozone. This variable is lagged by three
years because EPA gives heavy-emitters at least three years to comply with ozone NAAQS (USEPA, 2004,
p.23954).
   28
      Recall that once we have constructed weather shocks appropriately, the Frisch-Waugh-Lovell theorem
allows us to identify the effects of those shocks without deseasonalizing the dependent variable and without
highly saturating the econometric model with time fixed effects. Notwithstanding, in the robustness checks,


                                                    17
idiosyncratic term. In all estimations, standard errors are clustered at the county level.29
    As should be clear by now, we exploit plausibly random, monthly variation in climate
normals, and daily variation in weather within a season to estimate the impact of climate
change on ambient ozone concentration. Identification of the effect of weather shocks relies on
monitor-level daily variation in the deviation of meteorological variables from lagged climate
normals after controlling non-parametrically for regional shocks to ozone concentration at
the season-by-year level. For instance, let us consider the variation of May 1st, 1982 relative
to the Spring (April-June) of 1982 in the Northeast region. The question we ask is the
following: what happens to ozone concentration in a May 1982 day when the deviation of
temperature from the May 1981 climate normal is 1 C above the average daily temperature
shock in the Northeast in the Spring (April-June) of 1982? Conditional on business-as-usual
ozone precursor emissions, a higher temperature should lead to more ozone formation and,
consequently, higher ozone concentration.30
    Identification of the effect of climatic changes on ambient ozone levels relies on plausibly
random, monitor-level monthly variation in lagged 30-year MAs of meteorological variables
after controlling non-parametrically for regional shocks to ozone concentration at the season-
by-year level. As an example, let us consider variation of lagged 30-year MA temperature
in May 1982 relative to the Spring (April-June) of 1982 in the Northeast region. Again,
the question we ask is the following: what happens to ozone concentration in a May 1982
day when the normal temperature around the monitor in May 1981 is 1 C warmer than the
average of all 30-year monthly MAs of temperature in the Northeast in the Spring (April-
June) of 1981? If economic agents pursued full adaptive behavior, the unexpected increase
in normal temperature would lead to reductions in ozone precursor emissions to avoid an
we provide estimates from a number of less parsimonious specifications with a much richer set of time fixed
effects, and not surprisingly the results are remarkably similar to our main findings.
   29
      There may be a concern that our temperature shocks and trends are both constructed, so they could be
considered generated regressors. Estimating bootstrapped standard errors, we find little variation relative
to the county-level clustered standard errors, discussed further in the robustness checks. Given such a small
variation, we opted to report the regular clustered standard errors.
   30
      Robustness checks with richer sets of location by time fixed effects also control for a variety of time-
varying unobserved heterogeneity in emissions. Again, the results are remarkably similar to our main findings.


                                                     18
increase in ozone concentration of identical magnitude of the weather shock effect in the
same month of the following year. In other words, agents would respond to "permanent"
changes in temperature by adjusting their behavior or production processes to offset that
increase in normal temperature. Unlike weather shocks, which influence ozone formation by
triggering chemical reactions conditional on a level of ozone precursor emissions, changes in
the 30-year MA affect the level of emissions.
   To understand better the identification strategy for the climate effects, let us compare
it to the ideal experiment. In that experiment, we could have a glass dome covering each
county, assign climate to each of them randomly and inform residents that the assigned
climate is permanent, and collect information on a number of economic outcomes after some
time. To approximate such an ideal setting, we use plausibly random, within-season variation
in the lagged 30-year moving averages. Agents know the normal temperature in the spring
for having observed it in the last thirty years, but it turns out that the substitution of last
year's average March temperature in the 30-year MA for the average March temperature
three decades ago could generate some random variation in March climate. March could be
randomly assigned April or May temperature, for instance. Likewise, April could experience
March temperature randomly. Because individuals and firms have observed the temperature
in the last three decades, they should interpret such changes as permanent, and update their
climate information. As a result, they may make adjustments to cope with those changes,
leading to adaptive (or intensifying) behavior.

   Measuring Adaptation -- Once we credibly estimate the impact of the two components
of temperature ­ shocks and within-season changes in long-run trends ­ on ambient ozone
concentration, we uncover our measure of adaptation. The average adaptation across all
counties in our sample is the difference between the coefficients ^W and ^C estimated in

equation (13). If economic agents engaged in full adaptive behavior, ^C would be zero, and

the magnitude of the average adaptation would be equal to the size of the weather shock effect
on ambient ozone concentration. As explained before, agents would react to "permanent"

                                                19
increases in temperature by reducing ozone precursor emissions to offset potential increases
in ozone concentration.
   In our preferred econometric specification, behavioral responses are allowed to occur only
in the year after the change in temperature trend is observed. Those adjustments, however,
might be related to innovations in temperature happening both in the previous year and 30
years before. Indeed, the "moving" feature of the 30-year MA is, by definition, associated
with the removal of the earliest observation included in the average ­ 31 years before, and the
inclusion of the most recent observation ­ one year before. Nevertheless, in the robustness
checks we consider cases where economic agents can take a decade or two to adjust.


                                            IV.    Results

In this section we report our findings of the application of our unifying approach to the
impact of temperature changes on ambient ozone concentration, and the extent to which
economic agents adapt to climate change in the context of ambient ozone pollution.


                A.    Impacts of Temperature on Ambient Ozone Concentration

Column (3) of Table 1 presents the effects on ambient ozone of the two components of ob-
served temperature: climate, represented by the lagged 30-year monthly MA, and weather
shock, represented by the deviation from that long-run trend.31 Although they are uncov-
ered by estimating equation (13), columns (1) and (2) benchmark them against effects that
would have been found if one had exploited either only the cross-sectional (e.g., Mendelsohn,
Nordhaus and Shaw, 1994; Schlenker, Hanemann and Fisher, 2005) or only the longitudinal
(e.g., Deschenes and Greenstone, 2007; Schlenker and Roberts, 2009) structure of the data.
   Column (1) reports results from a cross-sectional estimation of daily maximum ozone
concentration on daily maximum temperature around each monitor, averaged over the entire
  31
     As mentioned before, even though we use monthly moving averages in our main analysis, as a robustness
check we also estimate our preferred specifications using daily moving averages. The results are virtually
identical, and are reported in Appendix B.1 Table B4.


                                                   20
period of analysis 1980-2013. These variables capture information for all the years in our
sample and are good proxies for the average pollution and climate around each monitor. The
estimate suggests that a 1 C increase in average maximum temperature is associated with
an increase of 1.02 parts per billion (ppb) in ozone concentration, approximately. Column
(2) reports the effect of temperature on ozone identified by exploiting within-monitor daily
variation in maximum temperature after controlling for climate region-by-month-by-year
fixed effects. The coefficient indicates that a 1 C increase in maximum temperature leads
to a 1.72ppb increase in maximum ambient ozone concentration. When we decompose daily
maximum temperature into our two components in column (3), as expected the effect on
ambient ozone changes for the lagged 30-year MA, relative to the column (1) result, but is
statistically the same as column (2) for the effect of weather shocks. A 1 C shock increases
ozone concentration by 1.68ppb, and a 1 C change in trends in the same month of the
previous year increases ozone concentration by 1.23ppb. Therefore, by including the two
components of temperature ­ the lagged 30-year MA and deviations from it ­ the impact of
a 1 C change in long-run maximum temperature increases roughly 20 percent when compared
to cross-sectional estimate.
   It is widely recognized that the cross-sectional approach is plagued with omitted variable
bias. In our context, if more informed/concerned local monitoring agencies inspect heavy
emitters of ozone precursors more often when average temperature rises, and more intense
enforcement of environmental regulations induces reductions in ozone concentration, then
this unobserved behavior might lead to underestimation of the long-run impact of temper-
ature. On the other hand, as emphasized in the conceptual framework, estimates from the
standard panel data fixed-effects methodology and our approach should be statistically the
same due to the properties of the Frisch-Waugh-Lovell theorem. The deseasonalization em-
bedded in the fixed-effects model is roughly equivalent to the use of deviations from 30-year
trends in our regression model.
   Even with the larger estimate of the impact of rises in long-term temperature on ambient


                                             21
ozone concentrations, our estimates imply a so-called "climate penalty" on ozone on the
lower end of the ranges found in the literature. Indeed, Jacob and Winner (2009), in their
review of the effects of climate change on air quality, find that climate change alone may lead
to a rise in summertime surface ozone concentrations by 1-10 ppb ­ a wide interval partly
driven by the different regional focuses of the studies they review. The U.S. EPA, in its 2009
Interim Assessment, claims that "the amount of increase in summertime average ... O3
concentrations across all the modeling studies tends to fall in the range 2-8 ppb " (USEPA,
2009, p.25). Combining our estimates in column (3) with climate projections from the U.S.
Fourth National Climate Assessment (Vose et al., 2017) under the business-as-usual scenario
(RCP 8.5), one would also predict an increase in ambient ozone concentrations by the mid
and the end of the century in the range of 2-5.9 ppb, approximately. To be clear, "climate
penalty" in our setting is the response of economic agents to longer-term climatic changes,
which is inclusive of adaptation, as it will be discussed below. If one would wrongly use the
responses to temperature shocks as the penalty, which is exclusive of adaptation, the range
would be 2.7-8 ppb, a nontrivial shift to the right. In fact, this may be one of the reasons
why our estimate of the penalty is on the lower ranges of the values produced by simulation
studies (again, for a review, see Jacob and Winner, 2009); they usually do not take into
account behavioral responses. To put those values in perspective, each of the last few times
EPA revised the air quality standards for ambient ozone, they decreased it by 5ppb.


                       B.   Measuring Adaptation to Climate Change

Our results indicate that temperature shocks have a larger impact on ozone levels compared
to long-term temperature trends. The comparison between the short- and long-run effects
of temperature may provide a measure of adaptive responses by economic agents (Dell,
Jones and Olken, 2009, 2012, 2014; Burke and Emerick, 2016). Given the bias of the cross-
sectional approach, by comparing the impact of long-run temperature on ozone concentration
in column (1) of Table 1 with the effect of a temperature shock in column (2), adaptation


                                              22
would be overestimated ­ approximately 0.69ppb. Our measure of adaptation ­ also a
comparison between the impact of the long-run temperature (lagged 30-year MA) and the
effect of the temperature shock (deviation from the MA) ­ is 35 percent smaller: 0.45ppb.
Notwithstanding, this suggests that economic agents might be adapting to climate change.
   If we ignored such adaptive responses by economic agents, then we would be overesti-
mating the "climate penalty" on ozone by over 36 percent. Again, we would be making the
mistake of taking the effect of weather shocks as the penalty, when we should be looking at
the impact of climatic changes, which incorporates adaptive responses by economic agents.
Using the climate projections from the U.S. Fourth National Climate Assessment under the
business-as-usual scenario (RCP 8.5), we would overestimate the climate penalty by 0.72ppb
by mid century, and 2.15ppb by the end of the century. For comparison, recall that each of
the last few times EPA revised the air quality standards for ambient ozone, they decreased
it by 5ppb.


                                   C.   Robustness Checks

Measurement Error & Agents' Beliefs -- A concern regarding our decomposition of meteo-
rological variables in equation (12) might be measurement error. Because both components
are intrinsically unobserved, we define the long-run trend as the 30-year MA, and weather
shocks as deviations from that moving average. If there is classical measurement error, the
estimates of the coefficients of interest in equation (13) will suffer from attenuation bias.
Moreover, the bias will be magnified in fixed effect regressions.
   To investigate the robustness of our results to measurement error, we carry out analyses
using moving averages of different length. We start by using a 3-year MA, then 5-, 10-, and
20-year MAs, relative to our preferred specification using 30 years. As argued seminally by
Solon (1992), as we increase the time window of a moving average, the permanent component
of a variable that also includes a transitory component will be less mismeasured. If this is the
case, we should observe the coefficients of interest increasing as longer windows are used for


                                              23
the moving averages. Our estimates in Table 2 remain remarkably stable over the different
lengths of the moving averages, but if anything they get slightly larger until the 20-year
moving average.
       As pointed out by Angrist and Pischke (2009) and Blanc and Schlenker (2017), a fixed
effects regression with variables under classical measurement error is plagued by larger at-
tenuation bias. The identifying variation in a standard longitudinal analysis comes from
deviations from the cross-sectional averages in the panel structure. Once the variables of
interest are demeaned, the share of measurement error variation is magnified, and the co-
efficients of interest will be even more attenuated. Again, our estimates in Table 2 remain
largely unchanged over the different lengths of the moving averages, with a slight attenuation
of the coefficient of the moving average when we move from the 20- to the 30-year moving
average. This latter result suggests that the widely used "climate normals" ­ three-decade
averages of meteorological variables including temperature and precipitation32 ­ are close to
the "optimal" long-run trends. The improvements from reducing measurement error might
be offset by the panel-driven attenuation bias between 20- and 30-year time windows.
       At the same time, it is possible that agents form climate beliefs in a way that exhibits
recency weighting (e.g., Kaufmann et al., 2017). This presents a second trade-off. Longer,
20- to 30-year MAs, guided by climatology, appear "optimal" in our setting for navigating
the first trade-off between potential measurement error and fixed-effect induced attenuation
bias for the purposes of estimating a long-run climate impact. Shorter, 3- to 5-year MAs,
however, may better reflect agents' internalized information set with regards to forming
beliefs over the current climate conditions and thus better capture medium-run adaptive
behavior (Moore et al., 2019). It is plausible, therefore, that the observed increases, however
slight, in the coefficient on climate trend as we move from a 3- to a 20-year MA are, at least
in part, due to agents' stronger adaptive response to recent events than to longer-run trends.
  32
     "The 30 year interval was selected by international agreement, based on the recommendations of the
International Meteorological Conference in Warsaw in 1933. The 30 year interval is sufficiently long to filter
out many of the short-term interannual fluctuations and anomalies, but sufficiently short so as to be used to
reflect longer term climatic trends " (Climatology Office, 2003).


                                                     24
   Lagged & Short-run Adaptive Responses -- Another potential concern with our preferred
specification might be the fact that we have used the 1-year lagged 30-year moving average
to capture the long-term climate trend, implying that agents adapt within one year. Hence,
we check the sensitivity of our results when agents have 10 or 20 years to adapt, instead
of just one. In columns (1) and (2) of Table 3, we provide estimates from our preferred
specification but using respectively 20-year moving averages of temperature lagged by 10
years, and 10-year moving averages lagged by 20 years. By doing so, we are providing agents
more time to potentially adjust to climate change. Even though we would expect that the
effects of the weather shocks to be similar, we anticipate the effects of the climate trend to
be slightly smaller than before, as agents should now be able to adapt more than before.
This is what we find from our estimates reported in Table 3, although the magnitude of the
coefficients is remarkably close to that of our main results.
   Alternatively, one might be concerned that agents are in fact able to respond rapidly and
adapt to weather shocks, in which case the coefficient on temperature deviations would be
inclusive of any such adaptive responses, and thus our estimate of adaptation would be biased
downwards. In column (3) we make use of a widespread policy of "Ozone Action Day" (OAD)
alerts, where a local air pollution authority would issue an alert, usually a day in advance,
that meteorological conditions are expected to be more conducive to a high concentration
of ambient ozone in the following day. If agents are adapting to contemporaneous weather
shocks, these "action days" would be the days we would be most likely to observe an adaptive
response. Indeed, individuals are urged to take voluntary action to reduce emissions of ozone
precursors such as working from home, carpooling to work, or using public transportation;
combining auto trips while running errands; and reducing home landscaping projects. Firms
are also urged to provide work schedule flexibility, reduce refueling of the corporate fleet
during daytime, and save AC-related energy usage by adjusting indoor temperature (USEPA,
1997, 2004). Interacting an indicator variable for days in which OAD alerts were issued
for a given county with our other covariates, we find that such alerts have a negligible


                                              25
and statistically insignificant impact on the effect of a 1 C change in the contemporaneous
temperature shock.33 Although previous studies have provided evidence of some decline in
driving and increases in the use of public transportation in a few locations (e.g., Cummings
and Walker, 2000; Cutter and Neidell, 2009; Sexton, 2012), we find little indication that
agents engage in meaningful short-run adaptive responses across the country.

       Controlling for Precursor Emissions -- As discussed previously in Section III, ozone
is formed from precursor pollutants ­ volatile organic compounds (VOCs) and oxides of
nitrogen (NOx) ­ in the presence of sunlight and heat. It may be of concern, then, that
the levels of such precursor pollutants are not explicitly included as regressors in our main
specification. Data on these precursors, especially VOCs, however, is unfortunately limited.
We thus investigate this concern via two approaches: Table 4 presents the results of our
main specification when using a richer set of fixed effects to account for systematic variation
in local precursor levels over time; while Table 5 presents the results of specifications using
the restricted sample for which precursor data exists.
       The ideal experiment would be to have two locations with the same levels of ozone
precursors, but facing different changes in temperature. If precursor levels are different,
but approximately unchanging over time, our standard monitor fixed-effects approach would
mimic this ideal setting. Additionally, our region-by-season-by-year fixed effects maintain
this ideal setting while allowing precursor levels to vary arbitrarily across NOAA climate
regions, seasons, and years as long as levels are similar for monitors each day within a region
in a given season and year. Precursor emissions may, however, vary at a more localized
level, whether it be seasonally, by day of the week, or trending over time. Table 4 presents
the results of four additional specifications in which we enrich our standard set of fixed
effects to account for potential localized variation in precursor levels. Column (1) allows
  33
    Although the recovered coefficients of temperature shock, climate trend, and implied adaptation are
quantitatively different for column (3) than columns (1) and (2), this is due to a difference in the underlying
sample. EPA data on "action day" alerts were only provided from 2004 onwards, leading to a restricted
overall sample (approximately 36% of our full sample).



                                                      26
the monitor fixed effect to vary by season, column (2) allows the monitor fixed effect to
vary by weekday/weekend, column (3) allows the monitor fixed effect to vary linearly over
time, and column (4) allows for all three. In all cases the magnitude of the change in
our coefficients of interest is economically negligible and statistically insignificant, providing
reassuring evidence in favor of our preferred parsimonious specification expressed in equation
(13).
       As an alternative approach to implementing further fixed effects, we collected all available
data on VOC and NOx emissions for each county in our sample as reported by the EPA.
Due to the sparseness of these data, we construct aggregate indicators of whether a county
is VOC-limited, NOx-limited, or neither for each 5-year interval of our overall sample.34
Column (1) of Table 5 presents the results of our main specification when using this restricted
sample ­ approximately 20% of our full sample ­ finding results that are qualitatively similar,
albeit larger in magnitude, for the effects of temperature shock, climate trend, and the
resulting measure of adaptation. The magnitude is probably larger because VOCs may
be monitored in places with likely higher concentrations. In column (2) we interact the
indicators for VOC- and NOx-limited counties with our other regressors to both investigate
whether their inclusion impacts our main coefficients of interest, and to recover a coarse
estimate of the effect that being limited in either precursor has on the relationship between
our two measures of temperature and ozone.35 Both main coefficients, and the resulting
measure of adaptation, remain unchanged for non-limited counties, while the difference from
these values is statistically indistinguishable from zero in VOC-limited counties. In NOx-
limited counties the effects of both temperature shock and climate trend are approximately 27
percent lower and significant, but the resulting level of adaptation is statistically indifferent
from other counties. Taken together, these pieces of evidence provide not only further support
  34
     Because ozone formation follows a Leontief-like production function, a county is "VOC-limited" if the
ratio of VOC to NOx is too low, while it would be "NOx-limited" if the ratio is too high, and a middle set
of counties would not be limited as they face levels of both precursor emissions closer to the "optimal" mix.
Further details on this data can be found in Appendix A.1.
  35
     Table B1 in Appendix B.1 combines both of these approaches, using this VOC/NOx-interacted specifi-
cation with the richer set of fixed effects employed in Table 4. Results are qualitatively similar.


                                                     27
for our preferred parsimonious econometric specification expressed in equation (13), but also
corroborate the Leontief-like production function of ozone (e.g., Auffhammer and Kellogg,
2011; Deschenes, Greenstone and Shapiro, 2017); when departing from the balanced mix of
ozone precursors, the estimated effects on ambient ozone concentration decline.

    Further Robustness Checks -- We conduct additional robustness checks regarding fea-
tures in the construction of the data, selection of the estimating sample, and alternative
econometric specifications in Appendix B.1 Tables B2, B3, and B4. Specifically, Table B2
examines the sensitivity of our results to our algorithm for matching ozone and temperature
monitoring stations. Table B3 restricts our sample of ozone monitors to a semi-balanced
panel, including only monitors with data for every year of our sample; however, as pointed
out by Muller and Ruud (2018), our preferred unbalanced panel is likely more nationally
representative. Finally, Table B4 contains three additional robustness checks: implementing
a daily MA rather than monthly, purposefully aggregating our data to the monthly level to
simulate our methodology with lower frequency data, and controlling for wind speed and
sunlight with the subset of data for which that information is available. Across all of these
models results remain qualitatively similar to our central findings. Finally, Appendix B.1
Table B5 provides bootstrapped standard errors for our main estimates, and shows that they
vary from -5 percent to +11 percent, relative to the standard errors clustered at the county
level.


                             V.   Exploring Heterogeneity

Earlier studies have inferred adaptation indirectly, by flexibly estimating economic damages
due to weather shocks, then assessing climate damages through shifts in the future weather
distribution. We have pointed out the shortcomings of that approach in the spirit of the
Lucas Critique (Lucas, 1976). Importantly, once we have recovered a measure of adaptation
from responses to weather shocks and longer-term climatic changes by the same economic



                                             28
agents, then we are able to explore the heterogeneity in their degree of adaptation. The
following subsections examine heterogeneity in adaptive behavior over time and space in
Figure 4 and Table 6, respectively, while Appendix B.2 Table B6 explores heterogeneous
effects of temperature in a nonlinear fashion.


                                       A.   Results by Decade

Panel A of Figure 4 illustrates the evolution of temperature's impact on ozone formation
across our sample period in 5-year increments, while Panel B reports the resulting level of
adaptation. As seen in Panel A, the effects of both temperature shocks and the climate trend
on ozone formation are decreasing over time, likely due ­ at least in part ­ to regulations
(see, for example, our companion paper Bento, Mookerjee and Severnini, 2020). The early
1980's, which marked the initial phases of ozone monitoring and awareness, and when the
average pollution levels were also higher, exhibit the largest impacts of climate on ambient
ozone, as well as the largest degree of adaptation. In fact, in the beginning of the sample
period adaptation is at approximately 0.65ppb, but then appears to level off at slightly over
0.40ppb by 1990, and remains in that range through 2013.36
       Notice in Figure 4 that responses to temperature shocks a decade ahead approximately
mirror responses to longer-term climatic changes a decade before. Nevertheless, the difference
between those responses at any point in time since the 1990's has been relatively stable.
This suggests that there may be limits to adaptation unless new technologies are able to
affect atmosphere composition, such as in the case of geoengineering (e.g., Heutel, Moreno-
Cruz and Ricke, 2016; Flegal et al., 2019). It also suggests that adaptation opportunities
for reducing ambient ozone may have shrunk or become more costly, and highlights the
risks of extrapolating flexibly-estimated weather responses over time to address adaptation
(Olmstead and Rhode, 2011; Bleakley and Hong, 2017), analogous to the Lucas Critique
(Lucas, 1976).
  36
    Table B7 in Appendix B.2 reports similar results to Figure 4 in tabular format, segmenting the sample
into only three time periods for brevity.

                                                   29
                B.    Adaptation by Beliefs in Climate Change Across Counties

Using the results of a recent county-level survey regarding residents beliefs in climate change
(Howe et al., 2015), we split the set of counties in our sample into terciles of high, median,
and low beliefs. Table 6 presents the results of our preferred specification when interacting
indicator variables for high- and low-belief counties with our temperature variables in column
(1). The implied measure of adaptation is presented in column (2). We find that low-
belief counties, on average, observe a smaller ozone response to a 1 C temperature shock,
relative to the median set of counties, but that this difference is statistically insignificant
with regards to changes in the climate trend. High-belief counties, by comparison, observe
approximately 23 percent larger and statistically significant ozone responses to a 1 C increase
in both components of temperature. As might be expected of counties at opposite ends of
the spectrum regarding beliefs that climate is changing, we find that adaptation is roughly
39 percent lower in low-belief counties than median ones, while this effect is statistically
similar but of opposite sign for high-belief counties.37 This evidence suggests that greater
caution is called for when extrapolating flexibly-estimated weather responses over space when
dealing with adaptation to climate change. Economic agents might respond heterogeneously
according to unobserved preferences, beliefs, and the experience with the local climate.


                                   VI.     Concluding Remarks

We have developed a novel, unifying approach to measuring climate change impacts that
considers both responses to weather shocks and longer-term climatic changes in the same
estimating equation. By bridging the two earlier strands of the climate-economy literature
  37
    Table B8 in Appendix B.2 conducts a similar analysis, separating counties by their belief in the use of
regulation to combat climate change, while Table B9 in Appendix B.2 instead splits the sample into two
groups based on whether they leaned Republican or Democrat in the 2008 presidential election using data
from MIT (2018). Results in Table B8 are qualitatively similar to Table 6, while the results in Table B9
paint a similar picture under the assumption that belief or dis-belief in climate change approximately maps
to Democratic or Republican political affiliation. Table A4 in Appendix A provides summary statistics of
basic characteristics for the three sets of counties used in Table 6. High-belief counties tend to be more
populous, better educated, and richer than low-belief ones.



                                                    30
­ cross-sectional studies that relied on permanent, anticipated components behind meteoro-
logical conditions (e.g., Mendelsohn, Nordhaus and Shaw, 1994; Schlenker, Hanemann and
Fisher, 2005), and panel fixed-effects that exploit transitory, unanticipated weather shocks
(e.g., Deschenes and Greenstone, 2007; Schlenker and Roberts, 2009) ­ we have overcome
identification concerns from earlier cross-sectional studies, improved on the measurement of
adaptation, provided a test for the statistical significance of this measure, and addressed
the changing relationship between meteorological variables and economic outcomes, in the
spirit of the Lucas Critique (Lucas, 1976). Our approach rests on two rather simple but
powerful ideas. First, the decomposition of meteorological variables in long-run trends and
weather shocks. Second, the properties of the Frisch-Waugh-Lovell theorem, which enables
the simultaneous identification of short- and long-run impacts of climate change.
   In the spirit of Dell, Jones and Olken (2009, 2012, 2014), we recovered a measure of
adaptation defined as the difference between those short- and long-run responses. Unlike
previous studies, however, this measure was derived directly from coefficients estimated in
same fixed-effects model; hence, less susceptible to omitted variable biases. In addition, it
compares the responses of the same economic agents to both weather shocks and climatic
changes, overcoming the challenges of identifying adaptation by comparing the profiles of
weather responses across time and space (e.g., Deschenes and Greenstone, 2011; Barreca
et al., 2016; Auffhammer, 2018a; Carleton et al., 2019; Heutel, Miller and Molitor, forthcom-
ing), which requires that preferences be constant across those dimensions. In other words,
our strategy to identifying adaptation does not require the imprecise assignment of a profile
of temperature responses to other locations solely based on observed attributes and the fu-
ture weather distribution, as pointed out by Olmstead and Rhode (2011) and Bleakley and
Hong (2017).
   We applied our unifying approach to study the impact of climate change on ambient
"bad" ozone in U.S. counties over the period 1980-2013. Others have relied on atmospheric-
sciences simulation models to study the so-called "climate penalty" on ozone (see a review


                                             31
in Jacob and Winner, 2009). By ignoring the adaptive behavior of economic agents, they
may have substantially overestimated the magnitude of this penalty. Based on our central
estimates, we suspect this can be as large as 36 percent. In addition to its atmospheric and
chemistry properties and richness of data, the ozone application is particularly relevant from
a policy perspective. The "climate penalty" on ozone implied in our study suggests that
climate change might deteriorate air quality in the near future, with important implications
for public health and labor productivity.38 Indeed, in a companion paper (Adler et al.,
2020) we examine the role of this "climate penalty" in partially undoing the benefits of the
Clean Air Act Amendments, implying that any future discussions related to the tightening
of ambient ozone standards should pay attention to the magnitude of this penalty.
       When considering the impacts of climate change on air pollution, the application of our
unifying methodology led to three main findings. First, a changing climate appears to be
affecting ambient ozone concentrations in two ways. A 1 C shock in temperature increases
ozone levels by 1.68 parts per billion (ppb) on average, which is expectedly what would
have been found in the standard fixed-effects approach. A change of similar magnitude in
the 30-year moving average increases ozone concentration by 1.23ppb, which is 20 percent
higher than what would have been found in the standard cross-sectional approach.
       Second, we found strong evidence of adaptive behavior. For a 1 C change in temperature,
our measure of adaptation in terms of ozone concentration is 0.45ppb, which is statistically
and economically significant. If adaptive responses were not taken into account in the esti-
mation of the impact of climate change, then the climate penalty on ozone would be over-
estimated by approximately 36 percent. Using the climate projections from the U.S. Fourth
National Climate Assessment (Vose et al., 2017) under the business-as-usual scenario (RCP
8.5), we would overestimate the climate penalty by 0.72ppb by mid century, and 2.15ppb by
the end of the century. To put these values in perspective, the last few times EPA revised
  38
    Exposure to ambient ozone has been causally linked to asthma hospitalization, pharmaceutical expen-
ditures, mortality, and labor productivity (e.g., Neidell, 2009; Moretti and Neidell, 2011; Graff Zivin and
Neidell, 2012; Deschenes, Greenstone and Shapiro, 2017).



                                                    32
the air quality standards for ambient ozone, they have decreased it by 5ppb. These findings
were robust to a wide variety of specification tests and sample restrictions accounting, for in-
stance, for measurement error in climate variables, the timing of adaptation, the production
function of ozone, and the potential non-random siting of ozone monitors.
   Third, we provided evidence of nontrivial heterogeneity in the degree of adaptation across
time and space, which highlights the potential biases of existing approaches in assigning
adaptation from one period and/or location to other periods and locations, consistent with
insights by Olmstead and Rhode (2011) and Bleakley and Hong (2017). We found a higher
degree of adaptation in the 1980s relative to the following decades, but a similar magnitude
for the estimates of adaptation in the 1990s and 2000s. This suggests that adaptation
opportunities in the context of ambient ozone might be shrinking or becoming more costly.
We also uncovered an interesting pattern of adaptation regarding county residents' beliefs
about climate change. Our measure of adaptation is much larger in counties where those
beliefs are stronger. This suggests that local social norms may play a key role in shaping
future responses to climate change.
   Notably, although we made use of high frequency data in this study, our unifying frame-
work is generalizable to any empirical setting where one can obtain short-term variation in
weather associated with limited opportunities to adapt, and long-term climatological varia-
tion allowing for adaptation. Settings in which opportunities to adapt are limited at the daily
level, but may exist at the monthly or seasonal level are reliant on temporally disaggregated
data, while those in which such opportunities are limited even at the monthly or seasonal
level may be able to use more aggregate data. Take, for example, the classical application in
agriculture (e.g, Mendelsohn, Nordhaus and Shaw, 1994; Schlenker, Hanemann and Fisher,
2005; Schlenker and Roberts, 2009; Blanc and Schlenker, 2017; Mendelsohn and Massetti,
2017), in which planting decisions are made in advance, crops typically cannot be changed
once planted, and the outcome of interest, harvest yields, are observed seasonally rather
than daily. In this context, weather shocks may be taken as a more coarse measurement of


                                              33
meteorological conditions over the growing season, while climate trends could reflect changes
over a number of years or decades.


                                        References

Adler, David, Antonio Bento, Noah Miller, Mehreen Mookerjee, and Edson
  Severnini. 2020. "Climate Change Will Undo the Achievements of the Clean Air Act on
  Ambient Ozone." Mimeo.
Angrist, Joshua D., and J¨   orn-Steffen Pischke. 2009. Mostly Harmless Econometrics.
  Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Auffhammer, Maximilian. 2018a. "Climate Adaptive Response Estimation: Short and
  Long Run Impacts of Climate Change on Residential Electricity and Natural Gas Con-
  sumption Using Big Data." NBER Working Paper No. 24397.
Auffhammer, Maximilian. 2018b. "Quantifying Economic Damages from Climate
  Change." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 32(4): 33­52.
Auffhammer, Maximilian, and Ryan Kellogg. 2011. "Clearing the Air? The Effects of
  Gasoline Content Regulation on Air Quality." American Economic Review, 101(6): 2687­
  2722.
Barreca, Alan, Karen Clay, Olivier Deschenes, Michael Greenstone, and
  Joseph S. Shapiro. 2016. "Adapting to Climate Change: The Remarkable Decline in the
  US Temperature-Mortality Relationship over the Twentieth Century." Journal of Political
  Economy, 124(1): 105­159.
Baxter, Marianne, and Robert G. King. 1999. "Measuring Business Cycles: Approxi-
  mate Band-Pass Filters for Economic Time Series." Review of Economics and Statistics,
  81(4): 575­93.
Bento, Antonio, Mehreen Mookerjee, and Edson Severnini. 2020. "Regulation-
  Induced Adaptation: Evidence from Ambient Ozone and the Clean Air Act." Mimeo.
Blanc, Elodie, and Wolfram Schlenker. 2017. "The Use of Panel Models in Assessments
  of Climate Impacts on Agriculture." Review of Environmental Economics and Policy,
  11(2): 258­279.
Bleakley, Hoyt, and Sok Chul Hong. 2017. "Adapting to the Weather: Lessons from
  U.S. History." Journal of Economic History, 77(3): 756­795.
Bums, Arthur M., and Wesley C. Mitchell. 1946. Measuring Business Cycles. New
  York, NY:National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER).
Burke, Marshall, and Kyle Emerick. 2016. "Adaptation to Climate Change: Evidence
  from US Agriculture." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 8(3): 106­40.
Carleton, Tamma A., and Solomon M. Hsiang. 2016. "Social and Economic Impacts
  of Climate." Science, 353(6304): aad9837.
Carleton, Tamma, Michael Delgado, Michael Greenstone, Trevor Houser,
  Solomon Hsiang, Andrew Hultgren, Amir Jina, Robert Kopp, Kelly McCusker,
  Ishan Nath, James Rising, Ashwin Rode, Hee Kwon Seo, Justin Simcock,


                                             34
  Arvid Viaene, Jiacan Yuan, and Alice Zhang. 2019. "Valuing the Global Mortality
  Consequences of Climate Change Accounting for Adaptation Costs and Benefits." Uni-
  versity of Chicago Becker Friedman Institute Working Paper No. 2018-51.
Christiano, Lawrence J., and Terry J. Fitzgerald. 2003. "The Band Pass Filter."
  International Economic Review, 44(2): 435­465.
Climatology Office, Wisconsin State Climatology Office. 2003. "Climatic Normals."
  http: // aos. wisc. edu/ ~ sco/ normals. html .
Cummings, Ronald G., and Mary Beth Walker. 2000. "Measuring the Effectiveness
  of Voluntary Emission Reduction Programmes." Applied Economics, 32(13): 1719­1726.
Cutter, W. Bowman, and Matthew Neidell. 2009. "Voluntary Information Programs
  and Environmental Regulation: Evidence from 'Spare the Air'." Journal of Environmental
  Economics and Management, 58(3): 253­265.
Dawson, John P., Peter J. Adams, and Spyros N. Pandisa. 2007. "Sensitivity of
  Ozone to Summertime Climate in the Eastern USA: A Modeling Case Study." Atmospheric
  Environment, 41(7): 1494­1511.
Dell, Melissa, Benjamin F. Jones, and Benjamin A. Olken. 2009. "Temperature
  and Income: Reconciling New Cross-Sectional and Panel Estimates." American Economic
  Review: Papers & Proceedings, 99(2): 198­204.
Dell, Melissa, Benjamin F. Jones, and Benjamin A. Olken. 2012. "Temperature
  Shocks and Economic Growth: Evidence from the Last Half Century." American Economic
  Journal: Macroeconomics, 4(3): 66­95.
Dell, Melissa, Benjamin F. Jones, and Benjamin A. Olken. 2014. "What Do We
  Learn from the Weather? The New Climate-Economy Literature." Journal of Economic
  Literature, 52(3): 740­798.
Deschenes, Olivier, and Michael Greenstone. 2007. "The Economic Impacts of Cli-
  mate Change: Evidence from Agricultural Output and Random Fluctuations in Weather."
  American Economic Review, 97(1): 354­85.
Deschenes, Olivier, and Michael Greenstone. 2011. "Climate Change, Mortality, and
  Adaptation: Evidence from Annual Fluctuations in Weather in the US." American Eco-
  nomic Journal: Applied Economics, 3(4): 152­85.
Deschenes, Olivier, Michael Greenstone, and Joseph S. Shapiro. 2017. "Defensive
  Investments and the Demand for Air Quality: Evidence from the NOx Budget Program."
  American Economic Review, 107(10): 2958­89.
Flegal, Jane A., Anna-Maria Hubert, David R. Morrow, and Juan B. Moreno-
  Cruz. 2019. "Solar Geoengineering: Social Science, Legal, Ethical, and Economic Frame-
  works." Annual Review of Environment and Resources, 44: 399­423.
Frisch, Ragnar, and Frederick V. Waugh. 1933. "Partial Time Regressions as Compared
  with Individual Trends." Econometrica, 1(4): 387­401.
Gabaix, Xavier, and David Laibson. 2006. "Shrouded Attributes, Consumer Myopia,
  and Information Suppression in Competitive Markets." Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  121(2): 505­540.
Garg, Teevrat, Gordon McCord, and Aleister Montfort. 2020. "Can Social Protec-


                                          35
  tion Reduce Environmental Damages?" Mimeo.
Graff Zivin, Joshua, and Matthew Neidell. 2012. "The Impact of Pollution on Worker
  Productivity." American Economic Review, 102(7): 3652­3673.
Heutel, Garth, Juan Moreno-Cruz, and Katharine Ricke. 2016. "Climate Engineer-
  ing Economics." Annual Review of Resource Economics, 8: 99­118.
Heutel, Garth, Nolan H. Miller, and David Molitor. forthcoming. "Adaptation and
  the Mortality Effects of Temperature Across U.S. Climate Regions." Review of Economics
  and Statistics.
Hodrick, Robert J., and Edward C. Prescott. 1981. "Postwar U.S. Business Cycles:
  An Empirical Investigation." Mimeo.
Hodrick, Robert J., and Edward C. Prescott. 1997. "Postwar U.S. Business Cycles:
  An Empirical Investigation." Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 29(1): 1­16.
Howe, Peter D., Matto Mildenberger, Jennifer R. Marlon, and Anthony Leis-
  erowitz. 2015. "Geographic variation in opinions on climate change at state and local
  scales in the USA." Nature Climate Change, 5(6): 596­603.
Hsiang, Solomon M. 2016. "Climate Econometrics." Annual Review of Resource Eco-
  nomics, 8: 43­75.
IPCC, Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 2013. "Summary for Policy-
  makers." In Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Work-
  ing Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
  Change. , ed. T.F. Stocker, D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K. Allen, J. Boschung,
  A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex and P.M. Midgley. Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York,
  NY:Cambridge University Press.
Jacob, Daniel J., and Darrel A. Winner. 2009. "Effect of Climate Change on Air
  Quality." Atmospheric Environment, 43(1): 51­63.
Kala, Namrata. 2019. "Learning, Adaptation and Climate Uncertainty: Evidence from
  Indian Agriculture." Mimeo.
Kaufmann, Robert K., Heikki Kauppi, and James H. Stock. 2006. "Emissions,
  Concentrations, & Temperature: A Time Series Analysis." Climatic Change, 77: 249­278.
Kaufmann, Robert K., Michael L. Mann, Sucharita Gopal, Jackie A. Liederman,
  Peter D. Howe, Felix Pretis, Xiaojing Tang, and Michelle Gilmore. 2017. "Spatial
  heterogeneity of climate change as an experiential basis for skepticism." Proceedings of the
  National Academy of Sciences, 114(1): 67­71.
Kelly, Dawn, and Terry L. Amburgey. 1991. "Organizational Inertia and Momentum: A
  Dynamic Model of Strategic Change." The Academy of Management Journal, 34(3): 591­
  612.
Kolstad, Charles D., and Frances C. Moore. 2020. "Estimating the Economic Impacts
  of Climate Change Using Weather Observations." Review of Environmental Economics
  and Policy, 14(1): 1­24.
Lovell, Michael C. 1963. "Seasonal Adjustment of Economic Time Series and Multiple
  Regression Analysis." Journal of the American Statistical Association, 58(304): 993­1010.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr. 1972. "Expectations and the Neutrality of Money." Journal of


                                             36
  Economic Theory, 4: 103­124.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr. 1976. "Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique." Carnegie-
  Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 1: 19­46.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr. 1977. "Understanding Business Cycles." Carnegie-Rochester Con-
  ference Series on Public Policy, 5: 7­29.
Massetti, Emanuele, and Robert Mendelsohn. 2018. "Measuring Climate Adaptation:
  Methods and Evidence." Review of Environmental Economics and Policy, 12(2): 324­341.
Mendelsohn, Robert O., and Emanuele Massetti. 2017. "The Use of Cross-Sectional
  Analysis to Measure Climate Impacts on Agriculture: Theory and Evidence." Review of
  Environmental Economics and Policy, 11(2): 280­298.
Mendelsohn, Robert, William D. Nordhaus, and Daigee Shaw. 1994. "The Impact
  of Global Warming on Agriculture: A Ricardian Analysis." American Economic Review,
  84(4): 753­71.
MIT, Election Data & Science Lab. 2018. "County Presidential Election Returns 2000-
  2016." https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/VOQCHQ, accessed on June 3, 2019.
Moore, Frances C., Nick Obradovich, Flavio Lehner, and Patrick Baylis. 2019.
  "Rapidly Declining Remarkability of Temperature Anomalies May Obscure Public Percep-
  tion of Climate Change." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 116(11): 4905­
  4910.
Moretti, Enrico, and Matthew Neidell. 2011. "Pollution, Health, and Avoidance Behav-
  ior: Evidence from the Ports of Los Angeles." Journal of Human Resources, 46(1): 154­75.
Muller, Nicholas Z., and Paul A. Ruud. 2018. "What Forces Dictate the Design of
  Pollution Monitoring Networks?" Environmental Modeling & Assessment, 23(1): 1­14.
Neidell, Matthew. 2009. "Information, Avoidance Behavior, and Health: The Effect of
  Ozone on Asthma Hospitalizations." Journal of Human Resources, 44(2): 450­78.
NOAA, National Oceanic & Atmospheric Administration. 2014. "National Oceanic
  and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), Global Historical Climatology Network."
  ftp://ftp.ncdc.noaa.gov/pub/data/ghcn/daily/by year/, accessed on November 30, 2014.
Olmstead, Alan L., and Paul W. Rhode. 2011. "Responding to Climatic Challenges:
  Lessons from U.S. Agricultural Development." In The Economics of Climate Change:
  Adaptations Past and Present. , ed. Gary D. Libecap and Richard H. Steckel, Chapter 6,
  pp. 169­194. Chicago, IL:University of Chicago Press.
Pretis, Felix. 2020. "Econometric Modelling of Climate Systems: The Equivalence of En-
  ergy Balance Models and Cointegrated Vector Autoregressions." Journal of Econometrics,
  214(1): 256­273.
Reis, Ricardo. 2006a. "Inattentive Consumers." Journal of Monetary Economics,
  53(8): 1761­1800.
Reis, Ricardo. 2006b. "Inattentive Producers." Review of Economic Studies, 73(3): 793­
  821.
Schlenker, Wolfram, and Michael J. Roberts. 2009. "Nonlinear Temperature Effects
  Indicate Severe Damages to U.S. Crop Yields under Climate Change." Proceedings of the
  National Academy of Sciences, 106(37): 15594­98.


                                           37
Schlenker, Wolfram, W. Michael Hanemann, and Anthony C. Fisher. 2005. "Will
  U.S. Agriculture Really Benefit from Global Warming? Accounting for Irrigation in the
  Hedonic Approach." American Economic Review, 95(1): 395­406.
Sexton, Steven E. 2012. "Paying for Pollution? How General Equilibrium Effects Under-
  mine the 'Spare the Air' Program." Environmental and Resource Economics, 53: 553­575.
Shrader, Jeffrey. 2020. "Expectations and Adaptation to Environmental Risks." Mimeo.
Solon, Gary. 1992. "Intergenerational Income Mobility in the United States." American
  Economic Review, 82(3): 393­408.
Solon, Gary. 1999. "Intergenerational Mobility in the Labor Market." In Handbook of Labor
  Economics. , ed. Orley C. Ashenfelter and David Card, Volume 3, Part A, Chapter 29,
  pp. 1761­1800. New York, NY:Elsevier.
USEPA, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 1997. "Survey and Review of
  Episodic Control Programs in the United States." Washington, DC: U.S. Environmen-
  tal Protection Agency, Office of Air and Radiation, EPA 420-R-97-003.
USEPA, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 2004. "Final Rule To Implement
  the 8-Hour Ozone National Ambient Air Quality Standard ­ Phase 1." Federal Register,
  69(84): 23951­24000. April 30, 2004.
USEPA, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 2006. "Air Quality Cri-
  teria for Ozone and Related Photochemical Oxidants - Volume II." Avail-
  able      at      epa.gov/ttn/naaqs/aqmguide/collection/cp2/20060228 ord epa600 r05-
  004bf ozone criteria document vol2.pdf, accessed on July 23, 2017.
USEPA, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 2009. "Assessment of the Impacts
  of Global Change on Regional U.S. Air Quality: A Synthesis of Climate Change Impacts
  on Ground-Level Ozone ­ An Interim Report of the U.S. EPA Global Change Research
  Program." Washington, DC: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Research
  and Development, National Center for Environmental Assessment, EPA/600/R-07/094F.
Vose, R.S., D.R. Easterling, K.E. Kunkel, A.N. LeGrande, and M.F. Wehner.
  2017. "Temperature Changes in the United States." In Climate Science Special Report:
  Fourth National Climate Assessment, Volume I. , ed. D.J. Wuebbles, D.W. Fahey, K.A.
  Hibbard, D.J. Dokken, B.C. Stewart, and T.K. Maycock, Chapter 6, pp. 185­206. Wash-
  ington, DC:U.S. Global Change Research Program.
Zhang, Yuzhong, and Yuhang Wang. 2016. "Climate-driven Ground-level Ozone Ex-
  treme in the Fall Over the Southeast United States." Proceedings of the National Academy
  of Sciences, 113(36): 10025­10030.




                                           38
                                                   Figure 1: Temperature Relative to Baseline (1950-1979)

                                      1.5
  Deviation from 1950-1979 Baseline




                                       1
           Temperature (C°)




                                       .5



                                       0



                                      -.5




                                            1950         1960       1970         1980       1990        2000       2010


                                                          Avg. Temp               Max. Temp                 Min. Temp

Notes : This figure depicts annual temperature fluctuations and the overall climate trend in the US relative
to a 1950-1979 baseline average. The baseline and the yearly deviations from it are constructed from a
balanced panel of weather stations across the US from 1950 to 2013. The 1950-1979 baseline represents,
generally speaking, the pre-climate change awareness era. The climate trend relative to this baseline has been
slowly but steadily increasing since the early- to mid-1970's, with an increase in the average temperature of
approximately 0.5 degree Celsius ( C) by 2010. For clarity, the thin solid line, the short-dashed line, and
long-dashed line refer to annual averages for average, maximum, and minimum temperature, respectively, as
coded in the legend. The thick solid line smooths out the annual observations for average temperature over
the period covered in the graph.




                                                                            39
                                                           Figure 2: Climate Trends and Shocks

                                       26.25          Panel A. Average Climate Trend Over Time




                                       26.20
       30-year Moving Average
          Temperature (C°)




                                       26.15




                                       26.10




                                       26.05
                                               1980                  1990                   2000     2010



                                         1.5          Panel B. Average Temperature Shock Over Time



                                         1.0
       Deviation from Moving Average
              Temperature (C°)




                                         0.5



                                         0.0



                                        -0.5



                                        -1.0

                                               1980                  1990                   2000     2010

Notes : This figure depicts US temperature over the years in our sample (1980-2013), decomposed into their
climate trend and temperature shock components. The climate trend (Panel A) and temperature shocks
(Panel B) are constructed from a complete, unbalanced panel of weather stations across the US from 1950 to
2013, restricting the months over which measurements were gathered to specifically match the ozone season
of April­September, the typical ozone season in the US (see Appendix A Table A3 for a complete list of
ozone seasons by state). Recall that the Climate Trend represents the 30-year monthly moving average
of the maximum temperature, lagged by one year, while the Temperature Shock represents the difference
between this value and the contemporaneous maximum temperature. The solid line in Panel A smooths out
the annual averages of the 30-year moving averages, and the horizontal dashed lines in Panel B highlights
that temperature shocks are bounded in our period of analysis. Appendix A Figure A2 depicts these same
trends and shocks when restricting the dataset to include only a semi-balanced panel of weather stations,
while Appendix A Figure A3 depicts these when the dataset is restricted to only those weather stations that
are matched to an ambient ozone monitor for our main estimation sample.
                                                                               40
Figure 3: Decomposition of Temperature Trends & Shocks ­ Illustration (Los Angeles, 2013)

                                           Panel A. Our Preferred Decomposition
                                40
             Temperature (C°)


                                20




                                 0



                                     Apr                     Jun                  Aug           Oct


                                                Temp Shock            Climate Trend     Daily Temp


                                           Panel B. Fixed-Effect Decomposition
                                40
             Temperature (C°)




                                20




                                0



                                     Apr                     Jun                  Aug           Oct


                                               Deviation from Avg       Average Temp    Daily Temp

Notes : This figure compares our preferred temperature decomposition method with a standard fixed-effects
approach using data from the 2013 Los Angeles ozone season, illustrating the benefit of our unifying approach
as outlined in Equation (6) relative to the standard fixed-effects approach outlined in Equation (2). Specif-
ically, Panel A depicts the daily measure of temperature, as well as its decomposition into Climate Trend
and Temperature Shock. By contrast, Panel B depicts the same daily measure of temperature, but instead
decomposed into a typical fixed-effect average temperature and the deviations from this constant value after
additionally controlling for monthly fixed-effects. The dashed line at the top of each panel indicates observed
daily maximum temperature while the black solid line represents long-run trends. The gray solid line at the
bottom of each panel indicates temperature shocks. Notice that the Temperature Shocks in our preferred
decomposition are nearly identical to the deviations in the fixed-effects decomposition, as would be expected
from the Frisch-Waugh-Lovell theorem, and illustrate the source of variation used for identifying W and
F E respectively. Additionally, Panel A highlights the source of variation in climate used to identify C
in our proposed approach, while the fixed-effects decomposition lacks any such variation in the measure of
climate, as the LA fixed effect is collinear with average temperature. Recall that for our proposed approach
the Climate Trend represents the 30-year monthly moving average of the maximum temperature, lagged by
one year, while the Temperature Shock represents the difference between this value and the contemporaneous
maximum temperature.                                   41
                                                      Figure 4: Climate Impacts and Adaptation Over Time in the Context of Ambient Ozone Concentration

                                               3      Panel A. Climate Impact on Ozone Over Time                                                      1 Panel B. Adaptation Over Time




                                                                                                        Reduction in Daily Max Ozone Increase (ppb)
     per Degree Increase in Temperature (C°)
        Increase in Daily Max Ozone (ppb)




                                                                                                                                                      .8




                                                                                                                     Due to Adaptation
                                               2
                                                                                                                                                      .6



                                                                                                                                                      .4
                                               1

                                                                                                                                                      .2
42




                                               0                                                                                                      0
                                                   1980          1990           2000             2010                                                      1980       1990              2000   2010


                                                          Temperature Shock      Climate Trend                                                                            Adaptation


         Notes : This figure displays the impacts of temperature rises on ambient ozone concentrations over time in the US, as well as the implied measures
         of adaptation. Splitting the main sample into 5-year periods (e.g., 1980-1984, 1985-1989, etc.), Panel A depicts the estimated coefficients on the
         Climate Trend and Temperature Shock variables for each of these periods. All these coefficients were estimated by Equation (13), extended to include
         interactions between each of the two components of temperature and indicators for each of the 5-year periods considered here. Panel B, on the other
         hand, depicts the respective measures of adaptation from the differences between the estimated coefficients associated with shocks and trends. Recall
         that the Climate Trend represents the 30-year monthly moving average of the maximum temperature, lagged by one year, while the Temperature
         Shock represents the difference between this value and the contemporaneous maximum temperature. The solid lines in Panel A smooth out each set
         of estimated coefficients plotted in the graph, and the dashed line in Panel B smooths out the derived measures of adaptation. Appendix B.2 Table
         B7 examines these same patterns by decade in tabular form. All point estimates included in the figure are statistically significant at the 1% level.
Table 1: Climate Impacts and Adaptation ­ Our Unifying Approach vs. Prior Approaches
                                                              Daily Max Ozone Levels (ppb)
                                                       Cross-Section      Fixed-Effects       Unifying
                                                             (1)                (2)              (3)

 Average Max Temperature                                   1.025***
                                                          (0.095)
 Max Temperature                                                              1.718***
                                                                             (0.054)
 Temperature Shock                                                                             1.677***
                                                                                              (0.059)
 Climate Trend                                                                                 1.229***
                                                                                              (0.055)

 Implied Adaptation                                                  0.693***                  0.448***
                                                                    (0.240)                   (0.037)

 Non-Attainment Control                                      Yes                Yes              Yes
 Precipitation Controls                                      Yes                Yes              Yes
 Latitude & Longitude                                        Yes
      Fixed Effects:
 Climate Region                                              Yes
 Month-by-Year                                                                  Yes
 Monitor                                                                        Yes              Yes
 Season-Year x Latitude                                                         Yes              Yes
 Season-Year x Longitude                                                        Yes              Yes
 Seasdon-Year-Region                                                            Yes              Yes

 Observations                                               2,514           4,924,099        4,923,932
 R2                                                         0.258             0.435            0.423
Notes: This table reports the weather and climate impacts on ambient ozone concentrations, estimated by
different methodologies. Column (1) reports cross-sectional estimates using average maximum temperature
and ambient ozone concentrations for each ozone monitor in the sample. Having averaged the variables over
all the years from 1980-2013, this estimate captures the effect of a change in climate. Column (2) reports
the effect of daily maximum temperature on ambient ozone from the panel fixed-effects approach, exploiting
day-to-day variation in temperature, hence capturing the effect of a change in weather. In Column (3),
we decompose daily maximum temperature into climate trends and weather shocks, and exploit variation
in both components in the same estimating equation ­ our Equation 13. These are the estimates of our
unifying approach, which represents climate trends as 30-year moving averages, lagged by 1 year to allow
for economic agents to potentially adapt, and weather shocks by deviations from the trends. Combining
our estimates in column (3) with climate projections from the U.S. Fourth National Climate Assessment
(Vose et al., 2017) under the business-as-usual scenario (RCP 8.5) ­ 1.6 C temperature increase by 2050,
and 4.8 C by 2100 ­ ambient ozone concentrations would rise by 2 and 5.9ppb, respectively. This should be
the so-called "climate penalty" ­ the response of economic agents to longer-term climatic changes, which is
inclusive of adaptation. Wrongly using the response to temperature shocks as the penalty, which is exclusive
of adaptation, those numbers would be larger: 2.7 and 8ppb, respectively. For a comparison, modelling
studies find increases in summertime ambient ozone concentrations by 1-10 ppb (for a review, see Jacob and
Winner, 2009). Standard errors are clustered at the county level. ***, **, and * represent significance at
1%, 5% and 10%, respectively.                        43
Table 2: Addressing Measurement Error with Alternative Lengths for the Climate Trends
                                                            Daily Max Ozone Levels (ppb)
                                                 3-yr MA         5-yr MA        10-yr MA        20-yr MA
                                                     (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)

 Temperature Shock                                1.680***        1.678***        1.674***        1.674***
                                                 (0.061)         (0.061)         (0.060)         (0.060)
 Climate Trend                                    1.209***        1.220***        1.234***        1.236***
                                                 (0.052)         (0.053)         (0.055)         (0.055)

 Implied Adaptation                               0.472***        0.458***        0.440***        0.438***
                                                 (0.037)         (0.037)         (0.038)         (0.037)

 All Controls                                       Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes

 Observations                                    4,923,932      4,923,932       4,923,932       4,923,932
 R2                                                0.422          0.422           0.422           0.423

Notes: This table addresses primarily measurement error in climate variables, but also sheds light on how
economic agents process weather information. The table reports estimates from Equation (13) but using
alternative definitions for the climate trends, which are now defined as moving averages of temperature from
different time windows ­ averages of 3, 5, 10, and 20 years. Recall that all moving averages are lagged by one
year to allow for the potential adaptation responses by individuals and firms. As argued seminally by Solon
(1992), as we increase the time window of a moving average, the permanent component of a variable that also
includes a transitory component will be less mismeasured. Our estimates remain remarkably stable over the
different lengths of the moving averages, but if anything, they get slightly larger until the 20-year moving
average. As pointed out by Angrist and Pischke (2009) and Blanc and Schlenker (2017), a fixed effects
regression with variables under classical measurement error is plagued by larger attenuation bias. Because
group fixed effects absorb a lot of the signal in the weather variables, the signal:noise ratio might decrease.
Again, our estimates remain largely unchanged over the different lengths of the moving averages, with a slight
attenuation of the coefficient of the moving average when we move from the 20- to the 30-year moving average
(Column 3 of Table 1). This latter result suggests that the widely used "climate normals" ­ three-decade
averages of meteorological variables including temperature ­ are close to the "optimal" long-run trends.
The improvements from reducing measurement error might be offset by the panel-driven attenuation bias
between 20- and 30-year time windows. The row entitled "implied adaptation" reports the implied measure
of adaptation as the difference between the estimated responses to temperature shocks, which are exclusive
of adaptation, and the estimated responses to climate trends, which are inclusive of adaptation. The full
list of controls are the same as in the main specification, depicted in Column (3) of Table 1. Standard errors
are clustered at the county level. ***, ** and * represent significance at the 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively.




                                                      44
                           Table 3: The Timing of Adaptation Responses
                                                                    Daily Max Ozone Levels (ppb)
                                                             Long-Run          Long-Run          Short-Run
                                                            10-year Lag       20-year Lag      2004-2013 only
                                                                  (1)              (2)                (3)

 Temperature Shock                                             1.676***          1.677***           1.195***
                                                              (0.059)           (0.059)            (0.029)
 Climate Trend                                                 1.225***          1.218***           0.629***
                                                              (0.055)           (0.055)            (0.037)

 Implied Adaptation                                            0.451***          0.459***           0.566***
                                                              (0.035)           (0.034)            (0.031)

 Temp Shock x Action Day                                                                            0.037
                                                                                                   (0.186)

 All Controls                                                    Yes               Yes                Yes
 Action Day Interactions                                                                              Yes

 Observations                                                 4,917,371        4,914,113          1,771,194
 R2                                                             0.422            0.422              0.413

Notes: This table addresses the timing of potential adaptation responses. It reports estimates when allowing
more or less time for economic agents to engage in adaptive behavior. The estimates in columns (1) and
(2) are obtained by Equation (13), but using 10- and 20-year lags between the moving average and con-
temporaneous temperature, rather than the usual 1-year lag. By doing so, agents are provided with more
time to potentially adjust to climate change. Even though we would expect that the effects of the weather
shocks to be similar, we expected the effects of the climate trend to be slightly smaller than before, as agents
should now be able to adapt more than before. Yet, our estimates are remarkably close to our main results
(Column 3 of Table 1), providing support to our main specification expressed in Equation (13). Column (3),
then, continues using the 1-year lag of the main specification, but adds an interaction term of temperature
shock with "ozone action day" announcements at the county-level to account for potential short-run adap-
tive behavior. These are days in which the relevant air quality authority observes, or expects to observe,
unhealthy levels of pollution on the Air Quality Index and releases a public service announcement to this
effect. Individuals and firms are urged to take voluntary action to reduce the emissions of pollutants that
are conducive to ozone formation. The estimate for the interaction between temperature shocks and action
days is economically and statistically insignificant, pointing to limited opportunities for economic agents to
adjust in the short run. Note that although action day policies first began in the 1990's, EPA only provided
data beginning in 2004, leading to a restricted overall sample (approximatley 36% of our full sample). The
row entitled "implied adaptation" reports the implied measure of adaptation as the difference between the
estimated responses to temperature shocks, which are exclusive of adaptation, and the estimated responses
to climate trends, which are inclusive of adaptation. The full list of controls are the same as in the main
specification, depicted in column 3 of Table 1. Standard errors are clustered at the county level. ***, ** and
* represent significance at the 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively.




                                                      45
       Table 4: Addressing Climate Experiment Issues with Alternative Specifications
                                                           Daily Max Ozone Levels (ppb)
                                                    (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)

 Temperature Shock                               1.677***        1.677***        1.690***        1.689***
                                                (0.060)         (0.059)         (0.062)         (0.063)
 Climate Trend                                   1.188***        1.229***        1.230***        1.189***
                                                (0.051)         (0.055)         (0.056)         (0.052)

 Implied Adaptation                              0.489***        0.448***        0.460***        0.500***
                                                (0.038)         (0.037)         (0.040)         (0.042)

 Non-Attainment Control                             Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes
 Precipitation Controls                             Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes
     Fixed Effects:
 Monitor-by-Season                                  Yes                                            Yes
 Monitor-by-Weekday/end                                            Yes                             Yes
 Monitor x Year                                                                    Yes             Yes
 Season-Year x Latitude                             Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes
 Season-Year x Longitude                            Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes
 Seasdon-Year-Region                                Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes

 Observations                                   4,923,931       4,923,932       4,923,932       4,923,931
 R2                                               0.434           0.425           0.442           0.456

Notes: This table addresses deviations from the ideal climate experiment with alternative specifications. The
ideal experiment would have two locations with the same levels of ozone precursors (NOx and VOCs), but
facing different changes in temperature. Unfortunately, data on these precursors, especially VOCs, is limited
­ only available to approximately 20% of our full sample, as reported in Table 5. If precursor levels are
different, but approximately unchanging over time, our standard monitor fixed-effects approach expressed in
Equation (13) would mimic this ideal setting. This table presents estimates of four additional specifications
in which the standard set of fixed effects is enriched to account for potential unobserved localized variation
in precursor levels. Column (1) allows the monitor fixed effect to vary by season, column (2) allows the
monitor fixed effect to vary by weekday/weekend, column (3) allows the monitor fixed effect to vary linearly
over time, and column (4) allows for all three. In all cases, the estimates are remarkably similar to our
main results depicted in column (3) of Table 1, providing reassuring evidence in favor of our preferred
parsimonious specification expressed in Equation (13). The row entitled "implied adaptation" reports the
implied measure of adaptation as the difference between the estimated responses to temperature shocks,
which are exclusive of adaptation, and the estimated responses to climate trends, which are inclusive of
adaptation. Standard errors are clustered at the county level. ***, ** and * represent significance at the
1%, 5% and 10%, respectively.




                                                     46
      Table 5: Climate Impacts and Adaptation by VOC- or NOx-limited Atmosphere
                                                                 Daily Max Ozone Levels (ppb)
                                                            Main Specification       VOC/NOx-Limited
                                                            Restricted Sample        Restricted Sample
                                                                     (1)                       (2)

 Temperature Shock                                                2.059***                   2.109***
                                                                 (0.139)                    (0.179)
       x VOC-limited                                                                       -0.090
                                                                                            (0.108)
       x NOx-limited                                                                       -0.548**
                                                                                            (0.253)
 Climate Trend                                                    1.457***                   1.469***
                                                                 (0.149)                    (0.157)
       x VOC-limited                                                                         0.008
                                                                                            (0.083)
       x NOx-limited                                                                       -0.423***
                                                                                            (0.149)

 Implied Adaptation                                               0.602***                   0.641***
                                                                 (0.103)                    (0.113)
       x VOC-limited                                                                       -0.098
                                                                                            (0.092)
       x NOx-limited                                                                       -0.125
                                                                                            (0.211)

 All Controls                                                       Yes                        Yes

 Observations                                                    1,006,748                 1,006,748
 R2                                                                0.452                     0.453
Notes: This table addresses the Leontief-like production function of ozone, and the heterogeneity of climate
impacts and adaptation according to conditions of the local atmosphere. The table reports estimates of
temperature shocks and climate trends interacted with indicators for whether the county is VOC-limited
or NOx-limited. The production of ozone is often VOC-limited in urban areas with a high population
concentration, but is generally NOx-limited in rural areas and downwind suburban areas. Using 5-year bins
(1980-1984, 1985-1989, etc.), a county is designated as VOC-limited, NOx-limited, or neither for each bin
based on whichever of these three categories the county was observed in most days. The sample is restricted
to only those counties for which data on these precursor pollutants are available (approximately 20% of
our full sample), but for comparison the table depicts in column (1) the results of our main specification
expressed in Equation (13) estimated under this restricted sample. In column (2), the main effect reflects
the result for non-limited counties, while each interaction term depicts the relative difference in the effect of
shocks and trends in precursor-limited counties. The rows entitled "implied adaptation" report the implied
measure of adaptation as the difference between the estimated responses to temperature shocks, which are
exclusive of adaptation, and the estimated responses to climate trends, which are inclusive of adaptation.
In this case, they also report the differential adaptation effects in limited counties. Overall, the estimates
are lower in limited counties, corroborating the Leontief-like production function of ozone. The full list of
controls are the same as in the main specification, depicted in column 3 of Table 1. Standard errors are
clustered at the county level. ***, **, and * represent significance at 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively.
                                                       47
           Table 6: Climate Impacts and Adaptation by Beliefs in Climate Change
                                                        Daily Max Ozone Levels (ppb)             Adaptation
                                                                         (1)                           (2)

 Temperature Shock                                                    1.519***
                                                                     (0.042)
       x Low Belief                                                 -0.173***
                                                                     (0.059)
       x High Belief                                                  0.374***
                                                                     (0.108)
 Climate Trend                                                        1.112***                      0.407***
                                                                     (0.049)                       (0.048)
       x Low Belief                                                 -0.014                        -0.159***
                                                                     (0.054)                       (0.050)
       x High Belief                                                  0.243***                      0.131*
                                                                     (0.080)                       (0.079)

 All Controls                                                            Yes                          Yes

 Observations                                                         4,923,932                    4,923,932
 R2                                                                     0.425                        0.425

Notes: This table addresses heterogeneity in climate impacts and adaptation according to beliefs in climate
change. It reports estimates of temperature shocks and climate trends interacted with indicators for whether
the residents of a county generally believed in climate change or not. Specifically, all counties in the sample
were split into terciles based on the results of a survey conducted on climate change beliefs (Howe et al.,
2015). In column (1), the main effect reflects the result for the middle tercile of counties, while the interacted
effects reflect the difference from this value observed in the lower and higher tercile counties. Column (2)
reports the implied measure of adaptation for the middle-belief counties along with the differential effects in
the low- and high-belief counties. The implied measure of adaptation is the difference between the estimated
responses to temperature shocks, which are exclusive of adaptation, and the estimated responses to climate
trends, which are inclusive of adaptation. Overall, high-belief counties seem to make more efforts to adapt
to climate change, and low-belief counties less efforts. For reference, high-belief counties tend to be more
populous, better educated, and richer than low-belief ones. The full list of controls are the same as in the
main specification expressed in Equation (13), depicted in column 3 of Table 1. Standard errors are clustered
at the county level. ***, **, and * represent significance at 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively.




                                                       48
