                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     MEASURING THE SPATIAL DISTRIBUTION OF HEALTH RANKINGS IN THE
                            UNITED STATES

                                          Will Davis
                                      Alexander D. Gordan
                                         Rusty Tchernis

                                       Working Paper 27259
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27259


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2020




We would like to thank Charles Courtemanche, Ian McDonough, Erik Nesson, workshop
participants at IUPUI, and participants at the 2019 Western Economics Association International
annual conference. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Will Davis, Alexander D. Gordan, and Rusty Tchernis. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Measuring the Spatial Distribution of Health Rankings in the United States
Will Davis, Alexander D. Gordan, and Rusty Tchernis
NBER Working Paper No. 27259
May 2020
JEL No. I1,I14

                                         ABSTRACT

We rank counties in the United States of America with respect to population health. We utilize
the five observable county health variables used to construct the University of Wisconsin
Population Health Institute's County Health Rankings (CHRs). Our method relies on a factor
analysis model to directly compute weights for our rankings, incorporate county population sizes
into the variances, and allow for spillovers of health stock across county lines. We find that
demographic and economic variation explain a large portion of the variation in health rankings.
We address the importance of uncertainty caused by imputation of missing data and show that the
use of rankings leads to inherently greater uncertainty. Analyzing the health of counties both
within and across state lines shows substantial degrees of disparity. We find some disagreement
between our ranks and the CHRs, but we show that much can be learned by combining results
from both methods.

Will Davis                                      Rusty Tchernis
Georgia State University                        Department of Economics
55 Park Place NE                                Andrew Young School of Policy Studies
Atlanta, GA 30303                               Georgia State University
gdavis29@student.gsu.edu                        P.O. Box 3992
                                                Atlanta, GA 30302-3992
Alexander D. Gordan                             and NBER
Department of Economics                         rtchernis@gsu.edu
Georgia State University
P.O. Box 3992
Atlanta, GA 30302-3992
zander.gordan@gmail.com
   1. Introduction:
Over time, both the prevalence and importance of rankings have grown considerably. Whether

designed to compare universities, products, cities, or nations, rankings produced using a wide

array of inputs regularly influence the decisions and opinions of individuals, firms, and

governments (Marginson and van der Wende 2007, Giffinger and Gudrun 2010, Wolff et al.

2011, Qui et al. 2018). Rankings are generally well suited for combining complicated outcomes

into a single easily understood measure that is comparable across units. This approach is

especially important in cases where a quality of interest is difficult or impossible to observe

using a single variable.


   A prime candidate for the use of rankings is the measurement of county-level health. Given

health's multidimensional nature, researchers and policymakers often rely on rankings to

combine information from multiple sources into a tractable outcome. For health at the county-

level, rankings may compel individuals within counties to take more active roles in improving

the health of their communities. Policymakers can also use these rankings directly or as a

framework for understanding which interventions prove effective in improving the health of a

county's residents.


   While county health rankings are important to policymakers, researchers, and other interested

parties, creating them is challenging for two primary reasons. First, no single observable

outcome captures county health. To overcome this restriction, a consistent method for combining

information from different inputs is needed. The second difficulty is the need to account for

uncertainty in the rankings. There may be considerable levels of uncertainty for smaller counties

which often have less reliable data. Furthermore, since many observed health variables have




                                                 2
large amounts of missing data, uncertainty in the final rankings should incorporate error caused

by the noisy imputation procedures used to replace missing values.


    The most commonly used rankings of county health come from the University of Wisconsin

Population Health Institute's (UWPHI's) County Health Rankings (CHRs). The CHRs produce

rankings of county health for each state which have been used both directly and indirectly by

local policymakers concerned with crafting interventions to improve the health of their

communities.1 While the CHRs are easy to calculate and interpret, there are several potential

concerns with their design. First, the CHR of each county is calculated using a weighted average

of five normalized manifest variables, the weights for which are subjectively determined rather

than estimated using data. These deterministic weights rely on the assumption that each

variable's relative contribution to the measure of county health is known. The second issue is

that the CHRs do not incorporate uncertainty into their final rankings even though a significant

number of missing observations are imputed. Without a measure of uncertainty, knowing

whether differences in ranks between counties are statistically significant or not is impossible.

Finally, the CHRs only rank counties within the same state, making it impossible to examine the

relative health of counties across state lines. While certain questions of interest involve within-

state comparisons, there are many cases where a set of national rankings is required.


    In this paper, we use a Bayesian spatial factor analysis model to estimate rankings of county

health. Our approach has several advantages. First, the variable weights used in our model are

estimated directly. By estimating factor weights, we allow the data to determine the relative

contribution of each variable to our health measure rather than relying on expert opinion.


1
  For examples of how the CHRs have been used in policy, see http://www.countyhealthrankings.org/explore-health-
rankings/use-data/communities-using-rankings-data.

                                                       3
Second, we summarize the posterior distribution of health rankings for each county instead of

providing a single point estimate. With a distribution of rankings, we can evaluate uncertainty

regarding the rank and relative health of each county. Third, we allow for spatial correlation in

the variance of our rankings to capture potential health spillover effects across county borders.

The variance of our estimates also changes inversely with county population, capturing the

increased uncertainty of data sampled from less populated counties. Finally, our model directly

incorporates the estimation error produced by imputing missing data into the overall uncertainty

of our estimates.


   We estimate our model with the data used to calculate the CHRs in 2015. Rather than

restricting our results to within-state rankings, we estimate county health ranks jointly for the

entire nation. Our study builds on the work of Hogan and Tchernis (2004) who use the spatial

factor analysis model to produce census-tract-level rankings of material deprivation in Rhode

Island, and Courtemanche et al. (2015) who use the CHR variables to estimate within-state

health rankings for counties in Texas and Wisconsin. In addition to addressing the technical

limitations of other rankings, our results allow for the direct comparison of county health across

state lines. Comparing the health of all counties to one another allows us to discern essential

characteristics of county health throughout the country.


   We find significant differences between the manifest variable factor weights estimated by our

model and the deterministic weightings used by the CHRs. Our model assigns less weight to

early mortality and low birthweight and more weight to outcomes of physical and mental health

among adults. Our mean posterior health rankings generally agree with those of the CHRs, but

there is more disagreement between the two measures towards the middle of the rank

distribution. The level of agreement between both rankings suggests a higher level of certainty

                                                  4
regarding the relative health of the most and least healthy counties versus those of average

health.


   Looking at our rankings of county health across the nation, we find a large degree of health

disparity both within and across states. While some states have relatively tight distributions of

county health, many contain a disparate mix of healthy and unhealthy counties. We also find that

the healthiest counties in some of the unhealthy states fall well below the average health level for

counties in high performing states. Using data from Chetty and Hendren (2018), we show that a

county's level of adult economic mobility among children born to low-income households has a

significant impact on its health ranking. Furthermore, we find that the effect of economic

mobility and race covary with one another, suggesting a complex relationship between a

county's racial makeup, economic mobility, and population health.


   We also show that there is a substantial degree of uncertainty in our model's rankings,

implying that any single set of rankings represents only one of many plausible orderings. The

level of uncertainty varies considerably across counties, however. For example, we are more

certain of relative health among the set of counties in the bottom 10% of health according our

model and the CHRs. We find that most of these "bottom 10%" counties are in one of five states,

further illustrating the underperformance of certain areas when compared to the national

distribution.


   Finally, we examine causes of the uncertainty in our rankings as well as methods which can

reduce the overall level of uncertainty. We show that the amount of uncertainty can be decreased

for most counties using alternative imputation procedures that ignore imputation error in the final

estimation. Furthermore, we find that the use of rankings rather than directly using estimates of


                                                 5
latent county health drives a substantial portion of the uncertainty in our results. Given that

rankings inflate the level of uncertainty in a county's health, it is even more concerning that

traditional measures like the CHRs do not include a measure of uncertainty.


    The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 discusses methodology

underlying the CHRs and our model. Section 3 provides an overview of our approach to

imputing missing data. In Section 4, we discuss the data used in the study. Section 5 presents our

results and Section 6 concludes.




    2. Methods:
We begin with an overview of the University of Wisconsin Population Health Institute's

(UWPHI's) County Health Rankings (CHRs). Rather than jointly ranking all counties in the

nation, the UWPHI produces separate sets of CHRs for each state. Creating these state-level

rankings begins by choosing which counties to rank as the UWPHI does not produce CHRs for

certain counties due to data concerns. Among the ranked counties, any missing observations are

imputed using the state mean. Each outcome variable is then normalized as z-scores. A weighted

average of these z-scores is used as the health score for each county. Finally, within-state health

rankings are produced by ordering the health scores of each county.2

    Our model builds on the assumption that the CHR's five observed variables are

manifestations of a single latent construct - county health. In contrast to the CHR's deterministic

weights, we use data to estimate the strength of the relationship between each manifest variable




2
 For additional information regarding the CHR's methodology, see https://www.countyhealthrankings.org/explore-
health-rankings/our-methods/rankings-overview

                                                      6
and latent health. We assume a linear relationship between the latent health variable and

observable outcome variables with a Gaussian error structure such that  =  +  +  , where

 is a vector of the observed outcome variables for county i,  is a vector of outcome variable

specific means,  is a vector of outcome specific factor loadings,  is the scalar-valued latent

health of county i, and  is a vector of Gaussian distributed idiosyncratic error terms. We further

assume that the error terms are uncorrelated both within- and across-counties, implying that

( )   = (2 ), where j indexes the set of observed manifest variables. Stacking over

all n counties, the model can be written in hierarchical form as:

                           |~(  + ,  ),                             ~ (0,  )


where  =  ,  is an  × 1 vector of 1's, and  is an  ×  identity matrix.

   We next alter our model to incorporate uncertainty from population size. We assume that the

variances of our latent factor and idiosyncratic errors are both decreasing in county population.

Defining  = ( ), where  is the population of county i, the model is written as:


                   |~(  + , -1 )                                    ~ (0, -1 )

The intuition behind this specification is that larger counties have less sampling error in their

manifest variables and are less likely to have populations on the extreme ends of the health

distribution relative to smaller counties.

   We next add spatial correlation into the model to produce our final specification. The

presence of spatial spillovers implies that the health of each county is partialy determined by the

health of its neighboring counties, a feature we incorporate with spatial dependence at the factor

level. With the addition of a spatial correlation matrix , the model is specified as:



                                                  7
              |~(  + , -1 )                                 ~ (0, M -1/2 -1/2 )

   We model spatial dependence in the latent health factor as a conditionally autoregressive

process in which a county's health is determined by the mean health of its neighbors. We define

county i's neighbors as the set of counties  which are geographically adjacent to it. Latent

health for county  conditional on the health of its neighbors is then modeled such that:



                                  | { :    }~  (  , 1)
                                                      



This conditional autoregressive model yields the spatial correlation matrix  = ( - )-1,

where  is a spatial correlation parameter to be estimated and R is the neighborhood adjacency

matrix with elements  =  = 1 if counties i and j are adjacent, and 0 otherwise (including that

 = 0).

   Using a Bayesian approach to estimate our model, we also specify prior distributions for our

parameters. We use a set of conjugate non-informative priors which simplify the derivation of

the conditional posterior distributions without contributing significant information to our

estimates. This specification implies that the posterior distributions of our model are informed

almost entirely by the data rather than the prior distributions. The posterior distribution of model

parameters and county ranks are then estimated using Markov Chain Monte Carlo methods (Chib

and Greenberg 1996). More specifically, we use a Gibbs sampling algorithm (Gelfand and Smith

1990) with a Metropolis-Hastings step (Chib and Greenberg 1995) for the estimation of . The

details of our prior distributions and estimation algorithm are discussed in Hogan and Tchernis

(2004).




                                                 8
   3. Missing Data:
The CHRs deal with missing data in two ways: not ranking certain counties with missing data

and imputation. Given that we would like to lose the fewest possible number of counties, we

choose to impute missing data for all counties with at least one non-missing outcome variable.

   While there are many ways to impute data, the CHRs replace missing observations with state-

level means. There are two primary concerns with this approach. First, using state-level means

does not incorporate the inherent uncertainty of the imputation process into the final rankings.

The second issue is that rankings for counties with more missing data are likely to be biased if

they are systematically different from counties with little to no missing data.

   As an alternative to state-level means, we use a posterior imputation procedure. Our posterior

imputation method consists of adding one step to our Gibbs sampling routine wherein we sample

missing manifest variable observations using the first level of our model conditional on the

current iteration's draws of latent health and parameter estimates. This approach allows us to

holistically incorporate uncertainty from missing data into the posterior distributions of our final

rankings. We evaluate the impact of different imputation procedures on our estimates in Section

6 using state averages and Predictive Mean Matching (PMM).




   4. Data:
We use the set of CHR manifest variables in 2015 which includes one mortality measure and

four morbidity measures. The mortality measure used is years of potential life lost before age 75

(YPLL) which is compiled by the National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS) using the 2010-

2012 mortality files. Three morbidity measures come from the Behavioral Risk Factor

Surveillance System Survey (BRFSS) using 2006-2012 data: percentage of adults reporting fair

                                                 9
or poor health (FP%), average number of reported physically unhealthy days (PUD), and average

number of reported mentally unhealthy days (MUD). The final morbidity variable is the

percentage of live births with low birth weight (LBW) which comes from the 2006-2012 NCHS

natality files.

   Among the set of all 3,142 U.S. counties and county equivalents, 79 are not officially ranked

by the CHRs. The three states with the most unranked counties are Texas with 17, Nebraska with

15, and Montana with 10. Of the officially ranked counties, 142 are missing YPLL rate, 400

counties are missing FP%, 334 are missing PUD, 552 are missing MUD, and 99 are missing

LBW. Given the considerable amount of missing data, it is especially important to consider how

noisy imputation procedures influence the overall uncertainty of relative health and its

subsequent ranking.




    5. Results:
We now present our results. First, we discuss the factor loadings and normalized squared

correlation coefficients of the five manifest variables. Second, we examine the levels of across-

and within-state variation in our health rankings. Third, we estimate regressions of our posterior

mean health rankings and each of the five manifest variables on a set of socioeconomic outcomes

to see which observable factors best explain county health. Fourth, we compare our data-driven

posterior mean rankings to a set of rankings produced using the CHR's methodology and discuss

how well both measures agree with one another. Fifth, we evaluate the level of uncertainty

present in our primary results. Sixth, we examine the set of counties in the bottom 10% of health

according to the ranks produced by our model and the CHRs. Seventh, we analyze how the

amount of uncertainty changes under different imputation strategies. Finally, we discuss the

                                                10
increase in uncertainty inherent to the use of rankings rather than directly using estimates of

underlying health.




Factor Loadings and Normalized Squared Correlation Coefficients:
Table 1 shows the posterior mean and 95% confidence interval of each manifest variable's factor

loading, residual standard deviation, and normalized squared correlation coefficient. Following

Hogan and Tchernis (2004), the normalized squared correlation coefficients signify the

proportion of variation in latent county health that is explained by each manifest variable, giving

us a comparable measure to standard index variable weights.


   Looking at the mean posterior factor loadings of our five manifest variables, we find that the

rate of fair/poor health and years of potential life lost rate have the largest and second largest

loadings, respectively, while the factor loadings for rate of low birth weight, physically

unhealthy days, and mentally unhealthy days are substantially smaller. When considering the

posterior standard deviations of each residual, however, we see that years of potential life lost

rate, number of mentally unhealthy days, and rate of low birth weight have posterior mean

residual standard deviations larger than their mean factor loadings. The relative magnitudes of

both the mean factor loading and residual standard deviation features directly into our

normalized squared correlation coefficients. We find that rate of self-reported fair/poor health

and number of physically unhealthy days explain the largest shares of variation in latent county

health at 0.28 and 0.27, respectively. Both years of potential life lost rate and number of mentally

unhealthy days have mean normalized squared correlation coefficients of 0.18 while rate of low

birth weight explains the smallest portion of variation in latent health at 0.08.



                                                  11
   Comparing our normalized squared correlation coefficients in Table 1 to the weights used by

the CHRs, we find a considerable amount of disagreement regarding the relative contribution of

each manifest variable. While years of potential life lost rate is assigned the weight of 50% in the

CHRs, we find that it captures only 18% of the variation in latent county health according to our

model. Furthermore, self-reported rates of fair/poor health and average number of physically

unhealthy days receive a weight of 10% under the CHRs while we find that they explain the

most variation in our latent factor at 28% and 27%, respectively. The rate of babies born low

birth weight explains the least amount of variation in county health according to our estimation

but receives the second highest weight in the CHRs at 20%. We find the most agreement

between our squared correlation coefficients and the CHR's weights for number of mentally

unhealthy days, but the two measures still differ by roughly 80%. The CHR weights of all five

manifest variables do not fall within the posterior 95% credible intervals of the squared

correlation coefficients estimated using our model.




                                                12
Table 1: Posterior Means and 95% Confidence Intervals of Model Factor Loadings, Residual Variances,
and Normalized Squared Correlation Coefficients

                                Factor Loadings        Residual Standard      Normalized
                                                          Deviations       Squared Correlation
                                   (95% CI)                                   Coefficients
                                                           (95% CI)
                                                                                (95% CI)

             YPLL Rate               19.25                   22.20                0.18

                                 (18.45, 20.01)         (21.53, 22.92)         (0.17,0.19)

            Self-Reported            57.30                   39.30                0.28
           Fair/Poor Health
                                 (55.23, 59.32)         (37.56, 40.99)         (0.27,0.29)

             Physically              9.74                    7.52                 0.27
           Unhealthy Days
                                 (9.37, 10.10)            (7.23, 7.81)         (0.26,0.29)

             Mentally                7.43                    9.48                 0.18
           Unhealthy Days
                                  (7.06, 7.79)            (9.19, 9.78)         (0.15,0.20)

          Low Birth Weight           10.90                   23.53                0.08
               Rate
                                 (10.16, 11.67)         (22.91, 24.17)         (0.07,0.09)




Comparing County Health Rankings Within and Across States:
While the official CHRs separately rank county health by state, there are often cases that require

comparisons across state lines. Figure 1 shows box plots of the mean posterior health rankings

produced by our model separated by state, with lower rankings corresponding to better

population health levels and higher rankings representing worse population health. The figure

illustrates a considerable degree of disparity in the rankings of county health both across and

within states. For example, the healthiest county in Mississippi, DeSoto, has a mean posterior

rank roughly 1,000 ranks away from the state's median, making it an extreme within-state

                                                  13
outlier. However, while DeSoto is the best performing county within Mississippi it falls below

the median county rank of 31 healthier states. Therefore, even though DeSoto is found to be the

healthiest county in Mississippi, it performs worse than average in most states and would even be

an unhealthy outlier in some of the nation's healthiest states. A system that only ranks counties

within states would make this comparison impossible as DeSoto would be indistinguishable from

the top ranked counties of the other 49 states.


   We can make a similar comparison for the least healthy counties located in otherwise healthy

states. Counties in Iowa are the nation's healthiest at the median, but the state also has a few

unhealthy outliers. The least healthy county in Iowa, Appanoose, has a mean posterior rank of

2,289, placing it nearly 2,000 ranks away from the state's median rank. While Appanoose is

considered an extremely unhealthy county within Iowa, it still outperforms the median county in

eight of the nation's least healthy states. If we were to simply rank the counties in Iowa,

Appanoose would remain the worst ranked county but the degree to which the county

underperforms relative to its peers would be masked.


   The within-state county health disparities shown in Figure 1 are also unobservable if counties

are ranked separately on a state-by-state basis. For example, Michigan, New York, and Illinois

have counties with mean posterior ranks at nearly every point of the national distribution,

implying that the three states include a mix of the country's most and least healthy counties.

Alternatively, while the median county health rank in Deleware is worse than Michigan, New

York, and Illinois, its distribution of health is much tighter. This indicates lower levels of within-

state disparity in Delaware. Again, these comparisons cannot be made when rankings are

calculated separately for each state.



                                                  14
Figure 1: Box Plots of Posterior Mean Rankings of County Health by State




Explaining County Health Ranks:
We now turn to the factors associated with a county's health ranking. To investigate which

variables significantly predict ranks, we first estimate regressions of our model's mean posterior

ranks on a set of county-level socioeconomic outcomes including total population, the

                                                 15
percentage of residents with less than a high school education, average income, income Gini,

percentage of black residents, and the percentage of Hispanic residents.3 We then include

measures of a county's adult economic mobility among children born to low-income families.

For ease of interpretation, all independent variables are normalized as z-scores.


    Table 2 shows results from three separate regressions of our mean health rankings on the set

of county outcome z-scores. Beginning with Column 1 of Table 2, we see that a county's

percentage of residents without a high school education, average income, income Gini, and

percentage of Hispanic residents all have statistically significant effects on mean posterior health

ranks while total population and percentage of black residents do not. Having a higher proportion

of residents with less than a high school education and greater levels of income inequality predict

worse health rankings and counties with higher average incomes are expected to be better ranked

than lower-income counties. The percentage of Hispanic residents is also positively correlated

with health, implying that there may be a beneficial health return to specific features of a

county's racial and ethnic diversity.


    Column 2 of Table 2 shows results from a regression of our posterior mean ranks on each of

the variables in Column 1 along with the addition of a variable capturing the effect of living in a

county during childhood on adult income mobility among children born to low-income parents.

This variable comes from the work of Chetty and Hendren (2018) which we refer to from here

on as CH. The CH variable shows an estimated percent change in future household income at

age 26 relative to the national average caused by spending one additional year of childhood in

the county for a child born to parents with incomes at the 25th percentile of the national


3
 On average, black, Hispanic, and white residents make up roughly 95% of a county's population. We therefore
exclude percent white as a reference group in our regressions in order to avoid high degrees of multicollinearity.

                                                         16
distribution. Positive (negative) values of the CH variable correspond to a positive (negative)

effect from spending a year of childhood in the county on relative levels of adult income for

children born to lower-income families. While the CH variable likely captures many things, we

refer to it as county economic mobility throughout the remainder of this study. Like other

socioeconomic variables used in our regressions, we normalize our CH variable as a within-

sample z-score.


   With the addition of county economic mobility, we find the estimated effects of a county's

percentage of residents without a high school education, average income, income Gini, and

percentage of Hispanic residents remain relatively unchanged compared to our results in Column

1. Alternatively, total population and the percentage of black residents become statistically

significant at the 1% and 0.1% levels, respectively. Both effects are negative, implying that

counties with larger populations and higher percentages of black residents are predicted to have

better health all else equal after controlling for economic mobility. We also find that higher

levels of economic mobility among children born to low-income parents has an economically

and statistically significant effect on a county's mean posterior health ranking with greater

income mobility predicting better health. This finding suggests that providing disadvantaged

children with greater opportunity for economic advancement may prove beneficial to a county's

health level.


   Finally, to test if economic mobility has a differential effect on county health rankings for

counties with different racial and ethnic makeups, we include interaction terms of the CH

economic mobility variable with the percentage of black residents and the percentage of

Hispanic residents in Column 3 of Table 2. After including our interaction effects, we find that

the effects of total population, percentage of residents without a high school education, average

                                                 17
income, and income Gini change only trivially. Alternatively, we find that the percentage of

black residents becomes statistically insignificant while its interaction effect is significant at the

0.1% level. Our results suggest that counties with higher percentages of black residents see lower

returns to increases in economic mobility while the percentage of black residents alone does not

have a statistically significant effect on a county's health ranking keeping economic mobility

fixed. Alternatively, the coefficient on percentage of Hispanic residents remains statistically

significant at the 0.1% level while the interaction of percent Hispanic and economic mobility is

much smaller in magnitude and only marginally statistically significant. Like the percentage of

black residents, our findings suggest that counties with higher percentages of Hispanics see

smaller returns to economic opportunity. Unlike percent black, we find that increases in the

percentage of Hispanic residents living in a county has a beneficial effect on county health that is

independent of its relationship to economic mobility.


   We now estimate regressions of our five manifest variables on the same set of county-level

socioeconomic variables. These estimates allow us to examine the degree to which each manifest

variable covaries with our socioeconomic outcomes. This approach provides information

regarding the relative contribution of each manifest variable to the overall change in our mean

ranks.


   Table 3 shows regressions of mean rank and our manifest variables on the set of county-level

outcomes. All dependent and independent variables are normalized as z-scores in order to

provide coefficients which are comparable across regressions. Looking at the results of Table 3,

we see that the overall effect of total population on our mean ranks is largely driven by changes

in years of potential life lost rate and rate of low birth weight. The relationship between total

population and YPLL rate is in line with recent work showing that urban areas often have better

                                                  18
longevity at age 65 due to greater health care quality, availability, and utilization (Finkelstein et

al. 2019). These differences in the health care environment between urban and rural areas may

also explain the negative relationship between low birth weight and total population. The percent

of individuals living in a county with less than a high school education corresponds to

significantly worsened outcomes for all five manifest variables with the largest effects for the

rate of fair/poor health and average number of physically unhealthy days. The same is true for

county-level income Gini, but the effect is largest for YPLL rate. Alternatively, average county

income level corresponds to significant improvements in each of the five manifest variables with

the largest change being YPLL rate.


   Looking to our measures of race and race interacted with economic mobility, we find several

interesting relationships. Starting with the percentage of black residents living in a county, we

find that increases in percent black lead to various effects on PUD and MUD depending on a

county's level of economic mobility. For a county with an economic mobility score of 0,

implying that spending an additional year in the county has neither a positive nor negative effect

on adult earnings for children born to low income parents, increases in percent black lead to

expected improvements in number of positive physical and mental health days. Interestingly, the

beneficial effect of percent black on PUD and MUD is larger in counties with lower levels of

economic mobility and smaller in counties with higher economic mobility. For the percentage of

babies born low birth weight, increases in percent black lead to substantial increases in LBW%.

Furthermore, the effect of percent black on birth weight is independent of economic mobility.

This finding is supported by the literature on differential probabilities of low birth weight by race

which finds that black mothers are more likely to give birth to low birth weight babies due to




                                                  19
factors such as maternal age at time of birth and ingrained institutions related to systemic

disadvantage among African Americans (CDC 2002, Love et al. 2010, Ncube et al. 2016).


   Finally, we evaluate the effects of county Hispanic percent and Hispanic percent interacted

with economic mobility on our manifest variables. Like percent black, increases in percent

Hispanic lead to decreases in YPLL rate, rate of fair/poor health, PUD, and MUD. Unlike

percent black, however, these effects are largely independent of economic mobility with the

interaction only being marginally statistically significant for the regression of YPLL rate.

Furthermore, the effect of percent Hispanic on LBW% is negative while the coefficient on

percent Hispanic interacted with economic mobility is positive. This relationship implies that

increases in a county's share of Hispanic residents produces higher levels of LBW% among

counties with higher economic mobility and lower LBW% in counties with worse economic

mobility.




                                                 20
                    Table 2: Regression of Mean Ranks on Socio-Economic Outcome Z-Scores
                                      (1)                        (2)                       (3)
                               Mean Posterior Rank        Mean Posterior Rank       Mean Posterior Rank
 Total Population                    7.160                     -25.69**                  -20.54*
                                    (6.936)                    (8.006)                   (9.028)

 No Highschool%                      373.5***                  361.7***                    333.7***
                                     (24.30)                   (21.73)                     (22.53)

 Mean Income                        -345.1***                  -313.6***                   -332.2***
                                     (17.98)                    (16.78)                     (17.85)

 Gini                                176.7***                  123.9***                    130.2***
                                     (13.26)                   (13.25)                     (13.34)

 Black%                               -12.76                   -119.3***                    -35.74
                                     (11.62)                    (12.68)                    (19.96)

 Hispanic%                          -167.3***                  -151.7***                   -167.8***
                                     (15.52)                    (14.89)                     (14.67)

 CH                                                            -247.6***                   -290.5***
                                                                (15.79)                     (18.47)

 CH * Black%                                                                               115.8***
                                                                                           (18.69)

 CH * Hispanic%                                                                             47.66*
                                                                                           (18.87)
 N                                       2832                   2798                         2798
 adj. R2                                 0.573                  0.616                       0.621
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*
  p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001




                                                     21
Table 3: Regressions of Mean Rank and CHR Manifest Variable Z-Scores on Socio-Economic Outcome Z-Scores
with CH Interactions
                            (1)               (2)                (3)                (4)             (5)               (6)
                       Mean Posterior      Years of       Rate of Fair/Poor   Avg Number of    Avg Number of     Rate of Low
                       Rank Z-Score      Potential Life    Health Z-Score       Physically       Mentally       Birth Weight Z-
                                         Lost Rate Z-                         Unhealthy Days   Unhealthy Days        Score
                                             Score                               Z-Score          Z-Score
 Total                     -0.0233*       -0.0500***          -0.0209            0.00137          0.0245           -0.0332**
 Population
                           (0.0102)        (0.0123)           (0.0135)          (0.00842)         (0.0127)         (0.0104)

 No                        0.378***        0.270***           0.493***           0.427***         0.312***         0.151***
 Highschool%
                           (0.0255)        (0.0293)           (0.0298)           (0.0311)         (0.0303)         (0.0257)

 Mean Income               -0.376***       -0.380***          -0.295***          -0.266***        -0.205***       -0.0966***
                           (0.0202)        (0.0213)           (0.0224)           (0.0215)         (0.0218)         (0.0177)

 Gini                      0.147***        0.214***           0.133***           0.105***         0.0656***        0.121***
                           (0.0151)        (0.0186)           (0.0171)           (0.0189)         (0.0186)         (0.0157)

 Black%                     -0.0405        -0.0561*            -0.0408           -0.248***        -0.221***        0.490***
                           (0.0226)        (0.0281)           (0.0298)           (0.0304)         (0.0374)         (0.0256)

 Hispanic%                 -0.190***       -0.306***          -0.136***          -0.259***        -0.233***       -0.0763***
                           (0.0166)        (0.0219)           (0.0197)           (0.0203)         (0.0196)         (0.0216)

 CH                        -0.329***       -0.168***          -0.142***          -0.283***        -0.386***        -0.178***
                           (0.0209)        (0.0285)           (0.0224)           (0.0253)         (0.0290)         (0.0210)

 CH*Black%                 0.131***        -0.00951           0.0860**           0.103***         0.117***         0.00538
                           (0.0212)        (0.0262)           (0.0282)           (0.0289)         (0.0345)         (0.0257)

 CH*Hispanic%                 0.0540*       0.0595*           0.00649             0.0240           0.0400          0.0930***
                             (0.0214)      (0.0235)           (0.0210)           (0.0200)         (0.0213)         (0.0235)
  N                            2798          2798               2798               2798             2798             2798
  adj. R2                      0.621         0.537              0.519              0.401            0.295            0.612
Standard errors in parentheses
*
  p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001




Comparing CHRs to Posterior Mean Ranks:
We now compare the similarity of our model's mean posterior health rankings to a set of joint

rankings for all U.S. counties created using the official CHR methodology. Figure 2 shows the

posterior mean ranks produced by our model on the x-axis along with the corresponding CHR of

each county on the y-axis. While the two rankings generally agree with one another, the posterior

mean rankings of our model most closely match those of the CHRs for counties at the top and

bottom of the rank distribution. Alternatively, there is less agreement between both sets of

rankings for counties towards the middle of the distribution. This comparison implies that




                                                                 22
particularly healthy and unhealthy counties are relatively easy to identify and rank compared to

counties towards the middle of the national distribution.




                           Figure 2: CHR Ranks vs. Posterior Mean Ranks




Mean Rankings and Uncertainty:
Since our Bayesian methodology produces draws from a posterior distribution of health rankings

rather than a single point estimate, we can utilize both the mean and 95% confidence interval of

each county's rank distribution when presenting our results. Figure 3 shows the ordered posterior

mean ranks of each county along the 45-degree line with their corresponding 95% confidence


                                                23
intervals represented by the solid horizontal lines. Graphically, we see a significant amount of

uncertainty in the county health rankings produced by our model with the 95% rank confidence

intervals of some counties reaching across the entire distribution of rankings. We also find less

uncertainty among counties with posterior mean ranks towards the distribution's left and right

tails, further supporting that we have greater certainty about the relative health rankings of very

healthy and unhealthy counties. There is, however, a significant amount of uncertainty in health

rankings for counties at all points of the distribution.


   The degree of uncertainty found in our rankings suggest that single point estimates provide

very little information regarding the relative health ranking of many counties. For policymakers

concerned with the health of poorly performing counties, lower levels of uncertainty allow for

greater accuracy when selecting at-risk counties for policy interventions or evaluation. We

discuss these counties in more detail below. Additionally, with less uncertainty policymakers and

researchers can more easily identify the nation's healthiest counties in order to study what

conditions produce better health. For counties with rankings towards the distribution's middle,

however, considerable uncertainty implies that we can only tentatively determine their health

relative to similar counties.




                                                  24
                    Figure 3: Mean Posterior Ranks and 95% Confidence Intervals




Identification of the Least Healthy Counties:
While uncertainty in our model's rankings can make it difficult to measure relative health, we

have shown that this is not the case for all counties. Some counties have smaller mean posterior

rank 95% confidence interval (95% CI) ranges which provides greater assurance that our mean

estimates accurately reflect underlying relative health. Additionally, certain counties see more

agreement between the mean posterior health rank produced by our model and the CHRs. If both

methods capture aspects of underlying health, we may be more certain regarding the true health

of a county when the two approaches produce similar rankings.


   To highlight cases where relative health is easier to identify, we examine the set of counties

which are most likely to be ranked in the bottom 10%. Counties in this bottom 10% group must

                                                25
satisfy two to three criteria. First, the county's mean posterior ranking must fall within the

bottom 10% of rankings according to our model. Second, the county must also be in the bottom

10% according to the CHRs. These two criteria allow us to include counties which are found to

be among the least healthy regardless of which model is used. Finally, among the set of counties

with mean posterior ranks and CHRs in the bottom 10%, we evaluate the subset of counties with

95% CIs that do not cross the 90th percentile threshold. This further restriction provides additonal

assurance that the counties in question truly belong in the bottom 10%.


   Figure 4 shows the mean posterior rank, 95% CI, and CHR for counties in our bottom 10%

group according to their mean posterior rank and CHR. We show the same measures for the

subset of counties whose 95% CI also falls within the bottom 10% range in Figure 5. We find

209 counties that are in the bottom 10% according to their mean posterior rank and CHR.

Among these 209 counties, 189 have 95% mean posterior rank confidence intervals that fall

within the bottom 10% range. Unsurprisingly, some states have no counties in our bottom 10%

group while other states have several. Of the 209 counties shown in Figure 4, 121 are in one of

five states: Mississippi, Alabama, Kentucky, West Virginia, and Arkansas (MAKWA). The

mean posterior rank of counties in MAKWA and non-MAKWA states are identified in our two

figures as red and blue, respectively.


   Figures 4 and 5 provide a few key takeaways. First, while our approach differs substantially

from the CHRs in certain respects, these differences do not necessarily carry over into

subsequent rankings. By ranking 3,141 total counties, 314 will necessarily be in the bottom 10%

under each model. We find 209 counties that are in the bottom 10% according to both, meaning

that the two methods generally agree for nearly two-thirds of all potential counties. Furthermore,

all but 20 of these counties have 95% rank confidence intervals that fall entirely within the

                                                 26
bottom 10% range. While Figure 3 shows that many counties have high levels of uncertainty

regarding their mean posterior rank, relative health among the nation's least healthy counties is

far more certain.


   Finally, we show that a small number of states contain most counties in our bottom 10%. Like

our state-level examination of mean posterior rank distributions, we find that counties in the

south are overrepresented among the bottom 10%. In addition to making up more than half of all

bottom 10% counties, most of the bottom 10%'s least healthy counties are also in one of five

MAKWA states. Only 3 of the 20 worst performing counties are in a non-MAKWA state and all

20 are located in the south. The share of MAKWA counties in the bottom 10% according to our

model and the CHRs further solidifies the poor health of southern counties relative to the

national average.




                                                27
28
Uncertainty Under Different Imputation Methods:
As discussed previously, there are a considerable number of counties which are missing

observations for one or more of the five manifest variables. While our primary results utilize

posterior imputation to predict and replace missing observations, we can estimate our rankings

under various imputation procedures. A significant difference between posterior imputation and

alternative methods is that posterior imputation incorporates the uncertainty from missing data

directly into the posterior distribution of each county's health rankings while other imputation

procedures do not. We therefore expect a significant increase in the degree of uncertainty for

counties with missing data using posterior imputation versus traditional imputation approaches.


                                                29
    Figure 6 shows density plots for the distribution of 95% rank confidence interval magnitudes

produced by our model under different approaches to dealing with missing data. Figure 6A

shows the density of posterior rank confidence intervals estimated using posterior imputation.

We see from the figure that the density is heavily right-skewed with the confidence interval of

some counties stretching across hundreds of ranks. Figure 6B shows the density of 95% rank

confidence interval magnitudes produced by our model using Predictive Mean Matching (PMM)

to impute missing data rather than posterior imputation.4 As opposed to similar methods like

naïve imputation using linear regression, the PMM algorithm preserves many features of the

observed data since all missing values are imputed using the non-missing observation of its

nearest neighbor.


    Compared to Figure 6A, the 95% rank confidence intervals produced using PMM vary in

magnitude significantly less than the ranks produced under posterior imputation. Since the

uncertainty of missing data is not directly incorporated into our posterior rank distributions using

PMM, counties with missing data have tighter confidence intervals on average relative to our

primary results. Comparing the change in 95% rank confidence intervals more formally, the

average percent change in interval magnitude from PMM to posterior imputation is roughly

897% with a median of 81%. Compared to PMM, nearly 45% of counties see a percent increase

of 100% or more under posterior imputation and roughly 18% of counties see an increase greater

than 1,000%.




4
 PMM imputes data in two stages. The first stage involves predicting values of each manifest variable for all
counties in the data set using linear regression. In the second stage, the algorithm matches the predicted manifest
variable value of each county with the most similar predicted value among the set of counties without missing data.
This county is known as the missing county's "nearest neighbor." The missing value of the county is then imputed
using its nearest neighbor's observed manifest variable va lue.

                                                        30
   Alternatively, we can use state averages to impute missing data. We show the density of 95%

rank confidence interval magnitudes produced using state-average imputation to replace missing

data in Figure 6C. Like our PMM estimates, we find that the rank confidence interval

distributions are much tighter on average and less heavily skewed using state-average imputation

compared to our posterior imputation results. Around 47% of counties see a 100% or greater

increase in their 95% rank confidence interval magnitude when moving from state-average

imputation to posterior imputation and 18% of counties see a change of 1,000% or more.


   While the smaller rank confidence interval magnitudes produced using alternative imputation

strategies may seem attractive, they do not holistically incorporate the uncertainty of missing

data in the same way as posterior imputation. Since we would expect to have less confidence in

the rankings of counties with significant amounts of missing data a priori, ignoring this

uncertainty may be undesirable. We can examine the relationship between uncertainty from

missing data and our uncertainty in health ranks in another way by looking at Figure 6D which

shows the density of 95% rank confidence interval magnitudes produced by our model using

only the set of counties that have no missing data. As Figure 6D shows, the density of confidence

interval magnitudes produced using only counties with full information is very similar to the

densities produced using PMM and state-average imputation. This similarity suggests that using

traditional imputation procedures which ignore the uncertainty from missing data produces

deflated levels of uncertainty akin to only using data without any missing observations, leading

to artificially high levels of certainty regarding the relative health ranking of counties.




                                                  31
     Figure 6: Density Plots of 95% Confidence Interval Magnitudes Using Different Imputation Procedures




Using Mean Posterior Draws of Latent County Health vs. Posterior Mean Ranks:
As an alternative to rankings of county health, one could use the estimates of latent county health

produced by our model directly. While rankings are often more convenient to interpret, they have

an inherent disadvantage compared to directly using estimates of county health. Specifically, the

amount of variation in each county's posterior rank distribution is driven by two factors:

sampling variation in their own latent factor's posterior distribution and sampling variation in the

overlapping latent factor distributions of counties with similar levels of health. To see this,

assume we have a sample containing only two counties, county A and county B. Let county A


                                                     32
have a mean posterior latent health draw of 1 in iteration  while county B has a mean posterior

health draw of 1.5, implying that county A has a rank of 1 and B has a rank of 2. Now, at

iteration  + 1 assume that county A draws a mean posterior latent health of 1.6 and county B

draws another sample at exactly 1.5. While the mean posterior latent health level of county B has

not changed across iterations, the variation in county A's latent factor will cause the ranks of

both counties to reverse. Since sampling variation in the latent factor of counties with

overlapping distributions of health can produce movement in a county's rank independently of

variation in their own mean posterior health distribution, the level of uncertainty in relative

county health is almost certainly higher when using rankings rather than the estimates of latent

health directly.


   To investigate the differences in uncertainty between these two approaches more closely,

Figure 7 shows ordered mean posterior latent health values on the 45-degree line along with 95%

posterior mean confidence intervals shown as horizontal lines. Graphically, we see that using

posterior means of latent county health directly produces significantly lower levels of overall

uncertainty than we find using ranks in Figure 3.


   Examining the degree to which changes in the uncertainty of our results under different

imputation strategies is driven by the choice to use ranks, we consider percent changes in the

posterior 95% confidence interval magnitudes for both posterior distributions of health rankings

and posterior distributions of mean latent health caused by switching from PMM to posterior

imputation and state average imputation to posterior imputation. While posterior imputation still

produces significantly higher levels of uncertainty relative to the alternative imputation

strategies, the average percent change in uncertainty is substantially smaller when using mean

posterior latent health directly instead of rankings. More formally, the average increase in 95%

                                                 33
confidence interval magnitude caused by switching from PMM to posterior imputation is 319%

when using posterior means of latent county health compared to an average increase of 998%

when using ranks. Similarly, switching from state average imputation to posterior imputation

leads to an average increase of 661% using posterior means of latent county health compared to

an average increase of 1,031% when using ranks.


   Given that many deterministic measures like the CHRs only provide rankings, the inflation in

uncertainty inherent to ranking a continuous underlying factor is especially important when

interpreting estimates. Our methodology gives practitioners the choice to directly utilize

estimates of the latent factor for each county rather than having to rely on rankings. While

directly using the latent factor produces a measure with less uncertainty, it comes at a cost since

point estimates of county health have no direct scale or interpretation aside from their direction

and magnitude relative to other counties in the sample.




                                                 34
                 Figure 7: Model-driven Posterior Means of  with 95% Confidence Intervals




   6. Conclusion:
In this paper, we produce rankings of health for all counties in the United States using a Bayesian

spatial factor analysis model. We utilize the five observable variables used to construct the

County Health Rankings (CHRs) produced by the University of Wisconsin Population Health

Institute. Our estimation approach has several advantages over the CHR's methodology. First,

our model estimates factor loadings for each manifest variable using information present in the

data rather than deterministic weightings that are subject to expert opinion. Second, we produce a

measure of uncertainty in our rankings which is directly influenced by a county's population size



                                                   35
and amount of missing data. Finally, we rank all counties in the nation simultaneously rather

than separately by state, allowing us to compare the health of counties both within and across

state lines.


   Compared to the CHRs, we find that the normalized squared correlation coefficients produced

by our model attribute significantly less weight to Years of Potential Life Lost (YPLL) and the

rate of Low Birth Weight (LBW) while Self-Reported Fair/Poor Health (FP%) rate, average

number of Physically Unhealthy Days (PUD), and average number of Mentally Unhealthy Days

(MUD) receive significantly higher weightings. These differences suggest that the CHRs may

attribute too much weight to outcomes of early mortality and birth weight and too little weight to

adult physical and mental health status.

   Our study also contributes to the literature on health disparity measurement (Bleichrodt and

van Doorslaer 2006, Nesson and Robinson 2017). Comparing the health of counties across state

lines, we find a significant amount of disparity in the rankings of counties relative to different

states as well as among counties within the same state. While county health is some states has a

relatively tight distribution, most have a mix of healthy and unhealthy counties. Additionally, the

healthiest counties in some of the unhealthiest states often fall below the average of healthier

states. Since the CHRs only rank county healthy separately for each state, it cannot be used to

makes these types of comparisons.


   We investigate which county-level variables predict the health rankings produced by our

model. In addition to total population, the percentage of residents with less than a high school

education, average income, income Gini, percentage of black residents, and percentage of

Hispanic residents, we include a county economic mobility variable created by Chetty and



                                                 36
Hendren (2018) (CH) which capture the effect of spending an additional year of childhood living

in a county on adult income for children born to low-income parents. While the effect of

increasing a county's percentage of black residents is found be statistically insignificant in a

regression excluding economic opportunity, the effect of having higher percentages of both black

and Hispanic residents becomes beneficial to health after accounting for adult economic

mobility. Furthermore, we find that the effect of racial diversity on health varies with a county's

level of economic mobility. Increased economic mobility predicts better health rankings, but the

effect is smaller for counties with higher percentages of black residents and Hispanic residents.

Furthermore, the effect of percent black on health only operates through its interaction with

economic mobility while increasing the percentage of Hispanic residents has a beneficial effect

that is independent of economic mobility.

   We also find that our rankings harbor a considerable degree of uncertainty. While the relative

rankings of counties towards the middle of the distribution harbor the most uncertainty, there is

significant ambiguity regarding the relative health of counties at every points of the distribution.

This is not the case for all counties, however, which we illustrate by examining the set of

counties in the bottom 10% of health according to their mean posterior ranking, 95% mean

posterior ranking confidence interval, and CHR.

   One source of uncertainty in our rankings comes from incorporating the inherent uncertainty

of missing data directly into our model using posterior imputation. We show that using

alternative imputation procedures like Predictive Mean Matching (PMM) and imputation using

state averages produces far tighter rank confidence intervals. While this may seem like an

attractive feature, these alternative imputation methods abstract from the uncertainty of

estimating ranks for counties that are missing data for one or more manifest variables.

                                                 37
Furthermore, we highlight how the use of ranks rather than direct measures of latent health

inflates the uncertainty of our estimates. This finding further illustrates the importance of

recognizing uncertainty in the rankings of deterministic frameworks like the CHR.

   The primary limitation of our study is data quality. More specifically, roughly 23% of all

counties in the data set are missing observations for one or more manifest variable. While one of

our study's primary aims is to illustrate a serious treatment of these missing data, the use of more

complete data would result in better precision.


   In addition to the use of variables with less missing data, future research would benefit from

the use of longitudinal data on observable county health outcomes rather than cross-sectional

data taken from a single year. While the manifest variables used in this paper are available in

earlier periods, the three variables collected from the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance

System (BRFSS) become unreliable for smaller counties. With longitudinal data covering an

adequate amount of time, researchers can not only measure the health of counties at a given point

but also how the health of counties evolves across time. Being able to measure this time-variant

aspect of county health is crucial to understanding the potential policies and factors which are

effective at improving or worsening a county's health in the long term.




                                                  38
References:

   1.   Bleichrodt, Han, and Eddy Van Doorslaer. "A welfare economics foundation for health inequality
        measurement." Journal of Health Economics 25, no. 5 (2006): 945-957.

   2.   Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC. "Infant mortality and low birth weight among black and
        white infants--United States, 1980-2000." MMWR. Morbidity and mortality weekly report 51, no. 27
        (2002): 589.

   3. Chetty, Raj, and Nathaniel Hendren. "The impacts of neighborhoods on intergenerational mobility I:
        Childhood exposure effects." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 133, no. 3 (2018): 1107-1162.

   4. Chib, Siddhartha, and Edward Greenberg. "Understanding the metropolis-hastings algorithm." The
        american statistician 49, no. 4 (1995): 327-335.

   5. Chib, Siddhartha, and Edward Greenberg. "Markov chain Monte Carlo simulation methods in
        econometrics." Econometric theory 12, no. 3 (1996): 409-431.

   6. Courtemanche, Charles, Samir Soneji, and Rusty Tchernis. "Modeling AreaLevel Health
        Rankings." Health services research 50, no. 5 (2015): 1413-1431.

   7. Finkelstein, Amy, Matthew Gentzkow, and Heidi Williams. "Place-Based Drivers of Mortality: Evidence
        from Migration." NBER Working Paper, no. 25975 (2019).

   8. Gelfand, Alan E., Susan E. Hills, Amy Racine-Poon, and Adrian FM Smith. "Illustration of Bayesian
        inference in normal data models using Gibbs sampling." Journal of the American Statistical Association 85,
        no. 412 (1990): 972-985.

   9. Giffinger, Rudolf, and Haindlmaier Gudrun. "Smart cities ranking: an effective instrument for the
        positioning of the cities?." ACE: architecture, city and environment 4, no. 12 (2010): 7-26.

   10. Hogan, Joseph W., and Rusty Tchernis. "Bayesian factor analysis for spatially correlated data, with
        application to summarizing area-level material deprivation from census data." Journal of the American
        Statistical Association 99, no. 466 (2004): 314-324.

   11. Love, Catherine, Richard J. David, Kristin M. Rankin, and James W. Collins Jr. "Exploring weathering:
       effects of lifelong economic environment and maternal age on low birth weight, small for gestational age,
       and preterm birth in African-American and white women." American journal of epidemiology 172, no. 2
       (2010): 127-134.

   12. Marginson, Simon, and Marijk Van der Wende. "To rank or to be ranked: The impact of global rankings in
        higher education." Journal of studies in international education 11, no. 3-4 (2007): 306-329.

   13. Ncube, Collette N., Daniel A. Enquobahrie, Steven M. Albert, Amy L. Herrick, and Jessica G. Burke.
       "Association of neighborhood context with offspring risk of preterm birth and low birthweight: A



                                                           39
    systematic review and meta-analysis of population-based studies." Social science & medicine 153 (2016):
    156-164.

14. Nesson, Erik, and Joshua J. Robinson. "The Measurement of Health and the Connection between Health
    Inequality and Income." (2017).

15. Qiu, Qihua, et al. "Using spatial factor analysis to measure human development." Journal of Development
    Economics 132 (2018): 130-149.

16. Wolff, Heinz-Peter, Leif Wolf, Ali Subah, Joseph Guttman, Abdelraman Tamimi, Aiman Jarrar, Amer
    Salman, and E. Karablieh. "Methodological challenges in evaluating performance, impact and ranking of
    IWRM strategies in the Jordan Valley." Water Science and Technology 66, no. 7 (2012): 1407-1415.




                                                  40
