                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  COMPETITION LAWS AND CORPORATE INNOVATION

                                             Ross Levine
                                              Chen Lin
                                               Lai Wei
                                              Wensi Xie

                                        Working Paper 27253
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w27253


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2020




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Ross Levine, Chen Lin, Lai Wei, and Wensi Xie. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Competition Laws and Corporate Innovation
Ross Levine, Chen Lin, Lai Wei, and Wensi Xie
NBER Working Paper No. 27253
May 2020
JEL No. K21,L4,O3

                                         ABSTRACT

A central debate in economics concerns the relationship between competition and innovation,
with some stressing that competition discourages innovation by reducing post-innovation rents
and others emphasizing that more contestable markets spur currently dominant and other firms to
invest more in innovation. We examine the impact of competition laws on innovation. We create
a unique firm-level dataset on patenting activities that includes over 1.4 million firm-year
observations, across 68 countries, from 1991 through 2015. Using a new, comprehensive dataset
on competition laws, we find that more stringent competition laws are associated with increases
in firms' number of self-generated patents and the citation-impact and explorative nature of those
patents. We also conduct the first examination of the relationship between competition laws and
firms' acquisition of patents from other firms. We find that competition increases patent
acquisitions but lowers the ratio of acquired to self-generated patents. The results hold when
using country-industry data on 186 countries over the 1888-2015 period.

Ross Levine                                     Lai Wei
Haas School of Business                         Twen Mun
University of California at Berkeley            Hong Kong
545 Student Services Building, #1900 (F685)     laiwei2@ln.edu.hk
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER                                        Wensi Xie
Ross_levine@haas.berkeley.edu                   Department of Finance
                                                Chinese University of Hong Kong
Chen Lin                                        Hong Kong
Faculty of Business and Economics               wensixie@cuhk.edu.hk
The University of Hong Kong
Hong Kong
chenlin1@hku.hk
                                                                                             1


1. Introduction
       A central debate in economics concerns the relationship between competition and

innovation. Schumpeter (1942) stressed that more intense competition can discourage
innovation by reducing post-innovation rents (e.g., Romer 1990; Aghion and Howitt 1992). In
contrast, Arrow (1962) emphasized that more intense competition can encourage innovation
by making markets more contestable, spurring both currently dominant and other firms to
invest in innovation. Aghion et al. (2005) and Shapiro (2012) stress that these countervailing
effects of competition on innovation are not mutually exclusive: the overall effect depends on
how an intensification of competition shapes the contestability of markets and the ability of
firms to appropriate returns from successful innovations. To evaluate empirically the impact of
competition on innovation, an enormous literature uses data on firm size, market concentration,
and price-cost margins to measure market structure and data on R&D expenditures and patents
to measure innovation. As summarized by Cohen (2010), the results depend on the different
measures of market structure and innovation and the different empirical methods employed by
researchers (e.g., Nickell 1996; Blundell, Griffith, and Van Reenen 1999; Gilbert 2006; Jansen,

Van Den Bosch, and Volberda 2006; Sutton 2007; Aghion et al. 2005, 2009; Hashmi 2013).
       In this paper, we examine the connection between competition laws and innovation.
Rather than analyzing measures of market structure, we examine the statutory laws that

regulate competition among firms, such as the laws concerning mergers and acquisitions,
anticompetitive agreements, the ability of firms to exploit their dominant position in markets,
and the authority for addressing and remedying violations of those statutes. That is, we examine
statutory policy levers that countries use to shape competition among firms. Using a unique
panel dataset on competition laws, firm patents, and firm acquisition of patents, we study the
relation between the stringency of competition laws and innovation.
       We make three contributions to research on competition and innovation. First, we create
a unique firm-level panel dataset with information on each firm's patents and financial accounts
for public and private firms, across 68 countries, over the period from 1991 through 2015. To
accomplish this, we combine the two global databases on patents (Worldwide Patent Statistical
Database, PATSTAT and OrbisIP) and link this patenting information with firm-level data on
                                                                                             2


income and balance sheets. This matching is extraordinarily labor intensive, as firm identifiers
differ across datasets and change over time. Using this new dataset with over 1.4 million firm-

year observations, we construct measures of the number of patents, the impact of those patents
as gauged by citations, and the extent to which the innovation is more explorative--involving
inventions that fall outside of the firm's historic base of innovative knowledge as reflected in
its patent applications--or exploitative--involving patents within the firm's historical
technology classes. In addition to this firm-level dataset, we construct a country-industry
dataset covering the period from 1888 through 2015 and use it to evaluate the connection
between competition laws and innovation over 128 years. While recent studies explore several
determinants of innovation (e.g., Chang et al. 2015; 2019; Brown and Martinsson, 2019;
Moshirian et al. 2020), we believe that we are the first to examine the impact of competition
laws on innovation for a large, international panel of private and public firms.
       Second, we conduct the first examination of the relation between competition laws and
the acquisition of patents by firms. Firms obtain patents from other firms by buying them
directly or through mergers and acquisitions. We assemble data on patent transactions

worldwide and study the connection between competition laws and innovation acquisition.
Thus, we offer an initial study of how competition laws shape the in-house development of
patents, the acquisition of patents, and the relative importance of self-developed and acquired

innovation.
       Third, we are the first to use a new, comprehensive dataset on competition laws across
123 countries from 1888 through 2010 to examine the relation between competition laws and
innovation. Bradford and Chilton (2018) and Bradford et al. (2019) compiled and codified data
on the multiplicity of competition laws that regulate mergers and acquisitions, the abuse of
dominant positions, the use of anticompetitive agreements, and who has the authority and tools
to raise and address potential violations of those laws. These data are much more extensive
with respect to the measurement of different competition laws and the coverage of countries
and years than any other dataset on competition laws. Based on Bradford et al (2019), we
examine both their overall index of competition laws (Competition Law Index) and the
subcomponents that focus on laws governing mergers and acquisitions, the abuse of dominant
                                                                                               3


positions, anticompetitive agreements, and authority, i.e., who has legal standing to raise
concerns about the violation of competition laws and what are the remedies available for

enforcing competition laws. These data offer a unique opportunity to evaluate the connection
between the different competition laws that regulate competition among firms and innovation.
       We begin our firm-level analyses by assessing the connections between innovation and
the Competition Law Index, which is an aggregation of the following four subcomponents.
Merger Control is an index of the laws regulating mergers and acquisitions and includes
information on the laws governing pre-merger notification and approval, the degree to which
the law grants authorities power to restrict mergers for economic and public interest reasons,
and the scope and purview of merger and acquisition laws with respect to industries, enterprises,
etc. Anticompetitive Agreements is an index designed to measure the degree to which a
country's competition laws prohibit firms from colluding to set prices, divide markets, limit
supply, rig bids, and engage in other anticompetitive activities. Abuse of Dominance is an index
of laws designed to limit the ability of dominant firms to exploit their market positions in
uncompetitive ways. Authority is an index that aggregates information on the degree to which

both private and public entities have the legal authority to bring suits against firms for
anticompetitive behaviours, the remedies available to authorities, and the scope of the law, i.e.,
the degree to which all industries and enterprises fall under the purview of a country's

competition laws. The Competition Law Index and its subcomponents are based on statutory
law, not on the implementation of those laws, and coded so that higher values signify laws that
more stringently regulate "anticompetitive behaviours" by firms. Furthermore, the coding of
Merger Control, Anticompetitive Agreements, and Abuse of Dominance indexes accounts for
the possible defenses that firms might employ against accusations. In particular, Bradford and
Chilton (2018) reduce the values of each of these subcomponents (and hence the Competition
Law Index) when firms have legal recourse to the defenses that the economic efficiency
benefits of their actions or the public interest benefits of their actions outweigh the
anticompetitive costs.
       Using a control function approach, we find a strong positive connection between the
stringency of competition laws and innovation. In our initial analyses, we regress patent-based
                                                                                               4


measures of innovation on the Competition Law Index while controlling for firm fixed effects,
industry-year fixed effects, lagged time-varying firm characteristics (e.g., size, leverage,

profitability, and age), and time-varying country traits (e.g., Gross Domestic Product (GDP)
per capita, the ratio of Credit to GDP, and the ratio of stock market capitalization to GDP).
Furthermore, the results hold when controlling for an assortment of time-varying national
policies, including laws and regulations associated with national patent systems, contract
enforcement, property rights protection, and the regulation of financial intermediaries, markets,
and international capital flows. Given these extensive controls and our finding that changes in
national innovation rates do not predict changes in competition laws, we interpret these firm-
level analyses as providing suggestive evidence on the impact of competition laws on
innovation. Below, we employ additional strategies to enhance our ability to draw causal
inferences about national competition laws and firm innovation. It is also worth emphasizing
that the results are robust to including or excluding U.S. firms and to examining all firms, or
limiting the sample to manufacturing firms.
       Our coefficient estimates suggest an economically large effect of competition laws on

firm innovation, as measured by the number of patents, forward citations to patents, citations
per patent, the number of very highly cited patents (top-quartile of the citation distribution
among patents in a year and technology class), and the number of explorative patents, i.e.,

patents that fall beyond a firm's historic base of innovative activities. For example, the
coefficient estimates indicate that if a country's Competition Law Index increased by one
standard deviation, then the total number of citations to patents received by firms in the country
would increase by 11%.
       We then examine the connection between competition laws and the acquisition of
patents. In particular, we examine the relation between competition laws and (1) firms
acquisition of innovation--as measured by both the number of patents and the citation impact
of those patents, (2) the ratio of patents acquired from other firms to self-developed patents,
where we compute this ratio based both on the number of patents and the citation impact of
those patents, and (3) the extent to which firms acquire more explorative patents and patents
from different industries. Since we are the first to examine the connection between competition
                                                                                                 5


law and patent acquisition, we use these results as establishing a set of stylized facts rather than
assessing competing theories about the impact of competition laws on patent acquisition.

       There are three clear patterns regarding competition laws and the acquisition of
innovation. First, greater values of the Competition Law Index are associated with significant
increases in the total number of patents acquired and the impact of those patents, as measured
by citations. These findings suggest that more stringent competition laws are associated with
firms acquiring more and higher-impact patents. Second, more stringent competition laws are
associated with a reduction in the ratio of acquired to self-generated innovation. While
Competition Law Index boosts both acquired and self-developed innovation as measured by
either the number or impact of patents, more stringent competition laws disproportionately
boost the rate of self-developed patents. Third, when competition laws become more stringent,
firms acquire more explorative patents (relative to exploitative patents) and they acquire a
higher proportion of patents from firms in industries different from their own.
       We next address a potential concern with these firm-level analyses: there might be an
omitted time-varying country trait that both drives innovation and is correlated with changes

in competition laws. To address this concern, we now differentiate among firms in countries,
so that we can include country-year fixed effects. Specifically, we conjecture that if more
stringent competition laws spur innovation, the effects should be stronger among firms in more

"innovative-intensive" industries, i.e., more stringent competition laws should have a bigger
effect on innovation among firms that are more likely to innovate. To categorize industries as
"innovative-intensive," we use the Eurostat definition of high-technology industries, e.g.,
pharmaceuticals, computer, electronics, and optical products. We then evaluate whether more
stringent competition laws spur innovation more among firms in innovative-intensive
industries. This approach is similar to the identification strategy employed by Moshirian et al.,
(2020) and Levine, Lin, and Wei (2017), who assess the impact of stock market liberalization
and insider trading laws on innovation respectively. Consistent with the results from using the
simple control function approach discussed above, these cross-industry firm-level analyses
suggest the following: among firms in innovative-intensive industries, more stringent
                                                                                              6


competition laws increase patenting, the patenting of higher-impact innovations, more
explorative patents, and the ratio of self-developed to acquired patents.

       Besides examining the overall Competition Law Index, we also analyze its individual
components: Authority, Merger Control, Abuse of Dominance and Anticompetitive Agreements.
The findings on Competition Law Index also hold for the individual sub-indexes of Authority,
Merger Control, and Anticompetitive Agreements. Each of these sub-indexes enters positively
and significantly when examining the number of patents, the impact of patents measured by
citations, and the degree to which those patents are explorative. We also find that each of these
sub-indexes of the overall index of competition law stringency is negatively associated with
the ratio of acquired to self-developed patents. These results are consistent with the view that
laws that grant greater authority to the antitrust regime, contain a broader range of provisions
regulating mergers, and exert strong limits on horizontal and vertical agreements between
companies that foster innovation and increase self-developed patents relative to the acquisition
of patents from others.
       The only exception regards the sub-index, Abuse of Dominance. Since Abuse of

Dominance is unrelated to the different firm-level measures of innovation, we explore the
components of Abuse of Dominance. Dividing Abuse of Dominance into its components
suggests a potential reason for why the overall Abuse of Dominance sub-index is not strongly

correlated with innovation. Exploiting the dominant position created by a patent might be one
strategy through which firms obtain returns from innovation, so that limiting such "abuse"
could reduce investment in innovation and hence future inventions. Therefore, a legal system
that allows firms to exploit their dominant positions based on efficiency considerations could
boost innovation.
       Consistent with the view that allowing firms to exploit their positions of dominance for
economic efficiency reasons boosts innovation, we find that the sub-component of Abuse of
Dominance that measures whether firms can defend themselves against charges of abusing
their dominant positions by using an efficiency defense enters positively and significantly when
examining the impact on firm innovation. These findings suggest that the presence of an
                                                                                                7


efficiency defense for actions that would otherwise be classified as abusive facilitates corporate
inventive activities.

        Finally, we also confirm our findings using an industry-country level investigation that
covers the period from 1888 through 2015 and includes a cross-section of 186 countries.
Although we do not have firm-level data going back to the 19th century, we can differentiate
innovation by industry, country, and year for a long panel of 128 years. All of the findings
using these industry-country-year dataset are fully consistent with the firm-level analyses.
        Besides the large body of research on competition and innovation, our research relates
to several other lines of inquiry. A growing literature examines the financial and institutional
determinants of innovation, as reviewed by He and Tian (2020). We examine a different but
important determinant of innovation: competition laws. Furthermore, a well-established
literature shows that laws shape the functioning of financial institutions, the contestability of
markets, and economic outcomes (e.g., La Porta et al. 1998; La Porta, Lopez-De-Silanes, and
Shleifer 2008; Ellul, Pagano, and Panunzi 2010; Brown, Martinsson, and Petersen 2013). We
build on this work by showing that particular laws regulating firm competition have a material

impact on innovation. A related line of research explores the regulation of entry. Djankov et al.
(2002) show that countries that make it more costly for start-up firms to enter a market typically
suffer from higher corruption levels, supporting a public choice view of entry regulation. We

focus on the competition laws and their effects on innovation and our findings indicate that
laws that limit anti-competition actions and activities are associated with faster rates of
innovation. Researchers also show that competition shapes corporate valuations (e.g., Giroud
and Mueller 2011). By showing the large impact of competition laws on firm innovation, our
work offers an additional mechanism through which competition can influence firm valuations.
        The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Sections 2 and 3 respectively
discuss the unique patenting and competition law data used in our study. Section 4 provides
the firm-level regression analyses, and Section 5 presents the country-industry-year results.
Section 6 concludes.
                                                                                               8


2. International Data on Patenting at the Firm and Country-Industry Levels
       In this section, we first describe the construction of our firm-level dataset. These data

include information on firms' patenting activity and financial accounts for a large panel of
private and public firms across 68 countries for the period covering 1991 through 2015. We
then describe the country-industry level dataset on patenting that covers the period from 1888
through 2015. We complete the section by providing summary statistics. To mitigate concerns
that the United States might dominate the results, we exclude U.S. firms from the analyses. All
of the findings reported below, however, hold when including U.S. data.


2.1 Firm-level patent and financial data
       We compile a unique dataset that combines the two most comprehensive global
databases on patents with detailed financial data on public and private firms. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first study to create and examine a firm-level dataset that contains panel
information on each firm's financial accounts, patents, the nature and impact of those patents,
and the firm's acquisition of patents for a broad range of firms, across many countries, and

over an extensive time period.
       The two global databases on patents are (1) the Worldwide Patent Statistical Database
(PATSTAT), which is administered by the European Patent Office, and (2) OrbisIP, which is

maintained by Moody's Bureau van Dijk (BvD). Each of these patent databases covers over
100 million patents filed with about 100 patent offices around the world, dating back to the
1800s. Each patent database provides detailed information on patents, such as application date,
grant status, and technological class (e.g., International Patent Classification (IPC)). Our firm-
level database covers the period starting in 1991 because we match these patenting data with
firm balance sheet and income data that only starts in 1991 for a broad selection of firms. As
discussed below, we also construct a country-industry-level dataset on patenting and use it to
examine a longer time period.
       The PATSTAT and OrbisIP datasets provide distinct and complementary information
that we exploit to (1) measure patenting activity more accurately and (2) link these patenting
datasets to firm-level datasets that contain income and balance sheet information. With respect
                                                                                                                   9


to measuring patenting activity, researchers face the following challenge: firms can, and do,
apply for and receive patents in multiple patent offices. This means that there are sometimes

multiple patents on the same underlying invention. Failure to account for this can lead to
measurement problems. For example, researchers might incorrectly (a) record a single
invention multiple times for a firm that obtains a patent from multiple patent offices; (b) record
the wrong innovation date depending on which patent office filing the researchers use, and (c)
measure patent citations by counting all of the citations from a single invention that received
patents in multiple patent offices.1
         To address this measurement challenge, we focus on the original invention. PATSTAT
provides unique "patent family" identifiers, where a patent family includes all of the patents
filed in different patent offices on the single underlying invention. This information, however,
is not readily available from OrbisIP. Based on the PATSTAT patent family identifier, we
ascertain the first time that an invention is granted a patent and we call this the "original patent."
We date patents using the application year of the original patent (rather than the date when the
patent is granted) because the application year is closer to the invention date (Griliches, Pakes,

and Hall 1987) and various factors can influence the gap between the application and grant
dates (Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg 2001). We also use the International Patent Classification
(IPC) of the original patent to define the technological section and subclass(es) of the

invention.2,3
         OrbisIP provides critical information--that is unavailable in PATSTAT--that allows
us to (a) link the patenting data with other firm-level datasets and (b) obtain information on
                                     
1
  For example, if patent A is cited by patent B and patent C, and patents B and C are simply the same invention
filed in two different patent offices, then failure to link patents B and C as a single invention will mean that patent
A will be recorded as having two citations rather than the correct value of one.
2
  A typical IPC takes a form as follows: in the case of "A61K 36/815", the first character, "A", identifies the IPC
"section". There are eight sections in total (from A to H). The first four characters, "A61K" provide the "subclass".
With the next two characters ("36") and the last three characters ("815"), we can further identify the IPC at the
"main group" and "sub-group" level. Since IPCs are not always available at the main group and sub-group level,
we use the first four characters, i.e., the subclass level, as the most granular technological class in our analysis.
3
  As more than one IPC can be assigned to a patent, we follow the procedures in Levine et al. (2017). All patents
have at least one inventive IPC. If the patent authority designates an inventive IPC as secondary ("L" in the
ipc_position of the PATSTAT), we remove that IPC from further consideration. This leaves only inventive IPCs
that the patent authority designates as primary ("F" in the ipc_position of the PATSTAT) or that the patent
authority does not designate as either primary or secondary, but rather as an undesignated IPCs. In no case does a
patent authority designate a patent as having two primary IPCs. In the few cases with multiple inventive IPCs
where none are designated as primary, we keep the IPC with the highest alphabetical order. 
                                                                                                            10


firms' acquisitions of patents. In particular, OrbisIP provides unique identifiers (i.e., Bvd ID)
for firms applying for patents that are the same as those in other Orbis databases that contain

firm-level income and balance sheet data. Furthermore, OrbisIP records transactions of patents
between firms, so that we can examine how competition influences patent transactions. By
combining these datasets, we create a firm-level dataset on patenting and financial data for
private and public firms around the world from 1991 through 2015.
        Merging the firm-level patenting and financial datasets is challenging. While both
patent databases use the patent application number from the original filing documents,
PATSTAT and OrbisIP use different standardization methods for recording and presenting this
"common" identifier. Moreover, the standardization rules changed over time and the different
patent offices changed how they recorded the patent application number over time. Thus, we
have reviewed the rules for each patent office and the standardization methods of the two patent
databases and constructed our own unified identifiers to ensure a one-to-one matching between
all patent records.4
        Another challenge to compiling our firm-level dataset involves the retrieval of historical

data from Orbis. For any particular version of Orbis, BvD only provides firm-level information
for the most recent ten years. Thus, to cover the 1991-2015 period, we need to combine data
from multiple versions of Orbis. However, the firm-level identifies (i.e., the BvD IDs) change

over time, making it difficult to match firms over time across the different versions of Orbis.
Thus, we had to check these records individually to resolve changes in a firm's BvD ID and
eliminate duplicate records from overlapping years. By doing this, we construct what we
believe is the broadest dataset containing a panel of firm-level data on patents, patent
transactions, and financial information for private and public firms worldwide.




                                   
4
 Given the idiosyncrasies of patenting offices, we restrict our analyses to patent offices that granted at least
100,000 patents over their full history based on the records in PATSTAT. This accounts for more than 97% of the
universe of eventually-granted patents in PATSTAT.
                                                                                                 11


2.2 Firm-level patent measures
       We construct six patent-based measures of innovation for each firm in each year, which

have been used by an extensive literature (see, e.g., Chang et al., 2015, 2019; Balsmeier,
Fleming, and Manso, 2017; Lin, Manso, and Liu, 2019).

       2.2.1 Patent quantity

       Patent Count equals the natural logarithm of one plus the total number of eventually-
granted patents that firm f applied for in year t, i.e., the application date of the original patent
in year t. Since patents granted after the last year covered by the database, i.e., 2018, will not
be recorded as eventually-granted in the database, there can be truncation problems during the
last few years of the database. Given that the average application-grant lag is about three years,
we end our sample in 2015 to mitigate this truncation problem (e.g., Hall et al., 2001). We use
the natural logarithm of one plus the total number of eventually-granted patents because the
distribution of the number of patents is right-skewed. Patent Count measures the quantity of
patents, but it does not measure the quality of patents.


       2.2.2 Patent impact

       Besides measuring the quantity of patents, we also use four measures of the "impact"

of patents, where impact is measured using citations.
       Citation equals the natural logarithm of one plus the total number of forward citations
received by all eventually-granted patents that firm f applied for in year t. Since a patent may
continue to receive citations beyond the observable coverage of the database, we adjust for
truncation bias using the approach employed in Hall et al. (2001, 2005) and Levine et al. (2017).
This measure gauges the degree to which an innovation influences other inventions.
       Cit/Pat equals the natural logarithm of one plus the average number of forward citations
received by all eventually-granted patents that firm f applied for in year t. This measure gauges
the average impact, rather than the aggregate impact of patents by firm f in year t.
       Cited Patent equals the natural logarithm of one plus the total number of eventually-
granted patents that firm f applied for in year t that received at least one citation. We use Cited
                                                                                                                  12


Patent to assess whether competition influences the degree to which firms create new patents
that are cited by at least one other invention.

         Top Cited Patent equals the natural logarithm of one plus the total number of
eventually-granted patents that firm f applied for in year t that have forward citation counts
falling in the top 25% of the forward citation count distribution for patents within the same
technology class and application year. This gauges whether a firm created a very high-impact
patent. We use this to assess the relationship between changes in the competition laws facing
firms and the likelihood that they create very impactful patents.

         2.2.3 Explorative patents

         Finally, in addition to measuring the quantity and impact of patents, we use an indicator
of the extent to which a firm's patents are "explorative," meaning that the innovative activity
reflected in the patent falls outside of the firm's typical line of research.
         Explorative Patent equals the natural logarithm of one plus the total number of
explorative patents that firm f applied for in year t. Following prior research (see, e.g., Manso,

2011; Balsmeier et al., 2017; Lin et al., 2019), a patent is defined as explorative if at least 60%
of the citations to which it refers are neither to patents that the firm produced during the last
five years nor to patents that were cited by the firm's others patents filed over the past five

years. Thus, an explorative patent is an invention that falls outside of the firm's historic base
of innovative knowledge as reflected in its patent applications. Explorative Patent gauges the
degree to which a firm engages in more explorative inventions--inventions in areas different
from the firm's past inventions and lines of research.5




                                     
5
 Furthermore, we constructed and examined an alternative measure using a more restrictive cutoff percentage of
patents. Specifically, Explorative Patent (Alternative) equals one if at least 80% of the citations to which it refers
are neither patents that the firm produced nor patents that were cited by the firm's others patents filed during the
past five years. The results hold using the alternative measure.
                                                                                                 13


2.3 Patent acquisition measures
       One of the advantages of using the OrbisIP database is that it provides information on

patent transactions worldwide. Using this information, we construct and examine six measures
of firms' acquisition of patents. Firms acquire patents primarily by purchasing them directly or
through mergers and acquisitions.
       Patent Acquired equals the natural logarithm of one plus the total number of patents
acquired by a firm in a given year. This measures the quantity of patents acquired by a firm.
       Patent Acquired Ratio equals the natural logarithm of one plus the total number of
patents acquired by a firm in a given year minus the natural logarithm of one plus the total
number of patents that the same firm applied for in that same year (i.e., the number of self-
developed patents). The Patent Acquisition Ratio is approximately equivalent to the ratio of
the number of patents acquired to the number of patents self-developed by the firm, which
gauges the relative intensity of acquiring innovation versus conducting in-house innovation.
Thus, we use this measure to evaluate the impact of competition laws on the degree to which
firms acquire patents from other firms or develop those innovations in-house.

       Explorative Patent Acquired Ratio equals the natural logarithm of one plus the total
number of explorative patents acquired by a firm in a given year minus the natural logarithm
of one plus the total number of exploitive patents acquired by the same firm in that same year.

An acquired patent is considered to be explorative if at least 60% of the citations contained
within the patent are neither to patents that the acquiring firm produced during the last five
years nor to patents that were cited by the acquiring firm's others patents filed over the past
five years. Similarly, an acquired patent is considered to be exploitative if at least 60% of the
citations to which it refers are patents that the acquiring firm produced or patents that were
cited by the acquiring firm's other patents filed over the past five years. An acquired
exploitative patent, therefore, is an invention that falls within the acquiring firm's historic base
of innovative knowledge, while an acquired explorative patent represents an invention that falls
outside of that base of innovation. The Explorative Patent Acquired Ratio is approximately
equivalent to the ratio of the number of explorative patents acquired to the number of exploitive
                                                                                                14


patents acquired by the firm. Thus, we use Explorative Patent Acquired Ratio to assess whether
more stringent competition laws induce firms to acquire more explorative patents.

       Intra-industry Patent Acquired Ratio equals the natural logarithm of one plus the total
number of patents acquired from firms in the same industry (four-digit NACE level) as the
acquiring firm in a given year minus the natural logarithm of one plus the total number of
patents acquired from firms in different industries. We use Intra-industry Patent Acquired
Ratio to assess whether competition influences the degree to which firms acquire patents from
firms in the same industry relative to the acquisition of inventions patented by firms in other
industries. For example competition might spur firms to seek out and acquire inventions in
other industries to establish a competitive advantage in their own industries.


2.4 Other firm-level characteristics and country traits
       For the firm-level sample, we start the sample in 1991 because the availability of firm-
level income and balance sheet data increases in 1990 and we constructed the firm-level control
variables with a one-year lag. We follow the literature (see, e.g., Hsu, Tian, and Xu, 2014) and

include the following control variables in our analysis: Firm Size, Leverage, Profitability and
Age. Firm Size is the natural logarithm of total assets of a firm in a year. Leverage is the ratio
between non-current liability and total assets of a firm in a year. Profitability is the net income

scaled the total assets of a firm in a year. Age is the natural logarithm of the number of years
since the establishment of a firm.
       We also include an assortment of country-level characteristics. GDP per capita is the
natural logarithm of Gross Domestic Product (GDP in real U.S. dollar in 2010) of a country in
a year, scaled by its total population. Credit/GDP is the ratio of total credit provided by the
financial sector over GDP in a country-year. Stock/GDP is the ratio of total market
capitalization of domestic firms over GDP in a country-year. The detailed definitions and
sources of the variables introduced in this section are presented in Appendix A.
       By requiring non-missing values for these firm-level characteristics and the firm's
industry classification and country traits, the final firm-level sample consists of about 200,000
firms from 68 countries over the period from 1991 through 2015.
                                                                                                             15




2.5 Country-industry-level innovation measures

         We complement the firm-level analyses with country-industry data. In moving to the
country-industry-level, we extend the sample period to cover 128 years: 1888 through 2015.
Thus, while we lose the granularity of firm-level data and the transactions-level information,
we gain the ability to examine the relationships between competition and patent-based
measures of innovation for 186 countries over more than a century.
         In constructing the country-industry-level patent-based innovation measures, we
continue to (a) consider all eventually-granted patents, (b) use the PATSTAT "patent family"
identifier to identify the original patent, (c) date patents using the application year of the
original patent, and (d) use the IPC of the original patent to define the technological section
and subclass(es) of each invention. To assign patents to industries, we convert the patent's IPC
subclass level to the two-digit Standard Industry Classification (SIC) level using the latest
mapping scheme from the World Intellectual Property Office (WIPO) and the United Nations
Statistical Division.6 To assign patents to countries, we use information from the original patent

on the country of residence of the patent's primary assignee.
         We construct four patent-based measures of innovation for each industry j, in country
c, in year t from PATSTAT: Patent Count-Ind, Citation-Ind, Top Cited Patent-Ind, and

Explorative Patent-Ind. Patent Count-Indc,j,t equals the natural logarithm of one plus the total
number of eventually-granted patents in industry j, in country c, in year t. Citation-Ind and Top
Cited Patent-Ind are defined analogously, building on the firm-level variables defined above.
For Explorative Patent-Ind, we need to identify the degree to which a patent involves
innovation beyond the firm's past inventive activity. Thus, we first restrict to those patents
where OrbisIP has the applicants' BvD ID to identify the firm it belongs to and evaluate
whether it is considered as explorative for the firm. This restriction is not needed for the other
three measures. Then, we count the number of explorative patents belonging to a certain IPC

                                    
6
   We first map IPC subclasses to the International Standard Industrial Classifications (ISICs) using the mapping
scheme         at:       https://are.ucdavis.edu/people/faculty/travis-lybbert/research/concordances-patents-and-
trademarks/.Then, we convert the ISICs to SICs using the concordance scheme from the United Nations Statistical
Division, which is available at: http://unstats.un.org/unsd/cr/registry/regdnld.asp?Lg=1.
                                                                                                            16


subclass that are filed by firms in a country-year, convert it to the two-digit SIC level, and take
the natural logarithm of one plus the count to obtain the final value for Explorative Patent-Ind.

By construction, the number of industry-country-year observations with Explorative Patent-
Ind available is smaller than that for the other patent-based innovation measures in the industry-
country-level dataset. We require each industry-country to have at least one eventually-granted
patent to be included in our analysis.


2.6 Summary information on patent-based measures of innovation
        Table 1 provides summary statistics on patenting at (1) the firm-level for the period
1991-2015 on a maximum of 68 countries and (2) country-industry-level for the period 1888-
2015 on a maximum of 186 countries. Focusing first on the firm-level sample, the average firm
(a) develops 1.3 eventually-granted patents in a year and (b) receives 30.3 forward citations to
the eventually-granted patents that it applies for in a year. Furthermore, about 0.23 of an
average firm's 1.3 eventually-granted patents in a year generate forward citations that place the
innovation in the top 25% of the forward citation distribution for all patents within the same
technology class and application year. An average firm has 0.27 explorative patents (out of its
1.3 patents) in a year.7 In terms of patent acquisitions, the average firm in our sample acquires
0.11 patents per year from other firms and these acquired patents receive on average four
forward citations. We follow the common practice in the literature and treat the firm-year
observations without any patent records as containing a value of zero for these measures. All
these measures of innovation are highly right skewed as shown by the standard deviations and
values at the 10th, median, and 90th percentiles. The median size firm in our sample has total
assets of US$6 million, with a leverage ratio of 16.9% and profitability (net income/assets) of
3.7%.

        The country-industry-level measures of innovation cover the period from 1888 to 2015.
These measures are also based on the original patent and then linked to an industry based on
the patent's IPC subclass and to a country based on residence of the patent's primary assignee.

                                   
7
  Our example excludes firms without any patents, so Explorative Patent does not measure firms that innovate for
the first time.
                                                                                                17


Thus, Citation-Indc,j,t equals the natural logarithm of one plus the total number of forward
citations received by all eventually-granted patents in industry j, in country c, in year t.



3. Competition Laws
           Bradford and Chilton (2018) and Bradford et al. (2019) recently compiled the most
comprehensive dataset on competition laws around the world and over time. The data cover
123 countries that have had a competition law in place over the period from 1888 through 2010.

Their data go well beyond other datasets with respect to the coverage of (a) competition laws,
(b) countries, and (c) years. Researchers have only begun to exploit the wealth of information
contained in their dataset on the statutory laws that shape competition among firms (see, e.g.,
Bradford and Chilton 2018; Bradford et al. 2019).8 In this section, we summarize features of
their data that are central to our examination of competition laws and innovation.
           Bradford and Chilton (2018) and Bradford et al. (2019) constructed the data as follows.
First, they collected all laws containing provisions regulating market competition for 123
countries dating back to each country's first competition law or 1888, whichever came later.
For example, the first relevant U.S. federal law regulating market competition is the Sherman
Act of 1890. They then coded the content of those laws with respect to provisions concerning
mergers and acquisitions, the abuse of dominant positions, anticompetitive agreements, and the

authority for addressing and remedying violations of those provisions. In this way, Bradford
and Chilton (2018) and Bradford et al. (2019) codify the multifaceted provisions of competition
laws for a large panel of countries.
           Bradford and Chilton (2018) aggregate data on individual competition laws into four
indexes. Authority captures provisions concerning who has standing to raise concerns about
the violation of competition laws and the remedies available for enforcing those laws. The next
three indexes measure the regulation of (1) mergers and acquisitions (Merger Control), (2)
agreements among firms that limit competition (Anticompetitive Agreements), and (3)


                                     
8
    See: http://comparativecompetitionlaw.org//.
                                                                                                18


strategies used by dominant firms to abuse their positions (Abuse of Dominance). In the

remainder of this section, we discuss the codification of these four indexes.



3.1 Authority
       In constructing the Authority index, Bradford and Chilton (2018) include information
on (1) who can bring suits against firms that are alleged to have engaged in anticompetitive
behavior, (2) the remedies that the authorities can impose on firms that violate competition
laws, and (3) the scope of the law, i.e., the degree to which all industries and enterprises fall
under the purview of a country's competition laws.
       Authority is the summation of eight components. Private right of action equals one if a
country allows individuals and firms to bring suits against companies for violating competition
rules. While governments typically enforce competition laws, some countries allow for an
additional avenue for raising and then adjudicating claims of anti-competition actions: private
actions by individuals and firms. Since allowing for these private actions expands the
competition regime beyond government enforcement, Bradford and Chilton (2018) add one to

the overall authority measure, Authority, when Private right of action equals one.
       The next five components of Authority concern remedial powers and scope. Fines
equals one if the authorities have the authority to levy monetary fines on firms that violate

competition laws. Imprisonment equals one if a country can imprison those who violate
competition laws. Divestiture equals one if a country's authorities have the right to stop, reverse,
or modify the structure of a merger or acquisition. Damages equals one if the authorities can
reward damages to private parties as compensation for another entity violating competition
laws. Extraterritoriality equals one when a country's authorities can address conduct by those
operating outside of the geographic boundaries of the country if those action violate the
country's competition laws and affect the competitive environment in the domestic economy.
       The next two components of Authority concern exemptions to the country's
competition laws. As stressed by Bradford and Chilton (2018), the extent to which countries
limit the purview of their competition laws by limiting their authority over market competition.
Thus, Industry Exemptions equals -0.5 when a country's competition law provides any
                                                                                                19


exemptions for industries (e.g., agriculture) adhering to the nation's competition laws.
Similarly Enterprise Exemptions equals -0.5 when there are any exemptions for enterprises

(e.g., state-owned).


3.2 Merger Control

       To gauge the extent to which competition laws regulate mergers and acquisitions,
Bradford and Chilton (2018) include information on each country's laws in each year with
respect to (1) regulating pre-merger notification and approval, (2) granting expansive powers
to the authorities to restrict mergers for economic and public interest reasons, and (3) permitting
an assortment of arguments by firms to defend mergers and acquisitions and limiting the scope
of laws, i.e., the degree to which all industries and enterprises are within the purview of the
competition laws.
       Merger Control is the summation of seven components. The first two measure the
degree to which competition laws require that firms get approval before undertaking a merger.
Pre-merger Notification equals one if firms obtain approval before completing a merger
voluntarily or mandatorily. Mandatory Notification equals one if firms must obtain approval
before closing a merger. The next two components focus on the types of reasons that can be
used to restrict mergers. Economic Reason equals one if the law grants the regulatory authority
expansive powers to limit mergers on grounds that the merger would lessen competition or
strengthen a firm's dominant position. Public Interest equals one if the country's competition
laws permit merger restrictions on grounds that the merger would hurt the public interest. As
stressed by Bradford and Chilton (2018), Merger Control is designed to capture the extent to
which a country grants officials control over mergers and acquisitions.
       The next three components of Merger Control concern the arguments that firms can
use to defend themselves against accusations that a merger is anticompetitive. Efficiency
Defense equals -0.5 if firms can argue that the merger will enhance economic efficiency enough
to outweigh any anticompetitive effects. This enters negatively into the Merger Control index
because such a defense reduces regulatory control over mergers. Similarly, Failing Firm
Defense equals -0.5 if a country's competition law allows firms to justify anticompetitive
                                                                                                                  20


mergers when firms are failing and bankruptcy would eliminate the value of their assets. Finally,
Public Interest Defense equals -0.5 if a country's competition laws allow firms to defend

mergers based on the argument that the public interest benefits outweigh the anticompetitive
costs.


3.3 Abuse of Dominance
         Competition laws often limit the ability of a dominant firm to abuse its power and limit
competition. In a few countries, the law gives the authorities broad, general powers to prohibit
abusive conduct. In most countries, the law identifies specific behaviors that are considered
anticompetitive abuses of a dominant position. Bradford and Chilton (2018) compute an overall
index, Abuse of Dominance, that measures the extent to which competition laws limit the ability
of dominant firms to abuse their market positions in uncompetitive ways.
         Abuse of Dominance is the summation of eleven components. General Prohibition
equals two if the country's competition law gives the authorities broad, general powers to
prohibit abusive conduct. This type of blanket prohibition gives authorities discretion over what

constitutes abusive conduct by a dominant company, which is why Bradford and Chilton (2018)
give it a weight of two.9 The next eight components of Abuse of Dominance involve laws
prohibiting specific behaviors that are generally viewed as abusive when dominant firms

perform them. Market Access equals 0.25 if the country's competition law prohibits a firm
from limiting the supply of its goods or services to the market or restricting sales to downstream
purchasers or consumers. Tying equals 0.25 if the law prohibits conditioning the sale of a
product on the sale or acquisition of another product that is not directly connected. Discounts
equals 0.25 if the law prohibits a dominant firm from offering discounts that incentivize the
buyer to deal exclusively or predominantly with the dominant firm. Discriminatory Pricing
equals 0.25 if the law prohibits setting different prices for the same products for different

                                     
9We made one adjustment in constructing Abuse of Dominance. We redefined General Prohibition. In the original

version, General Prohibition equals two if the law prohibits the abuse of a dominant position, either generically
or by specifying actions that would constitute an impermissible abuse of a dominant position. We redefined
General Prohibition as equal to two if the law prohibits the abuse of a dominant position generically, and equal
to zero if the law enumerates any types of abusive action. Our results remain robust if we use the original definition
of General Prohibition.
                                                                                               21


customers. Unfair Pricing equals 0.25 if the law prohibits setting the product's price at a supra-
competitive level. Predatory Pricing equals 0.25 if the law prohibits setting prices below the

costs of production to eliminate competitors. Retail Price Maintenance equals 0.25 if the law
prohibits setting a minimum resale price at which retailers will ultimately sell their product to
consumers. Other Abusive Acts equals 0.25 if the law prohibits firms from engaging in acts--
other than those specified above--that abuse a firm's dominant position.
       The next two components of Abuse of Dominance incorporate information on the
degree to which firms can defend actions that would otherwise be classified as abusive actions.
Efficiency Defense (Dom.) equals -0.5 if firms can argue that the actions will enhance economic
efficiency enough to outweigh adverse effects from those abuse actions. This enters negatively
because such a defense reduces regulatory power over behaviors by a dominant firm. Similarly,
Public Interest Defense (Dom.) equals -0.5 if a country's competition laws allow dominant
firms to defend abusive behaviors based on the argument that the public interest benefits
outweigh the costs of those actions.


3.4 Anticompetitive Agreements

       Competition laws often limit the ability of firms to form cartels and collude in setting
prices, dividing-up markets, limiting supply, rigging bids, and engaging in other activities

designed to limit competition. The Anticompetitive Agreements index is designed to measure
the degree to which a country's competition laws prohibit firms from colluding--both
horizontally and vertically--to constrain competition.
       In particular, Anticompetitive Agreements is the summation of ten components. The
first four involve laws limiting horizontal agreements. Price Fixing, Market Sharing, Output
Limitations, and Bid Rigging each equals 0.5 if a country's competition laws limit firms from
colluding to (1) set market prices for a product, (2) divide the market along geographic,
demographic, price, or other dimensions, (3) limit the overall supply of products, and (4) bid
on products and contracts to obtain preferential prices, respectively. The next four components
of the Anticompetitive Agreements index focus on limiting vertical agreements. Exclusive
Dealing, Resale Price Maintenance, Tying, and Eliminate Competitors each equals 0.5 if a
                                                                                               22


country's laws prohibit firms from colluding to (1) not sell/buy their products to/from specific
companies or groups of companies, (2) set the price at which retailers will ultimately sell the

product to consumers, (3) condition contracts on buying additional products that are not
directly connected to the product that is the subject of the contract, and (4) engage in coercive
practices that eliminate competitors or make it very difficult for them to increase market share.
       Finally, as above, the last two components of Anticompetitive Agreements involve
defenses that firms can employ against accusations that they entered into anticompetitive
agreements. Efficiency Defense (Anti.) equals -0.5 if firms can defend anticompetitive
agreements by arguing that the economic efficiency gains outweigh the costs of those
agreements. Similarly, Public Interest Defense (Anti.) equals -0.5 if a country's competition
laws allow firms to defend anticompetitive actions by arguing that the public interest benefits
of those actions outweigh the costs.


3.5 Competitive Law Index (CLI)
       Following Bradford and Chilton (2018), we construct an overall Competition Law Index
from these four sub-indexes. Bradford and Chilton (2018) assign a weight of 50% to Authority
and a weight of 16.67% to each of the other three indexes: Merger Control, Abuse of
Dominance, and Anticompetitive Agreements. Since the exact weighting is arbitrary, we (1)
follow their weighting and (2) explore the relationship between innovation and each of the four
sub-indexes of the Competition Law Index, which addresses concerns with this particular
weighting.


3.6 Summary statistics on the Competition Law Index and Innovation
       To illustrate the broad relationship between the stringency of competition laws and
innovation, we plot the number of patents and citations against the Competition Law Index in
Figure 1. Each observations represents one country. The number of patents is defined as
average number of patents in a country over period 1990 ­ 2015, while the number of citations
is the average number of citations in a country over the period 1990 ­ 2015. In particular, we
first calculate the total number of patents (citations) in each country across all industries in a
                                                                                                23


year using data from PATSTAT. We then compute the average annual number of patents

(citations) for each country over the 1990 ­ 2015 period. As shown, there is a positive

correlation between the stringency of competition laws (as measured by the Competition Law
Index) and innovation (as measured by the number of patents and the impact of those patents).
Since many confounding factors could account for these patterns, we now provide firm-level
and then industry-country level analyses of the relationship between the Competition Law
Index and our patent-based innovation measures.



4. Firm-Level Results
4.1 Empirical Strategy
       To evaluate the relationship between national competition laws and firm innovation,
we begin with the following regression specification.


 !""#$%&'#"!,#,$ = )% + + × -#./0&'&'#"2%3!"405#,$ + 67!,#,$&' + 9! + 9()*,$ + :!,#,$ ,

                                                                                               (1)


where f, c, and t index firm, country, and year, respectively. The dependent variable,
Innovationf,c,t, represents one of the patent-based measures of innovation for firm f in country

c in year t defined in Section 2. The key explanatory variable, Competition Law Indexc,t denotes
the Competition Law Index in country c in year t. In robustness tests reported below, we
separately examine the sub-indexes of the Competition Law Index (Authority, Merger Control,
Abuse of Dominance, and Anticompetitive Agreements). X'f,c,t-1 denotes a set of one-year-lagged
time-varying firm characteristics (Firm size, Leverage, Profitability, and Age) and country
traits (GDP per capita, Credit/GDP, and Stock/GDP). We include firm (9! ) and industry-by-

year (9()*,$ ) fixed effects. In this way, our analyses account for all unobservable time-invariant

firm characteristics (and hence for time-invariant country effects) and time-varying industry
influences. The firm-level analyses cover the period from 1991 through 2015 for over 1.4
                                                                                                           24


million firm-year observations.10 We estimate Equation (1) using ordinary least squares (OLS)
and cluster the standard errors at the country level since competition laws are defined at the

country level.


4.2 Validity Test
        One potential challenge to drawing confident inferences about the influence of
competition laws on innovation is reverse causality: changes in innovation among firms in an
economy could trigger changes in its competition laws. As a first step toward addressing this
concern, we examine whether innovation predicts changes in competition laws using the
following regression equation.


       -#./0&'&'#"2%3!"405#,$ = )% + + × !""#$%&'#"#,$&' + 67+,,&- + 9# + 9$ + :#,$ ,

                                                                                                           (2)


where the Competition Law Index and X' are the same as in equation (1). Innovationc,t-1 is the

average value of one of the innovation measures across firms in country c in year t-1. We
include country (9# ) and year (9$ ) fixed effects to account for any unobservable time-invariant
country characteristics and time effects. We estimate Equation (2) using ordinary least square

(OLS), with standard errors clustered at the country level.
        As shown in Table 2, we find no evidence that innovation predicts changes in
competition laws. The lagged patent-based innovation measures enter the regressions with
estimated coefficients that are insignificantly different from zero. These findings are consistent
with the view that changes in firms' innovative activity do not drive changes in competition
laws, reducing reverse causality concerns.




                                   
10
  The Competition Law Index is available until 2010. Given that the Competition Law Index is relatively stable
within a country, we use the value of 2010 for the period of 2011 ­ 2015. Our findings hold when using a sample
period from 1991 to 2010.
                                                                                                25


4.3 Firm Innovation
       Table 3 presents our initial examination of the relationship between national

competition laws and firm innovation. The dependent variable, Patent Count, is a simple
measure of the number of eventually-granted patents filed by a firm in a given year. The main
explanatory variable, Competition Law Index, gauges the overall stringency of a country's
competition laws.
       As shown, the Competition Law Index enters positively and significantly in all
specifications. The results are robust to conditioning on firm and year fixed effects (column 1)
or firm and industry-year fixed effects (column 2). The results also hold when limiting the
sample to manufacturing firms (column 3), which Moshirian et al. (2019) find are the most
innovative industries. The estimated coefficients are similar in magnitude across each
specification.
       The estimated coefficients on Competition Law Index suggest an economically
meaningful relationship between competition laws and firm-level innovation as measured by
Patent Count. For example, the estimates from column 2 indicate that a one standard deviation

increase in the Competition Law Index would increase the number of patents by about 4%
(=0.1638*0.242).
       We next examine the connections between competition laws and firm-level measures

of patent quality. That is, we move beyond simply measuring the quantity of patents (Patent
Count) and measure the impact of a firm's patents using five citation-based indicators: (1) the
total number of forward citations received by a firm's eventually granted patents (Citation), (2)
the average number ofcitations per patent (Cit/Pat), (3) the total number of patents that have
received at least one citation (Cited Patent), (4) the total number of patents whose citations fall
in the top quartile of the citation distributions (Top Cited Patent), and (5) the number of
explorative patents (Explorative Patent).
       The estimation results reported in Table 4 suggest that with stricter competition laws,
firms produce higher impact and more explorative patents. Firms operating in countries that
have more intensive competition laws tend to produce patents with greater impact as measured
by the total number of citations (Citation), the average number of citations per patent (Cit/Pat),
                                                                                               26


and the number of high impact patents (Top Cited Patent). For example, the coefficient
estimates from columns 1, 2 and 4 indicate that if the Competition Law Index increases by one

standard deviation, Citation would rise by 11% (=0.443*0.242), Cit/Pat would rise by 7%
(=0.2735*0.242), and Top Cited Patent would rise by 2% (=0.087*0.242). Furthermore, the
Competition Law Index is positively associated with the extent to which patents are ever cited.
The coefficient estimate in column 3 indicates that a one-standard-deviation increase in a
country's Competition Law Index will raise the number of patents that are ever cited (Cited
Patent) by 4% (=0.1751*0.242). Also note positive connection between Competition Law
Index and the extent to which firms engage in explorative innovation, as measured by
Explorative Patent. In particular, the estimated coefficients in column 5 suggest that a one
standard deviation increase in Competition Law Index will increase Explorative Patent by 3%
(=0.1303*0.242).


4.4 Acquisition of Innovation
       Firms can obtain patents both by creating them in-house and acquiring them from others.

One unique feature of our database is that it contains information on patent transactions
worldwide. We use these data to explore the relationship between the stringency of competition
laws and (1) firms' acquisition of patents, (2) the relative degree to which firms obtain patents

by acquiring them or developing them in-house, and (3) the types of innovations acquired from
other firms. More specifically, we evaluate the effect of the Competition Law Index on (a) the
acquisition of patents, (b) the ratio of acquired to self-developed patents, and (c) the extent to
which firms acquire more explorative patents and patents from different industries.
       We begin in Table 5 by examining the relationship between the stringency of
competition laws and the acquisition of patents. As shown in column (1), greater values of
Competition Law Index are associated with (a) a significant increase in both the total number
of patents acquired (Patent Acquired). The results are consistent with the view that more
stringent competition laws spur firms to acquire more patents.
       We next focus on the ratio of acquired to self-developed patents. As shown in column
(2) of Table 5, we discover that more stringent competition laws reduce the ratio of acquired
                                                                                                 27


to self-generated innovation. While increases in the Competition Law Index boost (a) the
acquisition of patents (columns 1) and (b) the in-house development of patents (Tables 3 and

4), more stringent competition laws disproportionately boost the rate of in-house innovation.
As shown, Competition Law Index enters negatively and significantly when the dependent
variable is Patent Acquired Ratio. This evidence suggests that, as competition intensifies, firms
choose to do relatively more in-house technological development, reducing their comparative
reliance on other firms for innovation. This shift could reflect increased difficulties in acquiring
or leasing technologies from rival firms as competition intensifies.
       Finally, we turn to the impact of competition laws on the types of innovations that firms
acquire from other firms. In particular, we examine Explorative Patent Acquired Ratio, which
gauges the ratio of acquired explorative patents to acquired exploitative patents, and Intra-
industry Patent Acquired Ratio measures the extent to which firms make intra-industry versus
inter-industry patent acquisitions. These two measures allow us to shed empirical light on
whether the nature of patent acquisitions changes when competition laws change. Columns (3)
and (4) of Table 4 show that a higher Competition Law Index is associated with a significant

increase in Explorative Patent Acquired Ratio and a significant decrease in Intra-industry
Patent Acquired Ratio: more stringent competition laws are associated with firms acquiring
more explorative (relative to exploitative) patents and acquiring a higher ratio of patents from

other industries relative to intra-industry acquisitions. Taken together, the evidence suggests
that intensified competition creates an impediment to using technologies developed by
industrial peers, encouraging more explorative patents and more inter-industry patent
acquisitions.


4.5 Robustness
       We were concerned that changes in a country's competition laws could happen
simultaneously with changes in other laws, regulations, and policies. By omitting these other
variables from the analyses, we might be misinterpreting the results above as reflecting the
impact of competition laws on innovation when the results are driven by these omitted factors.
We address this omitted variable concern in two key ways. We now discuss a control function
                                                                                                 28


approach. Below, we differentiate across industries so that we can include country-year fixed
effects.

           For the control function approach, we condition on three policy indicators: Financial
Reform Index, PR & Legal Index, and Patent Law. Financial Reform Index is an aggregate
index of the degree to which a country's laws and regulations foster competition, the setting of
market prices, private ownership, and liberalization more generally in the financial sector. This
index, which was developed by Abiad, Detragiache, and Tressel (2010), includes information
on credit controls, interest rate controls, capital controls, entry barriers, bank privatization, and
the regulation of banks and securities markets and the extent of liberalization of the financial
market. The Financial Reform Index ranges from 0 to 27, with higher values indicating fewer
restrictions on a country's financial markets. PR & Legal Index is a measure of the overall
strength of a country's system for protecting private property rights and fostering the rule of
law and the effective enforcement of contracts. The PR & Legal Index was created by Gwartney,
Lawson, and Hall (2015) for the Fraser Institute and includes information on (a) protecting
private property rights and effectively enforcing contracts, (b) judicial independence,

impartiality, and integrity, as well as the reliability of the police and military influence over the
rule of law, (c) regulatory restrictions on the sale of real property, and (d) cost of crime to
businesses. The index ranges from 0 (weakest) to 10 (strongest). Patent Law is an indicator

that equals one in the years after a country enacts its first patent law, and zero otherwise. We
obtain Patent Law from World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) Lex Database.
Appendix A provides detailed definitions for these variables.
           As shown in Table 6, the results are robust to conditioning on these additional policy
reform indicators. Competition Law Index continues to enter positively and significantly in
regressions where the dependent variable is (1) the quantity (Patent Count) or patents, (2) the
quality of patents as measured by either Citation or Top Cited Patent, or (3) the explorative
nature of patents as measured by Explorative Patent. In addition, the coefficient estimate on
the Competition Law Index score is negative and statistically significant in the regression of
Patent Acquired Ratio, suggesting that competition law stringency boosts the intensity of self-
developed patents more than patent acquisition. The economic magnitudes of the coefficients
                                                                                             29


become slightly smaller than those from the baseline results but remain statistically and
economically significant, and most of the coefficient estimates are within one standard

deviation of those reported in Tables 3-5 and all are well within two standard deviations. These
results mitigate concerns that the association between the competition law and innovative
activities is driven by simultaneous changes of other policies.


4.6 The Sub-Components of the Competition Law Index
       So far we have examined an overall index of competition laws, the Competition Law
Index, which is composed of data on (1) authority, (2) laws limiting mergers, (3) laws
prohibiting anticompetitive agreements among firms, and (4) laws limiting the ability of firms
to abuse their dominant positions in a market to restrict competition. We now separately
examine the association between firm innovation and each of the sub-indexes of Competition
Law Index: Authority, Merger Control, Abuse of Dominance and Anticompetitive Agreements.
Table 7 presents the results.
       As shown in Panel A and B, the findings on the overall index of competition laws also

hold for the individual sub-indexes Authority, Merger Control, and Anticompetitive
Agreements. Each of these sub-indexes enters positively and significantly in the regressions
where the dependent variable is Patent Count, Citation, Top Cited Patent, or Explorative

Patent, and they enter negatively in the regression where the dependent variable is the Patent
Acquired Ratio. These results are consistent with the view that competition laws that (a) grant
greater authority to the antitrust regime, (b) contain a broader range of provisions regulating
mergers, and (c) more stringently limit horizontal and vertical agreements between companies
foster technological innovation and increase self-developed patents relative to the acquisition
of patents from others.
       Since the results in Panels A-B of Table 7 also demonstrate that the sub-index, Abuse
of Dominance, enters insignificantly across all of the five regressions, we dig deeper into the
components of Abuse of Dominance to explore the reasons underlying the findings on Abuse
of Dominance. As constructed by Bradford and Chilton (2018), Abuse of Dominance is
composed of (1) Prohibition (Dom.), which accounts for the extent to which laws prohibit a
                                                                                              30


firm from abusing its dominant market position (i.e., it is the summation of General Prohibition,
Market Access, Tying, Discounts, Discriminatory Pricing, Unfair Pricing, Predatory Pricing,

Retail Price Maintenance, Other Abusive Acts), (2) Efficiency Defense (Dom.), which measures
whether firms can argue that the economic efficiency benefits from abusive actions dominate
the anticompetitive costs of those actions, and (3) Public Interest Defense (Dom.), which
measures whether firms can argue that the public interest benefits of abusive actions outweigh
the adverse anticompetitive effects.
       Dividing Abuse of Dominance into its components highlights a potential explanation
for why the overall Abuse of Dominance index is not strongly correlated with innovation:
exploiting the dominant position created by a patent might be one mechanism that firms use to
maximize the returns from innovation, so that limiting such "abuse" could reduce investment
in innovation and hence future patenting. From the perspective of maximizing patent-based
innovation, therefore, a legal system that allows firms to exploit their dominant positions based
on efficiency considerations could boost innovation. Thus, in Panels C and D of Table 7, we
examine the association between the sub-components of Abuse of Dominance (namely

Prohibition (Dom.), Efficiency Defense (Dom.), and Public Interest Defense (Dom.)) and firm-
level measures of innovation.
       Consistent with the view that allowing firms to exploit their positions of dominance for

economic efficiency reasons boosts innovation, we find that Efficiency Defense (Dom.) enters
positively and significantly at the 1% level in the regressions of Patent, Citation, Top Cited
Patent and Explorative Patent, and negatively and significantly in the regression of Patent
Acquired Ratio. These findings suggest that the presence of an efficiency defense for actions
that would otherwise be classified as abusive enhances corporate inventive activities.


4.7 Cross-Industry Heterogeneity
       We next differentiate firms by whether they are in more or less "innovative-intensive"
industries. As in Levine, Lin, and Wei (2017), and other cross-firm studies of innovation, we
conjecture that if more stringent competition laws spur innovation, the effects should be
stronger among firms in more innovative-intensive industries. To measure innovative-intensive,
                                                                                                         31


we use the Eurostat definition of high-technology industries: (a) basic pharmaceutical products
and pharmaceutical preparation and (b) computer, electronics, and optical products. 11 We then

define High-tech as a dummy variable that equals one if a firm belongs to a high-technology
industry and zero otherwise.
        We evaluate whether more stringent competition laws spur innovation more among
firms in innovative intensive industries by modifying equation (1) and including interaction
between the Competition Law Index and High-tech. In particular, we use the following
specification that allows us condition out time-varying country factors, including laws, policies,
and regulations.


 !""#$%&'#"!,#,$ = )% + + × -#./0&'&'#"2%3!"405#,$ × ;'<>0?. + 67!,#,$&' + 9! +
                                                                                9.,$ + 9#,$ + :!,#,$ , (3)



where f, j, c, and t index firm, industry, country, and year, respectively. High Techj denotes the
indicator of whether firm f in industry j belongs to a high-technology industry. Other variables

have the same definition as in Equation (1) above. The coefficient of interest, + , captures the
differential impact of the Competition Law Index on firms in innovative-intensive industries.
In addition to firm (9! ) and industry-by-year (9()*,$ ) fixed effects, we include country-by-year

fixed effects (9#,$ ), which conditions out time-varying country characteristics. Note that these

fixed effects subsume the linear terms, i.e., Competition Law Index and High Tech. We estimate
Equation (3) using OLS regression and cluster the standard errors at the country level.
        Consistent with the view that more stringent competition laws spur innovation more
among firms in more innovative-intensive industries, we find that the interaction term,
Competition Law Index * High-Tech, enters positively and significantly at the 1% level when
the dependent variable is either Patent Count, Citation, or Top Cited Patent, or Explorative
Patent, as reported in Table 8 (columns 1 ­ 3). We also find that the Competition Law Index
has an especially large, positive effect on the degree to which firms engage in explorative

                                 
11
     The classification of high-tech and knowledge intensive              industries   is   available    at:
https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/cache/metadata/Annexes/htec_esms_an3.pdf.
                                                                                                                   32


innovations (Explorative Patent) and an especially large, negative impact on the extent to
which firms acquire rather than create patents in-house (Patent Acquired Ratio). These cross-

firm analyses allow us to condition out time-varying country characteristics, confirm the results
in Tables 3-6, and hence mitigate omitted variable concerns.


5. Country-Industry-Level Results
           We complement these firm-level analyses with an industry-country level investigation.
The industry-country level investigation covers a much longer period, 1888 (the first year that
the Competition Law Index is available) through 2015 and includes a cross-section of 186
countries. In particular, we estimate the following regression:


          !""#$%&'#".,#,$ = )% + + × -#./0&'&'#"2%3!"405#,$ × ;'<>0?. + 9#,. + 9.,$ +
                                                                                                9#,$ + :.,#,$ ,   (4)



where j, c, and t denote industry (2-digit SIC), country, and year, respectively. The dependent

variable, Innovationj, c, t, is one of the patent-based measures of innovation of industry j in
country c in year t defined in Section 2. The key explanatory variable is the interaction between
the Competition Law Indexc,t and High Techj, where High Techj represents the indicator of

whether industry j is classified as a high-technology industry or not. For each industry at the
two-digit SIC level, we define high-tech industries using the average growth rate of R&D
expenditures of U.S. firms over the period from 1950 through 2010 (see, e.g., Hsu et al., 2014;
Levine et al., 2017). High-tech equals one if the average growth rate is greater than the sample
median value and zero otherwise.12 We include the full array of possible fixed effects for this
level of analysis: country-by-industry (9#,. ), industry-by-year (9.,$ ), and country-by-year (9#,$ )




                                       
12
     We use a different definition of High-tech industries in the firm-level and country-industry level data for the
following reason. The industry code in the Orbis firm-level data is NACE, and Eurostat defines industries as
high-tech based on NACE. In contrast, the country-industry data are from PATSTAT, which defines industries
using the SIC coding. 
                                                                                               33


fixed effects. We estimate the model using the OLS regression and cluster the standard errors
at the country level.

       The estimation results at the country-industry-year level reported in Table 9 confirm
our earlier findings based on firm-level measures of innovation. The coefficient estimates on
the interaction term, Competition Law Index * High-Tech, are positive and statistically
significant in all columns, suggesting that the positive relationship between stricter competition
laws and innovation are particularly strong among innovation-intensive industries. The
differential effects are economically meaningful. The estimated coefficients in column 1, for
example, imply that a one-standard-deviation increase in a country's Competition Law Index
would raise the number of patents among firms in the high-technology group by almost 4
percentage points more than that of the low-technology group (=0.1593*0.242).


6. Conclusion
       We examined the impact of competition laws on innovation. To conduct this study, we
(1) used a new, comprehensive dataset on competition laws, (2) created a large, international

firm-level panel dataset with detailed information on patenting activity and financial accounts,
and (3) assembled novel data on firms' acquisition of patents from other firms. These unique
data allow us to evaluate the impact of different competition laws on a multiplicity of firm-

level patenting activities, including the number of patents, the impact of those patents as
measured by forward citations, the explorative nature of those patents, the acquisition of patents,
and the relative importance of self-developed and acquired patents.
       We discovered a tight connection between competition laws and firm innovation. First,
more stringent competition laws are associated with sharp increases in firm innovation, as
measured by the number of patents, forward citations to patents, citations per patent, the
number of very highly cited patents, and the number of explorative patents. Second, more
stringent competition is also tightly linked with the firms' acquisition of patents from other
firms. Specifically, we find that competition law stringency is associated with significant
increases in (a) the total number of patents acquired, the citation-impact of those patents, and
the explorative nature of those acquired patents and (b) the ratio of self-generated to acquired
                                                                                             34


patents, competition law stringency disproportionately boosts the rate of self-developed patents.
These results are robust to several robustness tests and extensions. For example, we confirm

that these results hold when (a) differentiating by firms so that we can condition on country-
year effects to mitigate omitted variable concerns, (b) examining the sub-component of the
overall competition law stringency index, and (c) employing an industry-country panel that
covers the period from 1888 through 2015 and includes 186 countries.


Ross Levine, University of California, Berkeley
Chen Lin, University of Hong Kong
Lai Wei, Lingnan University
Wensi Xie, Chinese University of Hong Kong
                                                                                             35

References

Abiad, A., Detragiache, E., Tressel, T., 2010. A new database of financial reforms. IMF Staff
       Papers 57, 281-302.

Aghion, P., Bloom, N., Blundell, R., Griffith, R., Howitt, P., 2005. Competition and innovation:
      An inverted-u relationship. Quarterly Journal of Economics 120, 701-728.

Aghion, P., Blundell, R., Griffith, R., Howitt, P., Prantl, S., 2009. The effects of entry on
      incumbent innovation and productivity. Review of Economics and Statistics 91, 20-32.

Aghion, P., Howitt, P., 1992. A model of growth through creative destruction. Econometrica
      60, 323-351.

Arrow, K., 1962. Economic welfare and the allocation of resources to invention. In: The
      Universities-National Bureau Committee for Economic Research and the Committee
      on Economic Growth of the Social Science Research Councils (ed.) The rate and
      direction of inventive activity: Economic and social factors. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
      University Press, pp. 609-626.

Balsmeier, B., Fleming, L., Manso, G., 2017. Independent boards and innovation. Journal of
      Financial Economics 123, 536-557.

Blundell, R., Griffith, R., van Reenen, J., 1999. Market share, market value and innovation in
      a panel of British manufacturing firms. Review of Economic Studies 66, 529-554.

Bradford, A., Chilton, A.S., 2018. Competition law around the world from 1889 to 2010: The
       competition law index. Journal of Competition Law & Economics 14, 393-432.

Bradford, A., Chilton, A.S., Megaw, C., Sokol, N., 2019. Competition law gone global:
       Introducing the comparative competition law and enforcement datasets. Journal of
       Empirical Legal Studies 16, 411-443.

Brown, J.R., Martinsson, G., Petersen, B.C., 2013. Law, stock markets, and innovation. Journal
      of Finance 68, 1517-1549.

Brown, J.R., Martinsson, G., 2019. Does transparency stifle or facilitate innovation?
      Management Science 65, 1600-1623.

Chang, X., Chen, Y., Wang, S.Q., Zhang, K., Zhang, W., 2019. Credit default swaps and
      corporate innovation. Journal of Financial Economics 134, 474-500.

Chang, X., Fu, K., Low, A., Zhang, W., 2015. Non-executive employee stock options and
      corporate innovation. Journal of Financial Economics 115, 168-188.

Cohen, W.M., 2010. Fifty years of empirical studies of innovative activity and performance.
      In: Hall BH & Rosenberg N (eds.) Handbook of the Economics of Innovation. North-
      Holland, pp. 129-213.

Djankov, S., La Porta, R., Lopez-De-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., 2002. The regulation of entry.
      Quarterly Journal of Economics 117, 1-37.
                                                                                              36

Ellul, A., Pagano, M., Panunzi, F., 2010. Inheritance law and investment in family firms.
        American Economic Review 100, 2414-2450.

Gilbert, R., 2006. Looking for Mr. Schumpeter: Where are we in the competition-innovation
        debate? Innovation Policy and the Economy 6, 159-215.

Giroud, X., Mueller, H.M., 2011. Corporate governance, product market competition, and
       equity prices. Journal of Finance 66, 563-600.

Griliches, Z., Pakes, A., Hall, B.H., 1987. The value of patents as indicators of inventive
       activity. In: Dasgupta P & Stoneman P (eds.) Economic policy and technical
       performance. Cambridge University Press, London, pp. 97-124.

Gwartney, J., Lawson, R., Hall , J., 2015. Economic freedom of the world: 2015 annual report.
      Vancouver: Fraser Institute.

Hall, B.H., Jaffe, A., Trajtenberg, M., 2005. Market value and patent citations. RAND Journal
       of Economics, 16-38.

Hall, B.H., Jaffe, A.B., Trajtenberg, M., 2001. The NBER patent citation data file: Lessons,
       insights and methodological tools. National Bureau of Economic Research.

Hashmi, A.R., 2013. Competition and innovation: The inverted-U relationship revisited.
      Review of Economics and Statistics 95, 1653-1668.

Jansen, J.J.P., Bosch, F.A.J.V.D., Volberda, H.W., 2006. Exploratory innovation, exploitative
       innovation, and performance: Effects of organizational antecedents and environmental
       moderators. Management Science 52, 1661-1674.

He, J., Tian, X., 2020. Institutions and innovation: A review of recent literature. Annual Review
        of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Hsu, P.H., Tian, X., Xu, Y., 2014. Financial development and innovation: Cross-country
       evidence. Journal of Financial Economics 112, 116-135.

La Porta, R., LopezDeSilanes, F., Shleifer, A., Vishny, Robert W., 1998. Law and finance.
       Journal of Political Economy 106, 1113-1155.

La Porta, R., Lopez-De-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., 2008. The economic consequences of legal
       origins. Journal of Economic Literature 46, 285-332.

Levine, R., Lin, C., Wei, L., 2017. Insider trading and innovation. Journal of Law and
       Economics 60, 749-800.

Lin, C., Manso, G., Liu, S., 2020. Shareholder litigation and corporate innovation. Management
        Science, forthcoming.

Manso, G., 2011. Motivating innovation. Journal of Finance 66, 1823-1860.

Moshirian, F., Tian, X., Zhang, B., Zhang, W., 2019. Stock market liberalization and
      innovation. Journal of Financial Economics, Forthcoming.
                                                                                          37

Nickell, S.J., 1996. Competition and corporate performance. Journal of Political Economy 104,
       724-746.

Romer, P.M., 1990. Endogenous technological change. Journal of Political Economy, 98(5,
      Part 2), pp.S71-S102.

Schumpeter, J.A., 1942. Capitalism, socialism, and democracy. New York: Harper & Brothers.

Shapiro, C., 2012. Competition and innovation: Did arrow hit the bull's eye? In: Lerner J &
       Stern S (eds.) The rate and direction of inventive activity revisited. University of
       Chicago Press, pp. 361-404.

Sutton, J., 2007. Market structure: Theory and evidence. In: Armstrong M & Porter R (eds.)
       Handbook of industrial organization. Elsevier, pp. 2301-2368.
                                                                                                                                          38

                                   Figure 1. Cross-country innovation and CLI, 1990 ­ 2015
                                   These figures plot (a) the average annual number of patents filed by entities from each country and (b)
                                   the average annual number of forward citations to patents filed by entities from each country against
                                   the average value of the Competition Law Index. The averaging is done over the years from 1990
                                   through 2015. That is, we first calculate the total number of patents (citations) in each country in a year
                                   and then compute the average number of patents (citations) for each country over 1990 ­ 2015. Each
                                   dot represents one country.
                                   (a1) # of Patents
                                       10
      Ln(#patents),avg 1990-2015



                                       8
                                       6
                                       4
                                       2
                                       0




                                            0           .2             .4             .6          .8        1
                                                             Competition Law Index, avg 1990-2015

                                                              Ln(#patents)           fitted values




                                   (b1) # of Citations
                                       15
Ln(#citations),avg 1990-2015



                                       10
                                       5
                                       0




                                            0           .2             .4             .6          .8         1
                                                             Competition Law Index, avg 1990-2015

                                                              Ln(#citations)           fitted values
                                                                                                                 39

                                        Table 1 Summary Statistics
This table presents the summary statistics of the variables used in our analysis. Statistics for firm-level variables
are calculated based on the firm-level sample during 1991-2015; statistics for country-level and country-industry-
level variables are based on the broadest country-industry level sample from 1888 to 2015.

Variable                            N                       Mean      Std. Dev.      P10         P50        P90
Innovation Measures
Firm Level (log)
Patent Count                        1410369                 0.2010     0.5598         0           0        0.6931
Citation                            1410369                 0.3405     1.1290         0           0         1.152
Cit/Pat                             1410369                 0.2487     0.8042         0           0        0.8513
Cited Patent                        1410369                 0.1160     0.4244         0           0        0.6931
Top Cited Patent                    1410369                 0.0490     0.2744         0           0           0
Explorative Patent                  1410369                 0.1148     0.3828         0           0           0
Patent Acquired                     1410369                 0.0180     0.1828         0           0           0
Patent Acquired Ratio               1410369                -0.1830     0.5345      -0.6931        0           0
Explorative Patent Acquired Ratio   1410369                 0.0091     0.1334         0           0           0
Intra-industryPatent Acquired Ratio 1410369                -0.0097     0.1428         0           0           0
Firm Level (non-log)
Patent Count                        1410369                1.344        34.2          0           0          1
Citation                            1410369                30.340       1296          0           0        2.165
Cit/Pat                             1410369                2.217       25.280         0           0        1.343
Cited Patent                        1410369                0.682       21.610         0           0          1
Top Cited Patent                    1410369                0.229        7.628         0           0          0
Explorative Patent                  1410369                0.267        1.055         0           0          0
Patent Acquired                     1410369                0.109        5.284         0           0          0
Firm characteristics
Firm Size                           1410369                8.7550      2.3500   5.855   8.709               11.79
Leverage                            1410369                0.1685      0.2343     0    0.0807              0.4565
Profitability                       1410369                0.0367      0.2129 -0.08961 0.04196             0.2056
Age                                 1410369                2.6540      0.9828   1.386   2.708               3.892
Country-Industry Level (log)
Patent-Ind                          509727                 0.3990      0.9200         0           0        1.5834
Citation-Ind                        509727                 0.6577      1.4651         0           0        2.8779
Top Cited Patent-Ind                509727                 0.1489      0.4363         0           0        0.4266
Explorative Patent-Ind              423062                 0.3281      0.7956         0           0        1.2368
Country-Industry Level (non-log)
Patent-Ind                          509727                  2.4965 8.4534             0           0       3.8717
Citation-Ind                        509727                 15.9127 58.1251            0           0       16.7760
Top Cited Patent-Ind                509727                  0.3568 1.2314             0           0       0.5320
Explorative Patent-Ind              423062                  1.6425 5.7977             0           0       2.4447
CLI score and other country characteristics
Competition Law Index               927                    0.6151       0.242      0.2212      0.6538       0.875
Authority                           927                    0.6407      0.2528      0.2857      0.6429      0.9286
Merger Control                      927                    0.5736      0.2895      0.125       0.625        0.875
Abuse of Dominance                  927                    0.6492      0.2478      0.3636      0.7273      0.9091
Anticompetitive Agreements          927                    0.578       0.2439        0.3         0.6         0.9
                                                           40

GDP per capita   927   9.659   1.138   8.011   9.978   10.82
Credit/GDP       927   105.2   63.84   38.9     96.1    179
Stock/GDP        927   66.06   56.71   14.4     48.4    143
                                                                                                              41

                      Table 2 Competition Law and Preexisting Innovation
This table reports the connection between pre-existing measures of innovation and the competition law index. The
dependent variable, Competition Law Index, measures the overall stringency of a country's competition laws. The
key explanatory variables are one-year-lagged measures of innovation, Patent Count, Citation, Top Cited Patent,
Explorative Patent, and Patent Acquired Ratio, averaged across each country. Country controls include GDP per
capita, Credit/GDP and Stock/GDP. We include country and year fixed effects. Robust standard errors clustered
at the country level are reported in parentheses. ***, **, * denote significance levels at 1%, 5% and 10%
respectively.

 Dependent Var.                                                 Competition Law Index
                                                (1)           (2)        (3)        (4)                (5)
 Patent Count                                 0.0211
                                              (0.038)
 Citation                                                   0.0099
                                                            (0.011)
 Top Cited Patent                                                         0.0467
                                                                          (0.075)
 Explorative Patent                                                                    0.0271
                                                                                       (0.041)
 Patent Acquired Ratio                                                                              -0.0122
                                                                                                    (0.024)
 GDP per capita                                0.1128        0.1176       0.1150       0.1143       0.1172
                                              (0.106)       (0.109)      (0.110)       (0.107)      (0.110)
 Credit/GDP                                   -0.0005       -0.0005      -0.0005       -0.0005      -0.0005
                                              (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)
 Stock/GDP                                     0.0003        0.0003       0.0003       0.0003       0.0003
                                              (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)
 Country FE                                       Y             Y            Y            Y            Y
 Year FE                                          Y             Y            Y            Y            Y
 Observations                                  1,042         1,042        1,042         1,042        1,042
 Adjusted R-squared                            0.854         0.855        0.855         0.855        0.854
                                                                                                                 42

                        Table 3 Competition Law and Innovation Intensity
This table presents the effect of competition law on innovation intensity measured at the firm level based on
different fixed effects, classifications and time period. The dependent variable, Patent is the measure of innovation
intensity using the natural logarithm of one plus the total number of (eventually granted) patents filed by a firm
in a given year. Column 3 is based on firms from manufacture industry. The key explanatory variable, Competition
Law Index, measures the overall stringency of a country's competition laws. Firm-level controls include Firm Size,
Leverage, Profitability and Age. Country controls include GDP per capita, Credit/GDP and Stock/GDP. We
include firm and industry-by-year fixed effects. Robust standard errors clustered at the country level are reported
in parenthesis. ***, **, * denote significance levels at 1%, 5% and 10% respectively.

 Dependent Var                                                       Patent Count
                                                                                      Manufacturing industries
                                      (1)                     (2)                     (3)
 Competition Law Index                0.1549***               0.1638***               0.1645***
                                      (0.038)                 (0.035)                 (0.039)
 Firm Size                            0.0337***               0.0337***               0.0454***
                                      (0.006)                 (0.006)                 (0.008)
 Leverage                             -0.0094                 -0.0098                 -0.0091
                                      (0.010)                 (0.009)                 (0.017)
 Profitability                        0.0093                  0.0100                  0.0251
                                      (0.011)                 (0.011)                 (0.016)
 Age                                  -0.0040                 -0.0058                 -0.0037
                                      (0.012)                 (0.011)                 (0.019)
 GDP per capita                       0.4150***               0.4058***               0.3907***
                                      (0.073)                 (0.062)                 (0.063)
 Credit/GDP                           -0.0005                 -0.0004                 -0.0007
                                      (0.000)                 (0.000)                 (0.001)
 Stock/GDP                            -0.0002                 -0.0003                 -0.0003
                                      (0.000)                 (0.000)                 (0.000)
 Firm FE                              Y                       Y                       Y
 Year FE                              Y                       N                       N
 Industry-Year FE                     N                       Y                       Y
 Observations                         1,410,369               1,410,369               793,271
 Adjusted R-squared                   0.621                   0.622                   0.624
                                                                                                                    43



                          Table 4 Competition Law and Innovation Quality
This table presents the effect of competition law on innovation quality measured at the firm level. The dependent
variables include Citation, Cit/Pat, Cited Patent, Top Cited Patent, and Explorative Patent. Citation is the natural
logarithm of one plus the total number of truncation-adjusted forward citations made to patents filed by a firm in
a given year. Cit/Pat is the natural logarithm of one plus the number of truncation-adjusted forward citations per
patent filed by a firm in a given year. Cited Patent is the natural logarithm of one plus the total number of patents
with at least one citation, which are filed by a firm in a given year. Top Cited Patent is the natural logarithm of
one plus the total number of patents at firm-year level whose citations fall in the top 25% of citation distribution
across all patents in the same technology class in the same year. Explorative Patent is the natural logarithm of one
plus the total number of (eventually granted) explorative patents filed by a firm in a given year. A patent is defined
as explorative if at least 60% of the citations it refers are not from its existing knowledge, which includes all the
patents that the firm produced and all the patents that were cited by the firm's patents filed over the past five years.
The key explanatory variable, Competition Law Index, measures the overall stringency of a country's competition
laws. Firm-level controls include Firm Size, Leverage, Profitability and Age. Country controls include GDP per
capita, Credit/GDP and Stock/GDP. We include firm and industry-by-year fixed effects. Robust standard errors
clustered at the country level are reported in parentheses. ***, **, * denote significance levels at 1%, 5% and 10%
respectively.

                                                                                     Top Cited         Explorative
                                Citation          Cit/Pat           Cited Patent
Dependent Var                                                                        Patent            Patent
                                (1)               (2)               (3)              (4)               (5)
Competition Law Index           0.4430***         0.2735***         0.1751***        0.0870***         0.1303***
                                (0.073)           (0.052)           (0.038)          (0.016)           (0.036)
Firm Size                       0.0497***         0.0328***         0.0180***        0.0085***         0.0236***
                                (0.007)           (0.004)           (0.003)          (0.001)           (0.005)
Leverage                        -0.0201           -0.0144           -0.0061          -0.0029           -0.0052
                                (0.013)           (0.010)           (0.004)          (0.003)           (0.008)
Profitability                   0.0034            0.0015            0.0036           -0.0026           0.0002
                                (0.022)           (0.016)           (0.009)          (0.003)           (0.004)
Age                             -0.0116           -0.0113           0.0057           0.0000            0.0048
                                (0.016)           (0.009)           (0.007)          (0.004)           (0.011)
Country Control                 Y                 Y                 Y                Y                 Y
Firm FE                         Y                 Y                 Y                Y                 Y
Industry-Year FE                Y                 Y                 Y                Y                 Y
Observations                    1,410,369         1,410,369         1,410,369        1,410,369         1,410,369
Adjusted R-squared              0.498             0.341             0.603            0.636             0.549
                                                                                                                44



                         Table 5 Competition Law and Patent Acquisition
This table presents the connections between competition laws and firm-level measures of patent acquisition. We
use eight patent acquisition measures, Patent Acquired, Patent Acquired Ratio, Explorative Patent Acquired Ratio,
and Intra-industry Patent Acquired Ratio. The key explanatory variable, Competition Law Index, measures the
overall stringency of a country's competition laws. Firm-level controls include Firm Size, Leverage, Profitability
and Age. Country controls include GDP per capita, Credit/GDP and Stock/GDP. We include firm and industry-
by-year fixed effects. Robust standard errors clustered at the country level are reported in parentheses. ***, **, *
denote significance levels at 1%, 5% and 10% respectively.

                                                        Patent              Explorative         Intra-industry
                                     Patent
Dependent Var                                           Acquired            Patent Acquired     Patent Acquired
                                     Acquired
                                                        Ratio               Ratio               Ratio
                                     (1)                (2)                 (3)                 (4)
Competition Law Index                0.0337***          -0.1301***          0.0126***           -0.0203***
                                     (0.006)            (0.032)             (0.004)             (0.005)
Firm Size                            0.0054***          -0.0284***          0.0031***           -0.0024***
                                     (0.001)            (0.006)             (0.001)             (0.001)
Leverage                             0.0017             0.0115              0.0011              -0.0026**
                                     (0.001)            (0.008)             (0.001)             (0.001)
Profitability                        -0.0029*           -0.0129             -0.0017             0.0026**
                                     (0.002)            (0.010)             (0.001)             (0.001)
Age                                  -0.0092***         -0.0034             -0.0053***          0.0042**
                                     (0.003)            (0.014)             (0.002)             (0.002)
Country Control                      Y                  Y                   Y                   Y
Firm FE                              Y                  Y                   Y                   Y
Industry-Year FE                     Y                  Y                   Y                   Y
Observations                         1,410,369          1,410,369           1,410,369           1,410,369
Adjusted R-squared                   0.399              0.535               0.205               0.227
                                                                                                              45



           Table 6 Competition Law and Innovation: Robustness to Policy Reform
This table shows the effect of competition law on innovation conditional on a series of other policy reforms. We
include Financial Reform Index, which measures the overall financial liberalization, PR & Legal Index, which
measures the overall strength of legal system and property rights protection, and Patent Law, which equals to one
in the years after a country enacts its first patent law, and equals zero otherwise. We focus on five firm-level
measures of innovation, namely Patent Count, Citation, Top Cited Patent, Explorative Patent and Patent Acquired
Ratio. The key explanatory variable, Competition Law Index, measures the overall stringency of a country's
competition laws. Firm-level controls include Firm Size, Leverage, Profitability and Age. Country controls include
GDP per capita, Credit/GDP and Stock/GDP. We include firm and industry-by-year fixed effects. Robust standard
errors clustered at the country level are reported in parentheses. ***, **, * denote significance levels at 1%, 5%
and 10% respectively.

                                                                                                 Patent
                                                                Top Cited        Explorative
Dependent Var                  Patent Count Citation                                             Acquired
                                                                Patent           Patent
                                                                                                 Ratio
                               (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)             (5)
Competition Law Index          0.1379***        0.3779***       0.0767***        0.1100**        -0.1074***
                               (0.035)          (0.062)         (0.014)          (0.043)         (0.034)
Firm Size                      0.0337***        0.0494***       0.0085***        0.0236***       -0.0284***
                               (0.006)          (0.007)         (0.001)          (0.005)         (0.006)
Leverage                       -0.0100          -0.0208*        -0.0031          -0.0053         0.0119
                               (0.008)          (0.012)         (0.002)          (0.007)         (0.008)
Profitability                  0.0104           0.0044          -0.0025          0.0005          -0.0133
                               (0.011)          (0.022)         (0.003)          (0.004)         (0.010)
Age                            -0.0056          -0.0105         0.0001           0.0049          -0.0036
                               (0.011)          (0.016)         (0.004)          (0.011)         (0.014)
Financial Reform Index         Y                Y               Y                Y               Y
PR & Legal Index               Y                Y               Y                Y               Y
Patent Law                     Y                Y               Y                Y               Y
Country Control                Y                Y               Y                Y               Y
Firm FE                        Y                Y               Y                Y               Y
Industry-Year FE               Y                Y               Y                Y               Y
Observations                   1,405,852        1,405,852       1,405,852        1,405,852       1,405,852
Adjusted R-squared             0.622            0.499           0.636            0.550           0.535
                                                                                                                                                                 46

                                                Table 7 Competition Law and Innovation: Sub-index
This table presents the association between sub-components of the CLI score and firm-level measures of innovation. Panel A and B show the relation between each
sub-component (i.e., Authority, Merger Control, Abuse of Dominance, and Anticompetitive Agreements) and firm innovation. Panel C and D shows the relation between
each sub-component of the Abuse of Dominance (i.e., Prohibition (Dom.), Efficiency Defense (Dom.), and Public Interest Defense (Dom.)) and firm innovation. We
focus on five firm-level measures of innovation, namely Patent Count, Citation, Top Cited Patent, Explorative Patent and Patent Acquired Ratio. The key explanatory
variable, Competition Law Index, measures the overall stringency of a country's competition laws. Firm-level controls include Firm Size, Leverage, Profitability and
Age. Country controls include GDP per capita, Credit/GDP and Stock/GDP. We include firm and industry-by-year fixed effects. Robust standard errors clustered at
the country level are reported in parentheses. ***, **, * denote significance levels at 1%, 5% and 10% respectively.

Panel A.Sub-Components of the CLI Score
Dependent Var.                               Patent Count                                   Citation                                  Top Cited Patent
                             (1)       (2)          (3)        (4)        (5)       (6)          (7)        (8)        (9)         (10)       (11)       (12)
Authority                    0.1372***                                    0.3989***                                    0.0790***
                             (0.047)                                      (0.109)                                      (0.024)
Merger Control                         0.0991***                                    0.2451***                                      0.0469***
                                       (0.017)                                      (0.052)                                        (0.011)
Abuse of Dominance                                 -0.0012                                      -0.0039                                        0.0064
                                                   (0.045)                                      (0.088)                                        (0.014)
Anticompetitive Agreements                                 0.1730***                                    0.3427**                                     0.0543***
                                                           (0.062)                                      (0.132)                                      (0.020)
Firm Size                    0.0338*** 0.0335*** 0.0338*** 0.0335***      0.0499*** 0.0492*** 0.0498*** 0.0492***      0.0086*** 0.0084*** 0.0086*** 0.0085***
                             (0.006)   (0.006)   (0.006)   (0.006)        (0.007)   (0.007)   (0.007)   (0.007)        (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)
Leverage                     -0.0098   -0.0093   -0.0100   -0.0109        -0.0202   -0.0188   -0.0206   -0.0225*       -0.0029   -0.0026   -0.0029   -0.0033
                             (0.009)   (0.009)   (0.009)   (0.009)        (0.013)   (0.014)   (0.014)   (0.013)        (0.003)   (0.003)   (0.003)   (0.003)
Profitability                0.0099    0.0102    0.0101    0.0103         0.0032    0.0039    0.0038    0.0042         -0.0027   -0.0025   -0.0025   -0.0025
                             (0.011)   (0.011)   (0.011)   (0.011)        (0.022)   (0.022)   (0.022)   (0.022)        (0.003)   (0.003)   (0.003)   (0.003)
Age                          -0.0056   -0.0060   -0.0061   -0.0075        -0.0111   -0.0122   -0.0124   -0.0152        0.0001    -0.0001   -0.0002   -0.0006
                             (0.011)   (0.011)   (0.012)   (0.011)        (0.016)   (0.016)   (0.017)   (0.016)        (0.004)   (0.004)   (0.004)   (0.004)
Country Control              Y         Y         Y         Y              Y         Y         Y         Y              Y         Y         Y         Y
Firm FE                      Y         Y         Y         Y              Y         Y         Y         Y              Y         Y         Y         Y
Industry-Year FE             Y         Y         Y         Y              Y         Y         Y         Y              Y         Y         Y         Y
Observations                 1,410,369 1,410,369 1,410,369 1,410,369 1,410,369 1,410,369 1,410,369 1,410,369 1,410,369 1,410,369 1,410,369 1,410,369
Adjusted R-squared           0.622     0.622     0.621     0.622     0.498     0.498     0.498     0.498     0.635     0.635     0.635     0.635
                                                                                                                                  47

Panel B. Sub-Components of the CLI Score
 Dependent Var.                            Explorative Patent                                   Patent Acquired Ratio
                      (1)             (2)            (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)              (7)          (8)
 Authority            0.1086***                                              -0.1053**
                      (0.031)                                                (0.042)
 Merger Control                       0.0829***                                           -0.0825***
                                      (0.013)                                             (0.015)
 Abuse of Dominance                                  0.0170                                                0.0064
                                                     (0.031)                                               (0.042)
 Anticompetitive
 Agreements                                                      0.1021**                                               -0.1620***
                                                                 (0.046)                                                (0.058)
 Firm Size             0.0237***      0.0235***      0.0237***   0.0235***   -0.0284***   -0.0282***       -0.0284***   -0.0281***
                       (0.005)        (0.005)        (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.006)      (0.006)          (0.006)      (0.006)
 Leverage              -0.0052        -0.0047        -0.0052     -0.0059     0.0115       0.0110           0.0117       0.0125
                       (0.008)        (0.008)        (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.008)      (0.009)          (0.009)      (0.008)
 Profitability         0.0001         0.0003         0.0003      0.0004      -0.0128      -0.0130          -0.0130      -0.0132
                       (0.004)        (0.004)        (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.010)      (0.010)          (0.010)      (0.010)
 Age                   0.0050         0.0047         0.0045      0.0038      -0.0035      -0.0032          -0.0032      -0.0019
                       (0.011)        (0.011)        (0.011)     (0.011)     (0.014)      (0.014)          (0.014)      (0.013)
 Country Control       Y              Y              Y           Y           Y            Y                Y            Y
 Firm FE               Y              Y              Y           Y           Y            Y                Y            Y
 Industry-Year FE      Y              Y              Y           Y           Y            Y                Y            Y
 Observations          1,410,369      1,410,369      1,410,369   1,410,369   1,410,369    1,410,369        1,410,369    1,410,369
 Adjusted R-squared    0.549          0.549          0.549       0.549       0.535        0.535            0.534        0.535
                                                                                                                                            48

Panel C. Sub-Components of Abuse of Dominance
Dependent Var.                          Patent Count                            Citation                          Top Cited Patent
                                (1)         (2)           (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)          (7)          (8)          (9)
Prohibition (Dom.)            0.0296                                0.0658                              0.0193*
                              (0.032)                               (0.060)                             (0.010)
Efficiency Defense (Dom.)                0.0459***                             0.1016***                            0.0163***
                                           (0.012)                               (0.023)                              (0.005)
Public Interest
Defense (Dom.)                                           0.0006                              0.0070                                0.0046
                                                         (0.012)                             (0.023)                               (0.003)
Firm Size                   0.0338***    0.0333***     0.0338***   0.0498***   0.0487***   0.0498***   0.0085***    0.0084***    0.0085***
                              (0.006)      (0.006)       (0.006)     (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)
Leverage                     -0.0097      -0.0097       -0.0100     -0.0201     -0.0199     -0.0206     -0.0028      -0.0029      -0.0030
                              (0.009)      (0.009)       (0.009)     (0.014)     (0.014)     (0.014)     (0.003)      (0.003)      (0.003)
Profitability                 0.0102       0.0103        0.0101      0.0040      0.0042      0.0038     -0.0025      -0.0025      -0.0026
                              (0.011)      (0.011)       (0.011)     (0.022)     (0.022)     (0.022)     (0.003)      (0.003)      (0.003)
Age                          -0.0064      -0.0068       -0.0061     -0.0132     -0.0140     -0.0125     -0.0004      -0.0004      -0.0002
                              (0.012)      (0.011)       (0.012)     (0.017)     (0.017)     (0.017)     (0.004)      (0.004)      (0.004)
Country Control                  Y            Y             Y           Y           Y           Y           Y            Y            Y
Firm FE                          Y            Y             Y           Y           Y           Y           Y            Y            Y
Industry-Year FE                 Y            Y             Y           Y           Y           Y           Y            Y            Y
Observations                1,410,369    1,410,369     1,410,369   1,410,369   1,410,369   1,410,369   1,410,369    1,410,369    1,410,369
Adjusted R-squared             0.621        0.621         0.621       0.498       0.498       0.498       0.635        0.635        0.635
                                                                                                                                      49

Panel D. Sub-Components of Abuse of Dominance
 Dependent Var.                                       Explorative Patent                            Patent Acquired Ratio
                                              (1)            (2)              (3)          (4)               (5)               (6)
 Prohibition (Dom.)                        0.0461*                                      -0.0180
                                           (0.025)                                      (0.030)
 Efficiency Defense (Dom.)                               0.0370***                                       -0.0399***
                                                           (0.014)                                         (0.012)
 Public Interest Defense (Dom.)                                              0.0034                                            0.0035
                                                                             (0.012)                                          (0.012)
 Firm Size                                0.0237***      0.0233***         0.0237***   -0.0284***        -0.0280***         -0.0284***
                                            (0.005)        (0.005)           (0.005)     (0.006)           (0.006)            (0.006)
 Leverage                                  -0.0050        -0.0051           -0.0053       0.0115           0.0114              0.0116
                                            (0.008)        (0.008)           (0.008)     (0.009)           (0.008)            (0.009)
 Profitability                              0.0004         0.0005            0.0003      -0.0130           -0.0131            -0.0130
                                            (0.004)        (0.004)           (0.004)     (0.010)           (0.010)            (0.010)
 Age                                        0.0041         0.0040            0.0045      -0.0030           -0.0025            -0.0032
                                            (0.011)        (0.011)           (0.011)     (0.014)           (0.014)            (0.014)
 Country Control                               Y              Y                 Y            Y                Y                   Y
 Firm FE                                       Y              Y                 Y            Y                Y                   Y
 Industry-Year FE                              Y              Y                 Y            Y                Y                   Y
 Observations                             1,410,369      1,410,369         1,410,369    1,410,369         1,410,369          1,410,369
 Adjusted R-squared                          0.647          0.647             0.647       0.534             0.535              0.534
                                                                                                               50



   Table 8 Competition Law and Corporate Innovation: Cross-Industry Heterogeneity
This table presents the differential effect of competition law on corporate innovation in high-tech and other
industries. High-tech is an indicator variable equal to one if a firm belongs to industries classified as high-tech
and knowledge intensive according to the Eurostat guidance, and zero otherwise. We focus on five firm-level
measures of innovation, namely Patent Count, Citation, Top Cited Patent, Explorative Patent and Patent Acquired
Ratio. The key explanatory variable, Competition Law Index, measures the overall stringency of a country's
competition laws, and High-tech is a dummy variable equal to one if a firm belongs to a high-tech industry based
on the Eurostat guidance. Firm-level controls include Firm Size, Leverage, Profitability and Age. We include firm,
industry-by-year, and country-by-year fixed effects. Robust standard errors clustered at the country level are
reported in parentheses. ***, **, * denote significance levels at 1%, 5% and 10% respectively.

                                                                                                    Patent
                                                                    Top Cited       Explorative
                                    Patent          Citation                                        Acquired
                                                                    Patent          Patent
 Dependent Var                                                                                      Ratio
                                    (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)
 Competition Law Index
                                    0.0843***       0.1102***       0.0234***       0.0845***       -0.0615***
 *High-tech
                                    (0.015)         (0.040)         (0.006)         (0.014)         (0.012)
 Firm Size                          0.0324***       0.0495***       0.0084***       0.0228***       -0.0269***
                                    (0.006)         (0.007)         (0.001)         (0.005)         (0.006)
 Leverage                           -0.0205***      -0.0372***      -0.0063**       -0.0127***      0.0203***
                                    (0.005)         (0.009)         (0.002)         (0.004)         (0.005)
 Profitability                      0.0131          0.0074          -0.0018         0.0028          -0.0161
                                    (0.012)         (0.022)         (0.003)         (0.005)         (0.011)
 Age                                -0.0243***      -0.0351***      -0.0045*        -0.0083         0.0144
                                    (0.007)         (0.005)         (0.003)         (0.007)         (0.009)
 Firm FE                            Y               Y               Y               Y               Y
 Industry-Year FE                   Y               Y               Y               Y               Y
 Country-Year FE                    Y               Y               Y               Y               Y
 Observations                       1,410,369       1,410,369       1,410,369       1,410,369       1,410,369
 Adjusted R-squared                 0.625           0.502           0.638           0.555           0.538
                                                                                                               51



    Table 9 Competition Law and Corporate Innovation: Evidence from a Century's
                     Observation, Country-industry-year Sample
This table shows the association between the CLI score and innovation at the country-industry(two-digit SIC)-
year panel data, while differentiating industries by the degree of technological intensity. The dependent variables
are Patent Count-Ind, Citation-Ind, Top Cited Patent-Ind and Explorative Patent-Ind in columns 1, 2, 3, and 4,
respectively. High-tech is an indicator variable equal to one if it is a high-technology industry and equals zero
otherwise. We define high-technology industry at the country-industry-year level sample as 2-digit SICs with an
average industry R&D growth (benchmarked to the U.S.) above the sample median. We include a full set of
country-by-industry, industry-by-year, and country-by-year fixed effects. Robust standard errors clustered at the
country level are reported in parentheses. ***, **, * denote significance levels at 1%, 5% and 10% respectively.

                                                                                Top Cited         Explorative
                                         Patent Count-        Citation-
                                                                                 Patent-            Patent-
                                              Ind                Ind
Dependent Var.                                                                     Ind               Ind
                                               (1)                (2)              (3)                (4)
Competition Law Index
                                           0.1593***         0.2768***         0.0887***           0.1436***
*High-tech
                                             (0.041)           (0.065)        (0.024)               (0.045)
Time Period                                                           1888-2015
Country-Industry FE                            Y                  Y              Y                     Y
Industry-Year FE                               Y                  Y              Y                     Y
Country-Year EF                                Y                  Y              Y                     Y
Observations                                509,727            509,727       509,727                423,062
Adjusted R-squared                           0.929              0.896          0.872                 0.903
                                                                                                                                                 52



Appendix A. Variable Definition
   Variable                Definition                                                                                             Source
   Firm Level
                                                                                                                                  PATSTAT and ORBIS
   Patent Count            Log one plus the total number of patents filed by a firm in a given year.
                                                                                                                                  Database
                           Log one plus the total number of truncation-adjusted forward citations made to patents filed by
                           a firm in a given year; truncation-adjusted citation count is obtained by weight factors using
   Citation
                           the average life-time citation distribution of patents estimated within each technology class and
                           application year.
                           Log one plus the number of truncation-adjusted forward citations per patent filed by a firm in a
   Cit/Pat
                           given year.
                           Log one plus the total number of patents with at least one citation that are filed by a firm in a
   Cited Patent
                           given year.
                           Log one plus the total number of patents at firm-year level whose citations fall in the top 25%
   Top Cited Patent
                           of citation distribution across all patents in the same technology class in the same year.
                           Log one plus the total number of explorative patents filed by a firm in a given year. A patent is
                           defined as an explorative patent if at least 60% of the citations to which it refers are neither to
   Explorative Patent
                           patents that the firm produced during the last five years nor to patents that were cited by the
                           firm's patents filed over the past five years.
   Patent Acquired         Log one plus the total number of patents bought by a firm in a given year.
   Patent Acquired         Log one plus the total number of patents bought by a firm in a given year minus Log one plus
   Ratio                   the total number of patents filed by the same firm in the same year.
                           Log one plus the total number of explorative patents acquired by a firm in a given year minus
                           log one plus the total number of exploitive patents acquired by the same firm in that same year.
                           A patent is considered to be exploitative if at least 60% of the citations to which it refers are
   Explorative Patent
                           patents that the firm produced or patents that were cited by the firm's other patents filed over
   Acquired Ratio
                           the past five years. An exploitative patent, therefore, is an invention that falls within the firm's
                           historic base of innovative knowledge, while an explorative patent represent an invention that
                           falls outside of that base of innovation.
                           Log one plus the total number of patents acquired from firms in the same industry (four-digit
   Intra-industry Patent
                           NACE level) as the acquiring firm in a given year minus Log one plus the total number of
   Acquired Ratio
                           patents acquired from firms in different industries.
                                                                                                                                                      53




   Firm Size              Log the book value of total assets (in thousand USD)
   Leverage               The ratio between non-current liabilities and total assets
   Profitability          The ratio between net income and total assets
   Age                    Log of firm's age
   Country-Industry Level
   Patent-Ind             Log one plus the total number of patents at country-industry-year level.
                          Log one plus the total number of truncation-adjusted forward citations made to patents at            PATSTAT and ORBIS
                          country-industry-year level; truncation-adjusted citation count is obtained by weight factors        Database
   Citation-Ind
                          using the average life-time citation distribution of patents estimated within each technology
                          class and application year.
                          Log one plus the total number of patents at country-industry-year level whose citations fall in
   Top Cited Patent-Ind   the top 25% of citation distribution across all patents in the same technology class in the same
                          year.
                          Log one plus the total number of explorative patents filed by a firm at country-industry-year
   Explorative Patent-    level. A patent is defined as an explorative patent if at least 60% of the citations it refers are
   Ind                    not from existing knowledge, which includes all the patents that the firm produced and all the
                          patents that were cited by the firm's patents filed over the past five years.
   Country Level
                          The overall competition law index, consisting of Authority, Merger Control, Abuse of                 Bradford and Chilton
   Competition Law
                          Dominance and Anticompetitive Agreements.                                                            (2018)
   Index
                          An index that captures (1) who can bring suits against firms that are alleged to have engaged in
                          anticompetitive behavior, (2) the remedies that the authorities can impose on firms that violate
   Authority              competition laws, and (3) the scope of the law, i.e., the degree to which all industries and
                          enterprises fall under the purview of a country's competition laws.

                          Index of each country's laws in each year with respect to (1) regulating pre-merger notification
                          and approval, (2) granting expansive powers to the authorities to restrict mergers for economic
   Merger Control         and public interest reasons, and (3) permitting an assortment of arguments by firms to defend
                          mergers and acquisitions and limiting the scope of laws, i.e., the degree to which all industries
                          and enterprises are within the purview of the competition laws.
                                                                                                                                                  54




                      Index of the extent to which competition laws limit dominant firms from abusing their market
                      positions in uncompetitive ways. Abusive behaviors include price and nonprice related
                      conduct, including discriminatory pricing, resale price maintenance, unfair (or excessive)
   Abuse of           pricing, predatory pricing, and anticompetitive discounts (price-related abuses), as well as
   Dominance          tying and refusal to deal (nonprice abuses). The index includes data on firms' abilities to
                      defend actions that would otherwise be classified as abusive on efficiency or public interest
                      grounds.

                      An index designed to measure the degree to which a country's competition laws prohibit firms
   Anticompetitive
                      from colluding--both horizontally and vertically--to constrain competition.
   Agreements
   GDP per capita     Log real GDP per capita measured in 2010 U.S. dollar.                                                   World Bank WDI
                      Credit provided by the financial sector as a share of GDP.
   Credit/GDP
   Stock/GDP          Stock-market capitalization as a share of GDP.
                      The summation of Credit Control, Interest-Rate Control, Entry Barriers, Bank Supervision,               International Monetary
                      Bank Privatization, Capital Control, and Securities Market. Credit Control measures the                 Fund (IMF); Abiad,
                      restrictiveness of reserve requirements, existence of mandatory credit-allocation requirements,         Detragiache, and
                      and credit ceilings; Interest-Rate Control measures liberalization of interest rates; Entry             Tressel (2008)
   Financial Reform   Barriers measures the ease of foreign bank entry and the extent of competition in the domestic
   Index              banking sector; Bank Supervision measures the degree of supervision over the banking sector;
                      Bank Privatization measures the importance of state-owned banks; Capital Control measures
                      restrictions on international capital flows; Securities Market measures the level of development
                      of securities markets and restrictions on foreign equity ownership. The index ranges from 0 to
                      27, with higher values indicating less restrictive and more liberalized financial markets.
                      An index that measures the overall strength of the legal system and property-rights protection.         Fraser Institute;
                      It is the average value of nine components: judicial independence, impartial courts, protection         Gwartney, Lawson,
   PR & Legal Index   of property rights, military interference in rule of law and politics, integrity of the legal system,   and Hall (2015)
                      legal enforcement of contracts, regulatory restrictions on the sale of real property, reliability of
                      police, and business costs of crime. The index ranges from 0 (weakest) to 10 (strongest).
                                                                                                                                 55



                                                                                                             World Intellectual
   Patent Law   Indicator that equals one after a country enacts its first patent law, and zero otherwise.   Property Organization
                                                                                                             (WIPO) Lex Database
