                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         COST SAVING AND THE FREEZING OF CORPORATE PENSION PLANS

                                           Joshua D. Rauh
                                           Irina Stefanescu
                                          Stephen P. Zeldes

                                        Working Paper 27251
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w27251


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2020




The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the Rotman International Centre
for Pension Management (ICPM) at the Rotman School of Management, University of Toronto.
We thank Cristian Badarinza Jeffrey Brown, Andrew Ellul, Alan Gustman, Andi Mueller, Stan
Panis, Mark Warshawsky, Motohiro Yogo, and seminar participants at Indiana University,
University of Florida, Collegio Carlo Alberto (Turin), Utah State University, Federal Reserve
Board (Washington DC), Northwestern University (Kellogg School), Netspar, the Financial
Intermediation Research Conference (Minneapolis), National Bureau of Economic Research
(NBER Summer Institute), the Mitsui Finance Symposium (University of Michigan), and the
European Finance Association (Cambridge) for helpful suggestions. The views expressed in this
paper are those of the authors and do not reflect the views of the Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System or its staff members. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27251.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Joshua D. Rauh, Irina Stefanescu, and Stephen P. Zeldes. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Cost Saving and the Freezing of Corporate Pension Plans
Joshua D. Rauh, Irina Stefanescu, and Stephen P. Zeldes
NBER Working Paper No. 27251
May 2020
JEL No. G14,G23,G32,J31,J32,J33,J38

                                          ABSTRACT

Companies that freeze defined benefit pension plans save the equivalent of 13.5 percent of the
long-horizon payroll of current employees. Furthermore, firms with higher prospective accruals
are more likely to freeze their plans. Cost savings would not be possible in a benchmark model in
which i) all workers receive compensation equal to their marginal product and ii) workers value
equally all identical-cost forms of pension benefits. We find evidence consistent both with firms'
reneging on implicit contracts to provide workers with high pension accruals later in their careers
and with shifts in employee valuation of different forms of retirement benefits.


Joshua D. Rauh                                   Stephen P. Zeldes
Graduate School of Business                      Graduate School of Business
Stanford University                              Columbia University
Stanford, CA 94305                               3022 Broadway, Uris 825
and Hoover Institution                           New York, NY 10027-6902
and also NBER                                    and NBER
rauh@stanford.edu                                stephen.zeldes@gsb.columbia.edu

Irina Stefanescu
Federal Reserve Board
Washington, DC 20551
irina.stefanescu@frb.gov




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w27251
1. Introduction
         The role of defined benefit pensions in the labor market has been characterized in the
economics literature by two distinct approaches. Under the "legal contracts" framework, there is a
frictionless, competitive equilibrium in the spot market for labor, with no other economic benefits
to deferring compensation (Rosen, 1974; Sharpe, 1976; Bulow, 1982). As a result, workers' total
periodic compensation would have to equal their marginal product of labor. The alternative
"implicit contracts" framework (Ippolito, 1985) incorporates economic factors that cause a
worker's compensation to deviate from marginal product, such as the desire to discourage worker
shirking (Lazear (1979)), the offering of efficiency wages to encourage effort (Shapiro and Stiglitz,
1984), or the use of DB pensions to incentivize efficient employment, effort, and retirement
decisions (e.g. Lazear, 1983).
         The shift from defined benefit (DB) to defined contribution (DC) pensions in the U.S.
corporate sector over the past several decades provides an opportunity to study these different
views of pensions and contracts in the labor market. Under the legal contracts view, if a firm were
to freeze or terminate its DB pension plan, it would have to adjust other dimensions of
compensation so that there would be no change in costs. Under the implicit contracts hypothesis,
firms that freeze or terminate their plans would be able to save costs in part through reneging on
implicit contracts, and firms might decide to time such decisions to minimize the option value to
workers of continued benefit accruals.1 Alternatively, firms could see cost savings when they
freeze or terminate DB plans if worker preferences or other characteristics have shifted so that
financial frictions lead workers to value a DB plan less than an equal-cost DC plan. In this last
scenario, employers and employees would potentially both be made better off with a DB freeze
coupled with a new or enhanced DC plan.
         In this paper, we study the extent to which firms save costs through DB pension freezes
and the role of this cost saving in explaining which firms freeze their plans, and we interpret these
results in the context of the above hypotheses about pensions in labor markets. In 1998, 58% of
today's Fortune 500 employers offered a DB plan to new hires, but by 2017 only 16% did so (see
Willis Towers Watson (2018)). Most commonly, newer firms, such as those that are in the Fortune


1
  As emphasized by Lazear and Moore (1988) and Stock and Wise (1990), under the implicit contracts view, the option
to continue to earn benefits under a DB plan is valuable to workers in addition to the accrued defined benefits. The
option is particularly valuable if vesting periods are long. As such, the decisions of pension plan participants about
when to retire should also be a function of this option value.
                                                          3
500 today but were not 20 years ago have favored DC arrangements for new employees. However,
freezes are the main channel through which the shift has occurred for today's long-lived firms. Of
the above 42 percentage point drop, 25 percentage points came from a plan hard freeze in which
benefit accruals are stopped for all workers; 15 percentage points came from closing the DB plans
to new employees in what is called a soft freeze, stopping accruals for new workers but leaving
those already employed unaffected; and the remaining 2 percentage points came from plan
terminations, which generally occur when firms that sponsor DB plans enter bankruptcy and
transfer unfunded liabilities to the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation.
       Measuring the extent to which firms save costs in DB pension freezes requires measuring
the prospective DB accruals that they avoid by freezing as well as incorporating the increases in
current contributions to the DC plans that replace them. We use rich administrative data on the
demographics of individual DB pension plans as well as pension plan finances to obtain these
measures. To measure forgone accruals, we consider two counterfactuals. First, we compare
implementing a hard freeze today to waiting and implementing a hard freeze s years in the future.
Second, we compare implementing a hard freeze today to implementing a soft freeze today by
closing the DB plan only to new workers. In both cases we incorporate actual increases in
contributions to 401(k) plans that happen after the freezes. Under the first counterfactual, we
conclude that firms save 3% of payroll over the first year and 8% of the present value of payroll
over 10 years, which amounts to 3.4% of the firm's total assets. Under the second counterfactual,
we estimate the present value of long-term (45-year) cost savings on workers employed at the time
of the freeze to be over 5% of total current book assets or 13.5% of the expected future payroll of
those workers. As we find no evidence of compensating salary increases, we conclude that workers
would have to value the structure, choice, flexibility, and/or portability of DC plans (relative to
DB plans) by at least this much to experience welfare gains from freezes.
       One identification concern is that freezing could be correlated with other factors that would
have led to cost savings even in the absence of the freeze. We make the assumptions that had freeze
firms not frozen, i) they would have had similar entry and exit patterns as before they froze, and
ii) 401(k) contributions as a percent of salary would have remained the same as before the freeze.
       To examine whether the decision to freeze is related to prospective accruals, we use
propensity score-matched control samples, and we also estimate a linear probability model that
incorporates a number of controls. In order to address the possibility that firms with higher


                                                 4
accruals may be more likely to freeze for other reasons, we control for labor market factors
including labor market tightness and average industry tenure. Our identifying assumption is that
at least in the presence of these controls, prospective accruals are uncorrelated with omitted factors
that could be leading a firm to freeze. We find that firms that froze would have (had they not
frozen) faced, on average, about 50% higher accruals as a share of firm assets than comparable
firms that did not freeze, and that the probability that a firm freezes a pension plan is positively
related to the value of prospective accruals as a share of firm assets.
        The evidence therefore suggests that higher accruals play a significant role in driving the
freeze decision. Decomposing the accrual differences for freeze and non-freeze firms, we find that
much of the difference in prospective accruals between the freeze and matched non-freeze firms
is driven by the size of the labor force relative to firm assets, and some is also due to differences
in benefit factors.
        Our finding that employers can achieve substantial cost savings by changing pension
arrangements is evidence against the benchmark model described above and in favor of at least
one of the two possible alternatives. Either the compensation of some or all workers is not always
equal to marginal product; or employees value DB pension benefits less than they value an equal-
cost DC plan so that a freeze coupled with supplemental DC benefits creates a surplus that can be
split between the firm and its workers. While we cannot conclusively say to what extent the results
are explained by reneging on implicit contracts versus differences in worker valuation, we find
suggestive evidence that both factors are at play.
        One way we address this question is to examine whether there is heterogeneity in cost
saving across employee characteristics, in particular age. In a DB plan, annual accruals as a percent
of salary increase substantially with age. Consistent with this, we find that realized short-horizon
cost savings per worker as a percentage of salary are in fact largest for workers aged 50 to 65 and
smallest for workers aged 20 to 34. This age pattern could be explained by a preference for DC
relative to DB that is increasing with age and/or bargaining power of workers that is decreasing in
age (making it easier for firms to renege on implicit contracts for older workers).
        It seems implausible that older workers would undervalue a dollar of DB benefits relative
to a dollar of DC benefits substantially more than younger workers. If anything, younger workers
would likely value the investment flexibility (e.g. the ability to choose across a set of stock and
bond funds) and portability of a dollar of DC benefits relatively more than older workers. On the


                                                  5
other hand, there are good reasons to believe that the bargaining power of older workers is less
than that of younger workers. This suggests that at least part of the cost saving is arising from
reneging on implicit contracts for seasoned workers.
       To shed further light on this question, we supplement our analysis of traditional DB freezes
with an analogous examination of cash balance (CB) plan freezes. CB plans are a hybrid of DB
and DC, having some properties of each. Like DC plans, CB plan benefits are expressed as an
account balance that grows due to contributions and a rate of return. Also, CB plans have annual
accruals as a percentage of salary that are rou equal (or only very modestly rising) across age,
making them much more similar in this respect to DC plans than DB plans. However, like
traditional DB plans, CB plan sponsors control all investment decisions and bear all investment
risks, leaving workers with no choice on asset allocation. In addition, CB plan vesting occurs over
a number of years so, like traditional DB plans, workers have less portability than they typically
do in DC plans. Thus, if an employer freezes a CB plan and provides a DC plan in its place, the
employee receives a plan that has a very similar accrual structure, with the main differences being
portability and the ability of the employee to set the desired investment strategy and level of risk.
If, by freezing a CB plan, employers can save money even on young employees with substantial
presumed bargaining power, this suggests that at least some employees are willing to forego dollars
of employer contributions in order to get the added choice and portability of DC plans.
       We find that cost savings from CB plan freezes net of new contributions to DC plans are
also substantial and equal about 72% of the savings from freezes of traditional DB plans over a
10-year horizon. We therefore conclude that not all of the cost savings in pension freezes are
coming from reneging on implicit contracts for seasoned workers, and that some employees value
the benefit features common to DB and CB plans less than those of a DC plan.
       Our results have implications for a variety of public policy issues. First, as described above,
we examine whether workers receive compensation equal to their marginal product, which is an
important input to numerous policy questions including optimal capital and labor taxation (see,
e.g. Piketty, Saez, and Stantcheva, 2014). Second, recent research in public economics suggests
that individuals value annuities less than the amount implied by rational life-cycle models (Brown,
Kapteyn, Luttmer, Mitchell, and Samek (2019), Fitzpatrick (2015)), and some papers have
presented evidence that workers may not fully understand their pension plans (Gustman and
Steinmeier (2014), Dolls et al (2018)). Our results add to this literature by suggesting that workers


                                                 6
may not value DB benefits at their financial present value. Third, our results have implications for
the PBGC government insurance program. Our finding that pension freezes reduce overall labor
costs suggests that freezes could help firms better meet already-accrued pension benefit promises,
and therefore indirectly improve the financial health of the PBGC. Fourth, current law (ERISA)
protects private-sector accrued nominal benefits but not future accruals. In contrast, many state
and local governments also protect by law some future accruals of DB plans, with protections
varying widely across states and localities (Munnell and Quinby, 2012). Our results on freezes
highlight the potential tension between employee protection and the flexibility of firms to improve
their financial condition by reducing employee compensation. Similar to Pontiff, Shleifer, and
Weisbach (1990), which analyzes settings in which firms could extract value from pension plans
by acquiring other firms, our paper shows how firms operate within existing rules to increase cash
flow by freezing pensions.
        This paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the conceptual framework, landscape,
and existing literature. Section 3 gives a simple model and describes the theoretical issues related
to pension freezes and cost savings. Section 4 describes the data and the methodology used in our
empirical tests. Section 5 presents the results. Section 6 concludes.


2. Pension structures and background
2.1. The labor market and defined benefit versus defined contribution pension structures
        DB plan sponsors promise retirement income to their employees, with employers bearing
all the investment and longevity risk to meet the pension liability. The risk borne by the employee
under a DB plan is limited to risk of job change, risk that future benefit accruals will be reduced
or eliminated (as in a freeze), salary risk (as the pension is a function of late-career salary), inflation
risk (after separation or a plan freeze, because at that point benefits are typically fixed in nominal
terms), and risk that benefits will be reduced if their employer becomes financially insolvent.
        A DC plan has a simpler structure. It is a retirement savings program under which the
employer provides certain contributions to the participant's account during employment but there
is no guaranteed retirement benefit. The participant has control over the investment allocations
and can withdraw all or part of the accumulated account balance during retirement. DC plans
typically give most or all responsibility to the employee for setting contributions, allocating assets,
and making withdrawals, and the employee bears the investment risk (Bodie, Marcus, and Merton


                                                    7
(1988); Samwick and Skinner (2004); and Poterba et al. (2007)). The sponsor's financial
responsibility in a DC plan arrangement essentially ends after its share of the contribution is made.
         A CB plan is a hybrid form of pension that combines features of DB and DC plans.
Contributions are set as a percent of salary (either a fixed percent or one that increases with age
and/or years of service), and the rate of return on balances is determined the crediting rate of
interest set in plan rules.2 Employer contributions are pooled and invested by the sponsor. As in a
traditional DB plan, benefits do not depend on the plan's investment performance, so the employer
bears the full investment risk. A CB plan is therefore like a DB plan along the dimensions of risk
and choice/control, but is closer to a DC plan along the dimension of accruals.
         As noted above, the legal contracts view of pensions assumes that there is a frictionless,
competitive equilibrium in spot markets for labor and that there are no other economic benefits
(other than tax-deferral) to deferring compensation. If workers are rational, they will only forgo
wages in any given period equal to the accrual value of new benefits they have earned (Rosen,
1974; Sharpe, 1976; Bulow, 1982). As a result, a worker's total periodic compensation, including
cash wages, pension accruals, and other benefits, must equal his or her marginal product of labor,
and a firm can then freeze or terminate its plan at any time without affecting total costs.
         The implicit contracts view (Ippolito, 1985) takes into account frictions that could cause a
worker's compensation to deviate from marginal product. For example, efficiency wages could be
paid to encourage effort (Shapiro and Stiglitz, 1984), or downward wage rigidity could prevent
firms from lowering wages in the presence of negative unanticipated shocks to worker productivity
(for a review, see Bewley, 1999). Under the implicit contracts view, workers typically receive
compensation (including DB pension accruals) that is less than their marginal product when young
and more than their marginal product when old, as a way to efficiently incentivize workers' effort,
tenure, and retirement decisions. One such implicit contract (discussed further in the conclusion)
arises when workers accumulate firm-specific human capital. The high expected future DB
accruals encourage workers to join and stay with the firm and reduce the potential for firms to
exploit the increasing bargaining power they have over workers during their careers. The decision
to freeze a DB plan could be driven by changing demographic and economic forces that make
existing DB contract less efficient, giving the firm the opportunity to achieve a one-time gain by


2
 The interest credit in a cash balance plan can be fixed-rate or variable-rate (e.g. an interest rate benchmark plus a
basis point spread).
                                                          8
reneging on these implicit contracts for current workers.
       Previous papers on the role of DB plans in corporations have focused on work incentives
(Ippolito, 1985; Lazear, 1983; Mitchell and Fields, 1984), tax benefits (Black, 1980; Tepper, 1981;
Petersen, 1992; Shivdasani and Stefanescu, 2010), earnings manipulation (Bergstresser, Desai, and
Rauh, 2006) and financial slack (Ballester, Fried, and Livnat, 2002). Corporate pension plans have
a significant effect on the investment policy of the company (Rauh, 2006a). Firm equity betas
reflect the size of pension liabilities and pension asset risk (Jin, Merton, and Bodie, 2006).
       Other work considers the incentives that DB sponsorship provides in the context of mergers
and acquisitions. Pontiff, Shleifer, and Weisbach (1990) demonstrate that during a time largely
before excise taxes on the extraction of overfunded assets, around 13% of the takeover premium
can be explained by the option to terminate overfunded DB plans, highlighting another mechanism
by which value is extracted from DB pension plans potentially at the expense of employees. By
1990, Congress had imposed excise taxes of up to 50% on overfunded assets, dulling these
incentives, although our results suggest that there may well still be the possibility for acquirers to
extract value from DB sponsors by changing pension policy after an acquisition, e.g. through
pension freezes. Other work shows that firms with DB plans are less likely to be targeted in an
acquisition (Cocco and Volpin, 2013). In some pension systems, significant agency conflicts can
exist between the insider trustees and plan members (Cocco and Volpin, 2007). Cocco (2014)
provides a comprehensive review of the literature on corporate finance and DB pension plans (see
also Chen, Kacperczyk, and Ortiz-Molina (2011); Klasa, Maxwell, and Molina (2009); Matsa
(2010); Matsa and Agrawal (2013); and Simintzi, Vig, and Volpin (2015)).


2.2. The pension transformation and pension freezes
       Encouraged by the tax deductibility of pension contributions in times when corporate tax
rates reached historical highs after World War II, employers viewed DB plans as a tool to build
and retain human capital. In 1980, of all private-sector wage and salary workers participating in a
pension plan in their current job, 60% were participating only in a DB plan, 17% were participating
only in a DC plan, and the remaining 23% were participating in both types of plans. By 2018, of
those participating in a plan, merely 2% were solely in a DB plan, 80% were solely in a DC plan,
and the remaining 18% were in both (see Appendix Fig. A.1). Many other countries in the world
have also undergone a significant shift from DB to DC pensions (Holzmann, 2013).


                                                  9
        The relative decline of DB pensions has been well documented (Clark and McDermed
(1990); Gustman and Steinmeier (1992)). At first, this shift occurred primarily through new firms
adopting DC rather than DB plans (Kruse, 1995; Ippolito and Thompson, 2000). Starting in the
early 2000's, however, the hybrid conversions and pension freezes of very large employers became
more common (VanDerhei (2006), Government Accountability Office (2008), and Willis Towers
Watson (2018)). In 2005, for example, IBM, Hewlett-Packard, Sears Holding, Verizon, and many
other firms announced pension freezes.
        Why has this shift toward DC occurred? Explanations fit broadly into three categories.
Some of these explanations are consistent with a model in which all workers are at least as well
off after the shift from DB to DC, while others imply that some or all workers are worse off.
        The first relates to institutional and legal changes that fostered the shift to DC plans,
generally thought to go back to the Revenue Act of 1978, which changed the U.S. Internal Revenue
Code to allow salary reductions to be used for retirement plan contributions. Following this
legislation, large firms began to establish 401(k) plans. Over time, the costs and risks of DB
pensions relative to DC plans became more apparent to employers. Although interest rate risk,
mortality risk, and investment risk could all in principle be hedged through the appropriate choice
of plan assets (e.g., asset liability matching), in practice they are not, whether because of a lack of
suitable hedging instruments, a lack of desire to do so, or both.3 Furthermore, pension shortfalls
that arise in the face of unhedged shocks can compete for cash within the firm and thus have
liquidity implications, potentially negatively affecting capital investment decisions (Rauh, 2006a).
The economic environment of the early 2000s, with volatile equity markets and generally falling
interest rates, highlighted these risks, as did new accounting standards that moved more unfunded
pension liabilities onto firms' balance sheets.
        Second, changes in the economic environment could have driven changes in the pension
landscape. Life expectancy has increased over the past 40 years, raising projected costs. The large
decrease in inflation that occurred in the 1980s raised the real projected costs of accruing fixed
nominal pensions, as has the multi-decade decline in interest rates. Labor mobility increased,
induced by declines in the value of existing jobs relative to new jobs, lowering the attractiveness


3
  Capital markets appear to price these risks (Jin, Merton, and Bodie, 2006). Furthermore, Love, Smith, and Wilcox
(2011) find that firms' optimal funding and investment decisions depend on the nature of government pension
insurance, the degree of insurance pricing, the amount of guaranteed benefits, the stringency of minimum funding
requirements, and the costs of financial distress, among other factors.
                                                       10
of DB plans to workers (Friedberg and Owyang, 2004). Other factors include changes in labor
characteristics and preferences (Aaronson and Coronado, 2005), and reduced search costs
(Friedberg, Owyang, and Sinclair, 2006). Increased global competition could have led to lower
equilibrium compensation for U.S. workers. In the presence of downward nominal wage rigidity,
employers might have found it easier to cut pension benefits through a shift of pension design than
to cut wages.4 Also, the demographic changes associated with the post­World War II baby boom
led to an increased concentration of the workforce in age groups that had the highest projected DB
accruals (see Butrica et al., 2009).
         Third, changes in consumer preferences, such as an increased desire for flexibility and
control over retirement wealth investment and spending decisions, might have driven pension
changes. A DB plan requires participants to take a mostly riskless benefit, essentially by buying
deferred annuities with the pension contributions made on their behalf. A DC plan allows
participants to choose their asset allocation and make their own tradeoffs regarding risk and
return.5 Even within DB pensions, there has been an increase in the fraction of people taking lump
sum distributions instead of a lifetime income (annuity) stream, which could potentially represent
an increased preference for flexibility and control (see, e.g., Beshears et al., 2014).6
         The literature on the determinants of DB plan freezes is relatively sparse. Munnell and Soto
(2007) find that plan characteristics (such as underfunding level, size, and large credit balances),
bargaining power, and the financial health of the company play a role in the firm decision to freeze.
Beaudoin, Chandar, and Werner (2010) find that the less-profitable sponsors are more likely to
freeze DB plans. In addition, they show that the balance sheet effect of SFAS 158 is associated
with the decision to freeze, a finding related to Yu (2014) who finds that freezes are related to the
difference between accumulated liabilities and projected liabilities under U.S. GAAP disclosure




4
  For a survey see Howitt (2002).
5
  Although in theory a worker could borrow against his or her future pension to invest in the desired portfolio of
financial assets, in practice this is generally thought to be infeasible. Note also that participants are constrained by the
menu of investment options offered through the 401(k) plan and are likely affected by the choice of options presented
to them (Brown, Liang, and Weisbenner, 2007). Several studies have found evidence of agency problems in the setting
of the investment menu or fund selection; e.g., that service-providers favor their own funds (Pool, Sialm, and
Stefanescu, 2016), that trustee families overinvest in the sponsor's stock (Cohen and Schmidt, 2009), or that firms
induce employees to own company stock in 401(k) plans as a takeover defense (Rauh, 2006b).
6
  We include an additional discussion on how firms typically switch from a DB to a DC plan and whether pension
freezes can save costs in Appendix B.


                                                            11
rules.7 Other papers have considered the effect of DB plan freezes on firms' financial and capital
budgeting decisions (Phan and Hegde (2012), Choy, Lin, and Officer (2014)). The results of
Petersen (1994) suggest that moving away from DB arrangements could create financial flexibility
on operating leverage. Copeland and VanDerhei (2010) examine the effect of (soft) pension
freezes coupled with increases in DC contributions on projected retirement income and argue that
at least without risk adjustment the new workers who are put into the DC plan are no worse off.8
         Several papers have attempted to use equity market event studies to examine whether DB
plan freezes enhance shareholder value, with rather mixed conclusions.9 Because our paper
considers the cost effects on the firm from a cash flow and accrual standpoint, it is complementary
to this event-study strand of literature.10


3. Pension accruals and freezes
3.1 Measuring pension accruals
         How much does it cost a firm on an annual basis to offer a retirement benefit to its workers?
For a DC plan, answering this question is relatively straightforward, but it is more complicated for
a DB plan, because the plan incurs future liabilities that are not generally equal to the current
contributions that the firm makes to the plan's pension fund.
3.1.1 Defined contribution plans
         The annual cost to a firm of offering a DC plan is equal to the contributions that the firm
makes, either in the form of an outright contribution or as a matching contribution. Typically these
are set as a percentage of each worker's current salary up to a ceiling. The costs of providing a DC
plan will only vary with an employee's tenure and salary if participation and contribution rates


7
  Under U.S. GAAP, liabilities are disclosed as a projected benefit obligation (PBO) that accounts for future salary
increases but not future years of service.
8
  Their method credits the full historical equity premium to the average DC benefits of future workers, so their results
cannot be interpreted as a measure of the true economic losses to workers (or the cost saving to firms) from pension
freezes.
9
  Phan and Hegde (2012) find evidence of positive short-run abnormal returns but no evidence of long-term abnormal
returns. Rubin (2007) finds that pension freezes enhance firm market value with a lag. Milevsky and Song (2010) find
a positive effect of DB freezing on company value of around 3.8%, though of marginal statistical significance.
McFarland, Pang, and Warshawsky (2009) instead find that the value of small firms declines in some specifications.
They argue that 401(k) enhancements and declines in employee productivity could offset any potential cost savings,
or alternatively that freezes are simply a reflection of financial challenges at the firm.
10
   Although some literature suggests that share prices fully reflect the value of unfunded pension liabilities (Feldstein
and Seligman, 1981), other papers find that markets do not fully see through pension accounting and could overvalue
firms with underfunded pension plans (Franzoni and Marin, 2006) or respond excessively to pension assumptions
(Coronado and Sharpe, 2003).
                                                           12
also vary along those dimensions. There is evidence that, in 401(k) plans without auto-enrollment,
participation rates rise with tenure over the first several years of employment (Choi et al (2004)).
However, we would expect contribution rates in DC plans that are offered to workers as a
replacement for DB plans to start at a level closer to a steady state.
3.1.2 Defined benefit plans
         Most traditional DB plans promise to pay a fixed nominal income stream in retirement of
a magnitude that depends on years of service, a salary measure, and a benefit factor. The formula
is usually multiplicative. We capture this with the following benefit formula:
                                                =      ,                                                          (1)
in which BR is the nominal benefit paid in year R and beyond; k is the benefit factor, typically in
the range of 1.5 to 2.0%; NQ is the number of years that the employee was covered by the plan
before separating from the firm (by quitting, retiring, or being fired) in year Q; and YQ is the
nominal salary in the final year that the worker was employed and covered by the plan.11 The
employee receives the benefit in the form of an annuity that pays out the same annual BR every
year, beginning at a specified retirement age (e.g., age 65) and continuing for as long as the
recipient lives.12 For example, a worker with 40 years of service with a benefit factor of 1.5 would
receive an annual nominal pension benefit equal to 60% of his or her final salary.
         Because DB pensions are based on a formula that defines retirement income and DC
pensions are based on a formula that defines contributions as a percent of salary, it is not easy to
compare the costs and payouts of the two types of pensions. We therefore develop a metric to
compare plans: the expected present value of annual accruals as a percent of annual salary. For a
DC plan, this metric is simply the employer contribution as a percent of salary. In what follows,
we describe how we construct the comparable measure for DB plans.
         At any point in time t, a firm has the option of terminating the plan or freezing benefits.
Under a typical termination or freeze, the pension plan must pay the worker the future annual
benefit determined by formula (1), with NQ and YQ "frozen" at their current levels, Nt and Yt, so
that  =      . We refer to this term as the time R retirement benefit accrued as of time t.
         Following standard practice, we define the accumulated benefit obligation (ABO) as the


11
   Final pay is most commonly used in the benefit formula. In some cases, the benefit formula is based on the final or
highest few years or on career average pay or includes an adjustment to integrate with Social Security benefits.
12
   The worker can usually alter the features and corresponding amount of the annuity received, and some workers also
have the option of receiving a single lump-sum payment instead.
                                                         13
present value as of time t of the future stream of these accrued benefits:

                                     =                        ,                                                (2)

The annuity factor, Zt,R, is defined as the cost at time t of buying a deferred nominal annuity stream
of $1 that begins at year R (if the beneficiary is still alive) and continues as long as the recipient
lives.13 The appropriate discount rate for a true present value from the perspective of the
shareholders of the firm would reflect the fact that accrued benefits are bond-like promises on
which firms can default only in the event of bankruptcy and termination by the PBGC. A corporate
bond yield of the firm's own credit quality with maturity equal to the duration of the pension
promise would have similar characteristics. The statutory discount rates that firms must use to
comply with regulatory rules differ in some respects. Historically, statutory funding rates for
deficit reduction contributions were based on U.S. Treasury yields, but since the early 2000s they
have been based on smoothed corporate yield curves. Note that pension benefits received during
retirement are tied to salary at separation or freeze, and thus are fixed in nominal terms once
separation or a freeze has occurred. Thus, the appropriate discount rate is a nominal one, which,
in turn, depends on expectations of inflation and any inflation risk premium.
        We define annual accruals as the difference (in today's dollars) between next year's ABO
if the plan continues running and next year's ABO if the plan were instead terminated or frozen
today. These annual costs are uncertain, as there is uncertainty about future salaries, separations,
and mortality. This cost measure can be defined over a horizon of any length of time. The ABO
liability for one worker at time s>t if the plan is not frozen prior to s is

                               |[                    ]   =                ,   ,                                (3)

in which Ys is the nominal salary at time s>t (if the participant is still employed) or the last salary
the participant received (if separated).
        If, instead, the freeze is implemented at time t, the number of years of service and the salary
will remain frozen at their current levels, Nt and Yt. Therefore, the ABO will be

                               |[           ]   =                 ,   .                                        (4)

We define t,s as the difference as of time s between these two measures:


13
  This assumes that a worker who dies prior to retirement age receives no retirement benefit. If a spousal or other
survivor benefit would be paid, then the formula would have to be adjusted accordingly.
                                                         14
                           ,       =         |[                             ]       -    |[             ] ).              (5)
We next define  , as the expected present value (as of time t) of t,s, and derive its value as
follows:14
                                                  (   )                                       (   )
             ,   =  {          ,   (1 + )                 } =                   ,   (1 + )             ( -  ) +  ,    ,   (6)
where gt,s is the total nominal salary growth between t and the minimum of s and the last year of
employment. The appropriate discount rate i should reflect the riskiness of the future accruals,
which depend on the evolution of the worker's future salary and years worked. Assuming that the
evolution of salary and work is independent of aggregate asset pricing factors and future annuity
                                                               (    )
factors, and that      ,           = {   ,    (1 + )                    }, we can simplify this expression to 15
                                             ,        =    ,         { ( -  ) +  ,  }.                                    (7)
          We divide            ,    by current salary, Yt, to yield the annual cost of a DB plan as a percent of
current salary. As mentioned earlier, this measure is directly comparable to a common cost
measure for DC plans: current contributions and matches as a percent of current salary. Fig. 1 plots
     ,   / against age, based on our parameter assumptions and assuming that years of service rise
one for one with age. We include in this figure the annual DC costs as a percent of salary for a
worker who participates in the plan and contributes enough to get the full match in every year. The
DC costs are a constant percentage of salary, i.e. a flat line in the graph, equal to the sum of the
employer outright contribution and matching rate (for exposition purposes only, we calibrate it to
the data). Finally, Fig. 1 also includes the annual costs of CB plans.
          There are stark differences in the accrual/cost patterns of DB and DC plans. DC accruals
as a percent of salary are constant. In contrast, the cost of annual DB accruals is about 2% of salary
for a new 25 year-old worker and rises to over 25% of annual salary for a 60 year-old worker with
35 years of experience. These differences in accruals are crucial to our framework, as freezing a
DB plan and replacing it with a DC plan involves replacing a convex accrual structure that rewards
older and more senior workers more heavily (as a percent of salary) with a flat one in which
accruals are constant with age and tenure. Demographic differences across firms will generate
differences in the potential cost savings from freezing a DB pension plan. These differences in

14
  We include some additional details of the derivation in Appendix C.
15
  Geanakoplos and Zeldes (2018) argue that future wages are positively correlated with stock prices and that the
appropriate discount rate on wage-linked cash flows should be higher to reflect this. We assume away any such effect
here.


                                                                            15
accrual patterns could also yield different incentive effects on workers to remain with the firm.16
3.1.3 Cash balance plans
         As described in the introduction, a CB plan, while legally governed by the rules of DB
plans, is a hybrid plan that has some features of a DB plan and some that more closely resemble a
DC plan. The latter include that contributions are equal to a percentage of salary and earn a rate of
return over time, and that the lump sum available at retirement is equal to the accumulated balance
in the account. For some CB plans, the contributions are set as a fixed percent of salary, while for
others, the percent of salary increases modestly with age and/or years of service.
         Under a CB plan, each worker has an "account" that is credited each year with an interest
credit (equal to the starting balance multiplied by an interest rate, typically either a fixed rate or a
floating rate tied to a Treasury rate), and a pay credit (a percentage of salary):
                          |[                        ]   =  (1 +  ) +                                                (9)
in which CBt is the balance accumulated at the beginning of period t, CBt+1 is the balance
accumulated at the beginning of period t+1, Yt is salary in period t, ic is the interest credit rate and
h is the pay credit rate.17 At retirement, cash balance plans are required to offer employees a life
annuity (converted based on the accumulated balance CBR), and many also offer employees the
option to take the accumulated balance as a lump sum.18
         If the CB plan is frozen, no further salary credits are earned, but balances typically continue
to earn interest credits until retirement:
                          |[                ]   =  (1 +  )                                                       (10)
We define t,sCB parallel to the DB definition above: the difference between the present value of the
future retirement obligation if the plan is frozen at s and the obligation if the plan is frozen at t:
                                                                                   (   )
                  ,   = E {(      [             ]   -      |[        ]   )(1 + )           }.                     (11)
         We assume that the crediting interest rate ic for the CB plan equals the appropriate market


16
   Appendix Fig. A.2 plots  , /Yt against both age and service. Costs as a percent of salary increase both with years
of service (assuming g>0) and with age (assuming i>0). Note also that the degree to which accruals increase with
tenure depends on nominal salary growth, so that the patterns of DB accruals as a percent of salary are affected both
by real salary growth and by the average inflation rate. Changes in inflation can thus alter both the level and shape of
the accrual graph and the corresponding incentives for workers to remain with the firm and for firm to freeze the plan.
We thank Stan Panis for highlighting this point.
17
   When a DB plan is converted to a CB plan, the starting cash balance is typically set equal to the present value of
the cash flows the worker would have received under the DB arrangement if there were no future accruals.
18
   We assume that the annuity stream offered has present value at time R equal to the lump sum CBR.


                                                                16
valuation discount rate i in equation (11), which implies that CBR[freeze at t] (1+i)-(R-t) = CBt, i.e. the
cash balance at time t represents the present value of the future retirement obligation. In Fig. 1 we
compare      ,     scaled by salary to the comparable cost measures for DB and DC plans. We plot
the accrual patterns for two sets of CB plans: those that set h to be a constant and that set h to rise
with age and/or years of service.19 If h is a constant, accruals as a percent of salary is a flat line,
as it was for the DC accruals. For those plans where h increases with age and/or years of service,
we see a modest increase in          ,    scaled by salary, rising from about 3.2% of pay to about 8.5%
of pay as age increases.
         Multi-year accruals can be computed by iterating equations (9) and (10) forward and
substituting into equation (11). t,sCB is then equal to the present value of the stream of ht+jYt+j
between t and s. If h is constant, this equals h times the present value of income between t and s.20


4. Empirical tests: Data and methodology
4.1. Sample selection
         Our primary source of information on DB pensions is Form 5500, filed annually by plan
administrators with the Department of Labor (DOL) and the IRS. We begin by extracting
information on all DB plans filing Form 5500 between 1999 and 2010. Next, we restrict the sample
to plans that can be reliably linked to sponsors covered by Compustat. The reported sponsor name
and its employer identification number (EIN) serve as the primary identifiers.21 Table 1 illustrates
the sample selection criteria. The result is a sample of 40,637 plan-years from the IRS 5500 filings
matched to Compustat.
         Our accrual estimates are based on age-service tables, reported in the attachments to Form
5500, that list, for various age and service categories, the number of workers covered by the plan
and the average salary of these workers. Our sample is further restricted by the availability of these
tables at the plan level. Under the current disclosure rules, only plans with more than 1,000 active
participants are required to disclose this information. We therefore restrict the sample to plans that

19
   The CB lines in Fig. 1 are based on an average of a subsample of frozen and matched CB plans.
20
   We further develop the discussion on crediting rates in Appendix C.
21
   Although these variables allow us to generate a first link to Compustat sponsors, in many instances Form 5500
reports the name and EIN of one of the parent sponsor's subsidiaries. To overcome this problem, we manually collect
the names of all subsidiaries reported by all sponsors in the 10-k filings (Exhibit 21). We identify potential sponsors
in Compustat based on the availability of aggregate pension information such as pension assets and liabilities. This
process allows us to obtain a very close match between sponsors and plans.


                                                          17
report 1,000 active participants for at least one year during our sample period, which limits the
sample to 14,315 plan-year observations.22 An example of this age-service table is reported in
Appendix Table A.1. Age-service tables were available for 8,551 plan-years.23 Among these, there
are 2,049 plan-years of forms that are filed by CB plans. Where available, we also collect the cash
balance table, which reports individual account balances by age-service groups.
          To pursue our analysis, we require an accurate list of which pension plans were frozen and
when the freezing took place. Since 2003, there has been a question (check box) on the form that
asks whether the pension plan is (hard) frozen. Once the plan is reported as frozen, all subsequent
filings should have this annotation. Of course, for plans that checked the box already in 2003, it is
not immediately clear whether they froze in 2003 itself, or in a prior year. To deal with plans that
checked the box in the first year, and as a check on the accuracy of the information reported in the
check box, we searched for information about plan freezes in the news, annual reports, and in the
history of the plan as reported in the attachments to Form 5500, correcting any inaccuracies
manually. Appendix Table A.2 shows the development of this sample of pension freezes. Our
procedure identifies 213 plans that were frozen during our sample period.24
4.2. Estimating cost savings from pension freezes
          We have defined t,s as the expected value of the benefit accruals that would occur over the
period between t and t+s in the absence of a pension freeze. Recall that for a given individual,
     ,   =    ,     { ( -  ) +  ,  }.
          For each plan as a whole, we compute two measures of . The first includes accruals by all
future workers, including both current workers and new workers that join the firm between t and
s.25 We compute this measure for s from 1 to 10 years. This captures how much a firm could
potentially save by freezing its plan today (time t) rather than at time t+s in the future. However,



22
   The age-service tables are not in a standardized form or collected electronically. The DOL made scanned Form
5500 attachments publicly available during the summer of 2011 for all years between 2003 and 2011. Data were
manually entered from these age-service matrices into spreadsheets, and we subsequently standardized them for a
uniform definition of age and service groups.
23
   The results are not sensitive to the inclusion or exclusion of the roughly 100 observations obtainable for 1999 to
2002. We requested this subset of paper attachments based on a pilot of sample-plan freezes that we identified from
public news announcements.
24
   Because of other data requirements, we only use 175 of these for our sample (see later sections). Prior to the
announcement, 52 of the 175 plans have a cash balance feature.
25
   This measure is sometimes referred to as the "open group" measure because it assumes the plan is open to future
workers.


                                                         18
because it measures a cross-section of accruals for all workers rather than tracking workers
throughout their careers, this measure will miss an important piece of the one-time cost savings
that arise from cutting the future accruals of then older and more senior workers.26 To capture the
full transitional cost savings, we estimate a second, cohort-based, measure that restricts the
population to include only current workers (i.e., it excludes accruals of workers who will be hired
by the firm in the future), but tracks the current workers forward for a longer period of their future
tenure at the firm (up to 45 years) and sums the present value of all of the corresponding accruals.27
The 45-year version of this measure is equal to the present value of all accruals that would be
avoided by implementing a hard freeze today instead of a soft freeze today.
         Our calculations of cost savings make the identifying assumption that in the absence of the
freeze there would have been no changes in plan parameters or in worker entry and exit. In
addition, when we compare these foregone DB accruals to 401(k) contribution increases, the
identifying assumption is that contributions to defined contribution plans would have, in the
absence of the freeze, remained the same as a percent of salary as they were before the freeze.
4.3. Measurement of accruals
         We estimate t,s for both freeze and non-freeze firms over various horizons. Estimating t,s
requires information on projected future salaries and years of service, as well as benefit parameters
and discount rates. To obtain these estimates, we use a combination of i) plan-level summary
information and ii) worker-level data from the plan's age-service-salary matrices. We summarize
our methodology in the following sections, with some additional details provided in Appendix C.
         We first estimate future salaries and salary growth, and do so separately for traditional and
cash balance plans using the salary information in the age-service-salary matrices in the years
preceding the freeze. Our presumption is that salary growth is persistent at the plan level and does
not change significantly from year to year. Thus, in the absence of a freeze, salaries are expected


26
   For example, consider a steady state with a similar number of workers at each age. If pensions represent implicit
contracts for higher future compensation, the cost savings from freezing now could be very similar to the cost savings
from freezing 10 years from now, leading the differential between the two to be small, even though there would be
large "transition" savings from the freeze (either now or in 10 years).
27
   This measure is sometimes referred to as the "closed group" measure because it assumes the plan is closed to future
workers. For both measures, we incorporate estimates of exit / separation rates from the workforce. The separating
probability from the plan is integrated for all future years and for all age-service groups. Our estimation is not able to
differentiate participants who retire from those who leave the firm. However, the exit probability for older and longer-
tenured employees is most likely due to retirement. For DC costs, we use the same assumptions about future entry
into and future exit from the workforce as we use to compute the corresponding DB accruals. We are thereby implicitly
assuming that the future worker entry and exit rates are unaffected by the freeze.
                                                           19
to grow at the same rate as in the past. We further apply the estimated plan level salary growth to
individual participants' salaries in each age-service cell of the matrix to estimate their level in
future years. Missing salary levels for some age-service groups were estimated from regressions
on available data.
         Next, we measure years of service. If no workers transitioned in or out of employment with
the firm, then the number of years of service of each worker would simply increase by one per
year. In practice, of course, entries and exits do occur, and we therefore need to incorporate these
into our analysis. We use repeated snapshots of the age-service matrices to estimate the entries and
exits (separations) as a percentage of total participants by age groups each year, at the plan and
industry level. Entry is easily identified in the first column of the matrix each year, and exit is
estimated from matrix snapshots at five-year intervals on a rolling window.
         Next, measuring the change in accrued benefits over any given horizon requires estimates,
at the plan level, of the benefit factor (k), the rate of salary growth, and the discount rate.
         (a) The benefit factor (k). In the absence of direct information on the benefit factor, k, we
impute an estimate of k from two different accrual measures: a plan-level service cost measure
from Form 5500, and a plan-level measure that we compute up to an unknown scalar k by
aggregating information based on age, salary, and years of service. We then compute the value of
k that equalizes these two service costs. Note that because we model simplified plans, the benefit
factors we estimate reflect a range of plan features that affect accrual rates, not just the benefit
factors themselves. These might include different COLAs, retirement ages, and vesting provisions.
         (b) Discount rates (i). Regulations require firms to use market-based discount rates in
calculating their current liability for the IRS Form 5500 filing. We assume that this regulatory
discount rate is the same as the market rate for discounting future liabilities and accruals.28
         (c) The pay credit (h) is hand-collected from the paper attachments to IRS Form 5500, for
a subsample of CBP freeze and CBP non-freeze plans (182 plans). We find that in 40% of cases it

28
   To the extent that a pension promise from the perspective of the firm is equivalent to a defaultable corporate bond,
a corporate bond rate is the appropriate discount rate concept. Existing rules allow however for some flexibility in
firms' selection of rates that may or may not be related to underlying risk factors. For 2002 to 2003, the current liability
discount rate could not be more than 20% above or 10% below the weighted average of interest rates (set by the U.S.
Department of the Treasury) on the rates of interest on 30-year Treasury securities during the past four years. For 2004
to 2006, the current liability discount rate could not be more than 10% above or below the weighted average of interest
rates on long-term investment-grade corporate bonds during the previous four years. For 2007 to 2010, pursuant to
the Pension Protection Act, a procedure was phased in whereby the funding standard liability would be calculated
using a three-segment high-quality corporate bond yield curve published by the Treasury Department. In the period
after our sample, these rules were relaxed considerably by MAP-21 legislation in 2012.
                                                            20
is a flat percentage of salary, in 13% of cases depends on age, in 20% of cases depends on service
and in 28% of cases it depends both on age and service.
         Finally, our cost savings analysis requires an estimate of the difference between future
401(k) contributions made by the sponsor after the freeze and what those 401(k) contributions
would have been in the absence of a freeze. Because we obviously cannot observe contributions
under this counterfactual, we estimate them by assuming that in the absence of a freeze, future
401(k) contributions as a percent of salary would remain constant.29 We estimate current and actual
future DC contributions by aggregating (using Form 5500 Schedule H) all actual contributions
made by the sponsor to all of its 401(k) plans for each relevant year. Any difference between the
actual reported employer contribution and the projected employer contribution is then attributed
to the accounts of the DB participants now included in these DC plans. We translate the
incremental 401(k) contributions that we calculate into a present value by using the formula of a
growing annuity (over 1 to 10 years) and assuming constant salary growth, to be consistent with
the measurement of the DB accruals.30
4.4. Summary statistics on freeze and non-freeze plans
         Table 2 shows that the freeze and non-freeze plans in our sample differ on a variety of
observable dimensions. The columns labeled freezes are based on only pre-freeze data. Panel A
examines traditional DB plans, i.e. excluding CB plans, while panel B examines CB plans.
         Firms that freeze pension plans are smaller; they have an average of $22.5 billion in book
assets (from Compustat) compared with $36.9 billion for non-freeze firms. They are also more
leveraged, have lower interest coverage, and have smaller operating margins. The plans of firms
that freeze are also smaller - before the freeze they have both fewer total participants (a difference
of 4,288 at the mean), fewer total liabilities (by $316 million at the mean), and lower total payroll
by $101 million. Payroll as a percent of total assets is significantly higher for plans that freeze:
7.8% vs 4.8% at the mean. This fact suggests that labor costs are more important for firms that
freeze than for firms that do not.
         Freeze plans also appear to be in worse financial condition than those that do not freeze, as
they have funding ratios that are on average 9% lower than non-freeze firms before the freeze.
Freeze plans have a higher ratio of active participants to total participants by 5.5%, suggesting that

29
   Because there is no salary information in Form 5500 for DC plans, we assume that the rate of salary growth for
existing participants in the 401(k) plan is the same as the rate of salary growth for participants in the DB plans.
30
   We use the same discount rate that we used for DB accruals earlier (again ignoring any adjustment for salary risk).
                                                         21
relatively more of the liability is coming from promises to active employees. However, freeze
plans use slightly lower pension discount rates, which is interesting in light of the fact that freeze
plans have a higher share of active workers than non-freeze plans, and thus would in theory support
higher average discount rates. One possibility is that sponsors make plans look more underfunded
before the freeze to negotiate with participants (see for example Comprix and Muller (2011)).
       According to the plans' own reporting, service costs (accruals) for freeze plans are
somewhat lower as a share of payroll, by around 0.9% at the mean. However, these service costs
are higher as a percentage of total sponsor assets, reflecting the fact that total assets are smaller.
The differences presented in the table suggest that the expected growth rate of the total liability
and cost as a percentage of corporate assets are higher for firms that are about to be frozen than
firms that are not. Indeed, based on estimates described in the previous section, freeze firms have
benefit factors that are 9 basis points greater than firms that do not freeze.
       Looking at Panel B of Table 2 (CB plans), we observe broadly similar patterns. CB plans
that ultimately freeze have worse funding and a higher ratio of active participants. In contrast to
the relation between freeze and non-freeze traditional DB plans, there is some evidence that the
CB plans that ultimately freeze are, at the mean, somewhat larger than those that do not. Finally,
as was the case with traditional DB plans, the CB plans that ultimately freeze have lower service
costs as a share of payroll but higher service costs as a fraction of corporate assets.
4.5. The Freeze Decision and Matched control samples
       To examine whether the decision to freeze is in part driven by prospective accruals, we use
propensity score­matched control samples, and we also estimate a linear probability model. Our
identifying assumption is that prospective accruals are uncorrelated with omitted factors that could
be leading firms to freeze.
       The goal of using our control samples is to eliminate the confounding factors of unobserved
industry-level trends, year-level correlations such as changes in regulation following the Pension
Protection Act of 2006, and other potential covariates. We construct five control samples for this
analysis: 1) Non-freezes, the entire universe of plans that did not freeze during our sample period
for which age-service tables were available; 2) Ind Controls, the subsample of the non-freezes
within the same two-digit SIC code and year; 3) PS Match1, the subsample of the non-freezes
group matched on propensity scores calculated based on two-digit SIC, ABO, and year; 4) PS
Match2, the subsample of the non-freezes group matched on propensity scores calculated based


                                                  22
on two-digit SIC, ABO funding ratio, and year; and 5) PS Match3, the subsample of the non-
freezes group matched on propensity scores based on two-digit SIC, ABO, funding ratio, and year.
The propensity score is the conditional probability of treatment assignment given ex ante variables
(Rosenbaum and Rubin (1983, 1985); Heckman and Vytlacil (2007)). We follow a similar
matching procedure to identify matched plans for CB plans freezes from a large sample of CB
plans that did not freeze, among observations for which the pay credit is available.
       The final treatment sample includes 116 traditional pension freezes and 40 cash balance
freezes. Our control groups have 4,896 plans, 1,634 industry control plans, and 116 PS Matched
plans. Similarly, we identify 1,641 non-freeze CB plans and 40 PS Matched CB plans.
       The purpose of developing these control groups is to assess the extent to which higher
accruals in fact influence a firm's decision to freeze their DB or CB plan. This hypothesis contrasts
with two main alternatives. First, sponsor financing constraints may make the sponsorship of DB
plans costly ­ given the typical equity-heavy pension fund portfolio, firms face the risk of having
to contribute more to DB plans during times when they have profitable investment opportunities.
Second, it is possible that firms freeze DB plans and introduce DC plans in response to changes
over time in the value that employees place on having a DB pension, whose value to the employee
rises convexly with the number of years the employee works at the firm.
       The construction of PS Match2 and PS Match3 are specifically created to address the
possibility that higher accruals could be correlated with greater financing constraints, since large
plans with high levels of unfunded liabilities are more likely to create financial hardship for the
sponsor in coming years. Regarding the second alternative hypothesis, while firms with higher
accruals could in theory be the same firms where workers value the DB plan less, in practice, this
seems very unlikely. If freeze firm employees valued the DB less than employees at control firms,
then why would they have ended up at a point where they have higher accruals than employees
control firms? We also address this question more directly, as we include an industry level mobility
control in our linear probability model.


5. Results
5.1. Accrual comparisons
       In this section, we first document that the projected future DB accruals of freeze plans
(conditional on not freezing) are larger than those of non-freeze plans. Then, using propensity


                                                 23
control samples, we show that the savings achieved through the plan freeze are not due to other
observable factors that could have led to cost savings even in the absence of freezing. Finally, we
test the hypothesis that the higher accruals cause firms to freeze by using a linear probability
model, and we include additional controls to capture possible confounding factors correlated with
high accruals.
       Table 3 shows the results of our accrual estimations. Panel A includes summary statistics
for inputs to the accrual calculation including the salary growth, discount rate, benefit factor, and
employee entry and exit rates (see table for descriptions). Panel B presents  , , our measure of the
reduction in accruals that would occur by freezing today (t) rather than freezing s years in the
future. We scale accruals by total firm assets, under the assumption that the firm cares about the
cost savings of the freeze compared with the total value of the firm.
       As discussed earlier, we compute two measures of accruals: one that includes accruals by
all current and future workers and one that includes only current workers. The first measure,
presented on the left of panel B, captures how much a firm could potentially save by freezing its
plan today rather than in the future and measures a cross-section of accruals for all workers rather
than tracking workers throughout their careers. The second measure, presented on the right of
panel B, captures the full transitional cost savings of all current workers through the end of their
career, when accruals are relatively higher. This distinction allows us to differentiate between
savings coming from current and future employees, whereby we do not attempt to estimate long-
horizon savings from future employees given the uncertainty about future entry rates.
       Accruals for current and future workers are estimated for 1, 5, and 10 years. The first row
contains the t,s for plans that froze. We estimate that in the absence of the freeze, projected 1-year
accruals would have been 0.41% of assets and 10-year accruals would have been 3.2% of current
firm assets. The second row presents comparable data on plans that were not frozen. The projected
one-year accruals for these plans were 0.26% of assets. The absolute difference between
counterfactual freeze and projected non-freeze plan accruals amounts to 0.15% (=0.0041-0.0026)
of assets at a 1-year horizon and 1.04% (=0.0321-0.0217) of assets at a 10-year horizon (these
differences are statistically significant at the 1% level). Thus, had the freeze plans not frozen, their
subsequent one-year accruals would have been 57% higher (0.41% of assets compared with 0.26%
of assets) and their 10-year accruals 48% higher than comparable accruals for non-freeze plans.
Restricting the control sample to the plans that are in the same two-digit SIC industry and year as

                                                  24
the freeze plans yields very similar results. Thus, plans that freeze have greater potential cost
savings from halting accruals than plans that do not freeze.
         As we saw in the comparison of means in Table 2, plans that freeze differ in meaningful
ways from plans that do not freeze. Most critically, they are smaller in terms of total liabilities,
and they also have lower funding ratios.31 The PS Match lines in Table 3 show the counterfactual
freeze plan accruals relative to the projected accruals of propensity score­matched firms that do
not freeze. The accruals of the propensity score­matched samples are in almost all cases slightly
lower than the accruals of the larger and more general control samples. Overall, comparing the
estimated counterfactual accruals of the freeze plans with the estimated accruals of the PS Matched
control plans yields very similar results to the differences we find when we use the larger and more
general control samples.32
         The right panel of Table 3 shows analogous accruals calculations for current workers only.
The estimated forgone accruals on a 10-year horizon for current workers are only marginally
smaller than those estimated in the left panel for current and future workers, which is a reflection
of relatively small accruals for new hires over the first 10 years, as well as relatively low entry
rates. For the 45-year measures, we find that the present value of future accruals for current
workers is 5.1% of current firm assets, or 65% higher than the 10-year measure. In both the 10-
year and 45-year calculations, we find that counterfactual accruals for freeze firms are around 56%
higher than for non-freezes, and even larger relative to the PS matched samples.
         Table 4 shows that future accruals are also larger CB plan freezes compared to a set of
similarly constructed controls. Pay credit is calculated as a participant-weighted average across
different age-service groups. We find that mean entry and exit ratios, salary growth, and discount
rates are similar across freeze and non-freeze plans, while mean pay credit is somewhat higher for
freeze than for non-freeze plans. In Panel B of Table 4 we show accrual calculations for the freeze
and control samples of CB plans. As with traditional DB, we find that plans that froze had higher
projected accruals than comparable plans that did not freeze. For example, for PS1, the difference
amounts to 0.08% (=0.0027-0.0019) of assets at a 1-year horizon and 0.62% (=0.0190-0.0128) of


31
   Other inputs, such as mean salary growth, entry rates, discount rates, and benefit factors are similar for freeze and
the non-freeze PS matched firms (see Table 3 panel A for statistics on the PS1 sample, as an example).
32
   In separate analyses, we also examine whether freeze and non-freeze firms share common trends before freezes
occur. Our results, as shown in Appendix Fig. A.4, show no significant differentials, suggesting that firms are not
flattening out their benefit structures before the freeze.


                                                          25
assets at a 10-year horizon.33
         Fig. 2 illustrates these patterns graphically, where the most relevant comparison is the
accruals of the freeze sample (solid line) to the accruals of the matched controls (dotted line). The
upper-left graph shows the accruals scaled by total assets. The lower-left graph does the same for
CB plans. These graphs correspond directly to the rows in panel B Table 3 and 4, respectively.
         We also examine the relations in panel B of Tables 3 and 4 and in Fig. 2 for an alternative
scaling measure: accruals as a share of payroll (see the right side of Fig. 2 for the comparable
graphs). Under this scaling, the differences are not significant. The graphs show that when scaling
by total payroll, both the unmatched and the matched sample of non-freeze firms have larger
accruals as a share of payroll than the freeze firms, but again these differences are insignificant.
These results reflect the fact that non-freeze firms have much higher assets but similar payroll to
freeze firms, i.e. that freeze firms have a much higher ratio of payroll to assets (see Table 2). The
difference in accruals as a share of total assets is therefore in part because freeze firms have
relatively larger payrolls relative to assets, and in part to the different age-service distributions and
plan parameters (higher benefit factors and salary growth) of freeze firms.
         Fig. 3 examines one potential explanation for why freeze and non-freeze plans could differ
in their accruals: specifically, the age and service distribution of the workforce. The left graph
shows the age distribution of freeze and non-freeze plans, and the right graph shows the service
distributions.34 Below the graphs we show tests of statistical significance for differences at each
point. Freeze firms have more workers aged 55 to 64 and fewer workers aged 40 to 54 than
comparable firms that do not freeze. Specifically, around 1.5% less of the workforce is 40 to 44
years old, around 1.5% less of the workforce is 45 to 49 years old, around 2.5% more of the
workforce is 55 to 59, and around 1% more of the workforce is 60 to 64. Service patterns are
similar but more extreme. Freeze plans have a higher share of very long-tenured employees with
30 years or more service, and a correspondingly lower share of workers with 5 to 29 years of
service.
         To further isolate the relative importance of various accrual factors that explain the
observed accrual differences between freeze and non-freeze firms presented in Table 3, we


33
   The results for CB plans differ across control groups more than they did for the DB plans. This may be due to the
smaller sample sizes.
34
   For the freeze plans, the graphs are based only on observations in years before the freeze.


                                                         26
undertake in Table 5 a more precise decomposition of these differences based on benefit-related
parameters, demographic factors, and the size of the labor force relative to firm assets.35 In each
panel, the starting point is the counterfactual prospective DB accruals (including current and future
workers) relative to assets for freeze firms. The characteristics of each firm are then replaced with
those of the propensity score­matched controls sequentially and cumulatively, and the prospective
DB accruals are recalculated.
        In all cases, adjusting for both the total sponsor assets and the total number of participants
has a substantial effect on accruals. For example, in PS Match1, the combined effect decreases
accruals from 0.0041 to 0.0031--about half of the differential accruals between the freeze plans
and their matched sample.36 This fact suggests that labor is more important in the firm production
function for sponsors that freeze their plans than for those that do not. The plan age-service
distribution of participants (demographics) and salaries (human capital) have a further effect of
decreasing the difference in accruals by about 21% (that is, (0.0031-0.0027)/(0.0041-0.0022)). The
remaining difference of about 26% is attributed to the combined effect of plan-level assumptions
on the benefit formulas (the benefit factor, salary growth, and the discount factor).
        To further examine whether the decision to freeze is related to prospective accruals, we
estimate a linear probability model for the probability of a freeze. This analysis follows from the
identification concern that firms with higher accruals may be more likely to freeze for other
reasons. We therefore include in the estimation a number of controls, such as firm level financial
constraints, plan health, and labor market characteristics.
        For instance, firms in a weak financial position, as reflected by profitability and interest
coverage ratios, might freeze plans to avoid the liquidity or cash-flow problems associated with
having to fund DB plans. Sponsors of worse-funded plans have greater incentives to freeze plans
for corporate financial purposes. Finally, firms with strong employee representation (such as
unions) may be expected to help employees to recuperate more of the losses from the foregone
accruals through salary increases or greater contributions to the DC plans that will replace DB
accruals.



35
   Our exploration is motivated, for example, by the observation that freeze firms have a more pronounced group of
older and longer-tenured workers. Appendix Fig. A.3 shows the joint age-service distribution for freeze plans (Panel
A), non-freeze plans (Panel B), and the difference between the two (Panel C).
36
   The results hold independent of the particular propensity score control sample used.


                                                        27
         Table 6 shows the results of our linear probability model that examines the impact of one-
year accruals on the probability of freezing.37 Plan-year observations after the plan has been frozen
are excluded, and all standard errors are clustered at the firm level. The first column shows that
firms with higher estimated accruals as a share of total firm assets (t,t+1 /TA) in the year following
the freeze are more likely to freeze, controlling for the size of the plan. The marginal effect is 1.7,
which implies that for each 1 percentage point increase in DB accruals scaled by total assets, there
is a 1.7 percentage point higher probability of the plan freezing. One standard deviation of t,t+1
/TA is 0.4%, so a plan with one standard deviation more accruals is 0.7 (=0.4*1.7) percentage
points more likely to be frozen, which compares with an unconditional sample freeze probability
of 2.2%.38
         The next two columns explore further whether the effect comes from within-industry
variation or from within-firm variation. Column (2) includes industry fixed effects. It reveals that
within industries, firms with larger savings are more likely to freeze, suggesting that competitive
effects are likely important determinants of freeze decisions. Column (3), which includes firm
fixed effects, addresses a different question, which is the timing of the freeze for firms that choose
to freeze, as there is no variation over time in the dependent variable for a given non-freeze firm.
The results show that the timing of the freeze is driven by sponsor and plan financial
characteristics, such as lower profitability and interest coverage and worsening funding status. As
the DB accruals themselves do not vary substantially for a given firm across time, the accruals are
not a statistically significant predictor of when a given freeze will occur.
         The remaining columns explore the impact of industry-level labor market characteristics,
such as labor tightness, labor mobility, and average tenure. Across industries, freezes are more
likely to occur where jobs are more likely to be available and job-to-job transitions are high.
However, changes of these industry level variables over time do not appear to have a significant
impact on pension freezes.39 We conclude that while the decision to freeze is a combined result of
industry and firm level pressures, cost savings remain an important element of this decision.



37
   Results are qualitatively similar using a probit model.
38
   As a robustness check, we re-ran Table 6 using the market value of assets rather than book value. The results
(presented in the Appendix, Table A.3) are qualitatively similar, but the coefficients on accruals are larger and the p-
values are smaller.
39
   We also ran a specification that included a dummy for whether the firm had been taken over in the previous 3 years.
The coefficient on the dummy was not significant and other coefficients were similar to those in our baseline.
                                                          28
5.2. Realized cost savings
        In this section, we analyze the degree to which the drop in DB costs due to a freeze is offset
by an increase in DC costs. If the employer increases DC contributions by as much as (or more
than) the DB accruals would have been in the absence of the freeze, then the firm does not save
any costs. For this exercise, we are interested in the absolute amount of ex-post cost savings of
firms that froze, rather than the amount relative to those that did not freeze.40 We make the
identifying assumption that had they not frozen, freeze firms' 401(k) contributions as a percent of
payroll would have stayed the same. We also assume that there are no other offsets to the
employees, such as improvements in non-pension fringe benefits or compensating salary changes
(we address the latter in the next section).
        Table 7 shows counterfactual DB accruals and estimated actual increases in 401(k)
contributions for both firms that freeze traditional DB plans and those that freeze CB plans, at the
sponsor-firm level.41 Given that 401k contributions are more naturally presented as a percentage
of salary, the table reports savings also as a percentage of payroll.
        The left side of the table estimates the cost savings for all workers from freezing the plan
today instead of freezing 1, 5, and 10 years in the future. The right side of the table shows the cost
savings from current workers only, over 10 years (for comparison) and 45 years (at which point
all current workers will have separated from the firm). For each side of the table, we include three
sets of rows, corresponding to three scaling measures: current payroll, current firm assets, and the
present value of future payroll (of all workers in the left panel and of current workers only in the
right panel). For all of these combinations, we present the projected accruals that would have
occurred if the firm had not frozen the plan, the estimated increases in 401(k) contributions that
occurred as a result of the freeze, and the difference between the two, which we refer to as realized
cost savings.
        Consider first the savings from both current and future workers. Compared with a one-year
counterfactual DB accrual of 6.1% of payroll, firms increase contributions to DC plans by 2.6%
of payroll in the first year after the freeze, a difference of 3.5% of payroll. Over 10 years, compared
with counterfactual DB accruals of 49.6% of current payroll, we estimate that firms will contribute


40
   Moreover, even if we were interested in a relative measure, we have no way of knowing the counterfactual of what
401(k) contributions would have been for the non-freeze firms had they chosen to freeze.
41
   The number of observations is smaller because a few sponsors freeze multiple plans.


                                                        29
to 401(k) plans an extra amount equal in present value to 10.4% of current payroll, a difference of
39.2% of current payroll.42 The next rows show that firms save 3.1% of current assets over 10
years net of the increase in 401(k) contributions. The third set of rows shows that over 10 years,
freeze firms save 8.1% of the present value of future payroll of all current and future workers.
         The estimates on the right side of the table on current workers only suggest that virtually
all of the accruals and cost savings over the 10-year period come from current workers. Savings
over 10 years from current workers alone amount to 37.8% of current payroll, 3.0% of current
assets, and 8.3% of the present value of future payroll, compared to 39.2%, 3.1%, and 8.1% for
the open group.43 The 45-year estimates show substantially more cost-saving than the 10 year
estimates, equal to 62.5% of current payroll, 5.1% of current firm assets, and 13.5% of the present
value of the corresponding future payroll. Thus current workers are estimated to lose 13.5% of
their entire future payroll at the firm as a result of the pension freeze. This substantial number
arises due to the high DB accruals that would have been earned by current workers later in their
careers had the pension freeze not occurred.
         Panel B of Table 7 shows that for CB plans, both the counterfactual accruals and the
estimated 401(k) increases are significantly smaller. Nevertheless, the net cost savings from the
perspective of the firm are still substantial. Specifically, freezing of the CB plans is estimated to
have saved firms 5.8% of future payroll over a 10-year (open group) horizon, or around 72% of
the 10-year savings realized in DB freezes.
         In Fig. 4, we investigate the extent to which the cost savings is greater for certain age
groups. The upper graph shows the accruals for the freeze plans by age group, minus the increases
in 401(k) contributions, scaled by total current aggregate payroll. Because the estimates are scaled
by plan-level payroll rather than payroll of the age group, the estimates reflect both differences
across age groups in accrual rates as a percentage of own salary and differences in the number of
workers in each age group. Relative to the projected increase in 401(k) contributions for these


42
   These estimates are close to those reported by Towers Watson (2009). Although their data sources and analysis are
very different from ours, they find that "sponsors that transitioned from DB to DC-only coverage increased their DC
benefits values by an average of 27 percentage points (of payroll), but the enhancement covered only about half of the
DB value lost by closing or freezing pension plans."
43
   It is possible (as in the third set) for the savings from current workers only to be higher than the savings from all
current and future workers, as the freeze could increase 10-year costs for future hires. This could occur if in the absence
of the freeze their DB accruals when starting out would have been less than the 401(k) contributions they now receive
instead.


                                                            30
plans, the figure shows that for the youngest employees (ages 20 to 34), the increased 401(k)
contributions mostly offset the lost DB accruals.44 The most saving is achieved at the expense of
the workers in the oldest age group (ages 50 to 65), followed by those in the middle group (ages
35 to 49). For example, over 10 years, there is a difference of approximately 18% of payroll for
employees aged 35 to 49, and there is a difference of 21% of payroll for employees aged 50 to 65.
The total cost savings for firms (39% of payroll, as reported in Table 7) is therefore achieved
because the increase in DC contributions is small relative to the forgone DB accruals for workers
in the 35­65 age range. The lower graph shows the same accruals scaled by plan assets, where the
patterns are broadly similar.
         These findings suggest that at least older employees are made worse-off by the change.
Suppose that workers value a dollar of DC accruals at cost, but mark down a dollar of DB accruals
by a fraction a that varies with age a. For all workers to value new DC benefits the same as their
prior DB benefits, the markdown factor a would have to be increasing with age as well. This
seems implausible ­ if anything it seems more likely that a would be higher for younger workers,
as these are the workers who would potentially be most bothered by the lack of choice, control,
and transparency inherent in DB plans. In addition, it seems implausible that the markdown ratios
for older workers would be high enough to make them indifferent to the DB freeze.45
5.3. Compensating salary growth
         In Table 8, we examine whether there is a compensating differential through salary
increases after freezes. In fact, we find the opposite. There are 72 plan-year freeze observations
for which salary data exist in at least one year before the freeze and one year after the freeze.
Before the freeze, employees in these plans see average salary growth of 4.35%, but the year after
the freeze their salary only grows by an average of 2.56%. Furthermore, control firms see
comparable salary growth in years before the freeze and substantially higher salary growth in the
year after the freeze. To the extent that the observed variables, including a low pension funding
ratio, capture a sponsor's weak financial condition, these results suggest that salary growth would


44
   As expected, savings are in fact slightly negative in the near future for the youngest cohorts, as their projected
accruals as a percent of current salary tend to be small. Note that the smaller magnitudes in the graph reflect the
cumulative net savings per groups at the plan level and therefore the fact that the younger cohorts have a smaller
number of participants.
45
   It would be interesting to know how freezes affected new hiring after the freeze. The data necessary to investigate
this are unfortunately not available at the plan level. Noiser plan sponsor level data on employment do not indicate
any consistent differences between the subsequent employment growth of freeze and control firms.
                                                         31
not have been substantially lower in the absence of the freeze, and that the cost savings from
freezing are not being offset by higher salaries. The observed salary decreases for freeze firms may
arise as part of the same cost-saving pressures that cause freezes.
6. Conclusion
       In this paper, we show that the decision to freeze corporate DB plans is positively related
to prospective cost savings resulting from the freeze. Our results imply either that workers do not
value DB pensions as much as equal-cost DC benefits; or that labor market frictions exist that
result in some or all workers being compensated more than their outside option or marginal
product, so that firms can save costs by cutting prospective pension accruals; or both.
       Additional evidence on the differential impact on different demographic groups suggests
that both factors lead to cost savings. In the absence of compensating wage changes, freezes that
replace accrual structures that increase with age and tenure with flat ones cut the compensation of
older, longer-tenured workers more than that of younger, shorter-tenured workers. Since it is
implausible that older workers would particularly value DC over DB benefits, these findings imply
that at least part of the cost savings come from reducing the welfare of older workers. One possible
model consistent with this evidence is one in which workers accumulate firm-specific human
capital that creates a growing wedge between their marginal product to the firm and their outside
option. The implicit promise of the DB pension to provide higher accruals to more senior workers
could represent one (imperfect) way of committing the firm to not exploit its growing monopoly
power over the worker. The freezing of DB plans would represent a reneging on such an implicit
contract.
       However, the finding that firms achieve substantial cost savings by freezing cash balance
plans, in which accrual profiles have the same or similar shapes as DC contributions, suggests that
compensation cuts that primarily reduce the welfare of more senior workers are not the only source
of cost savings. Some cost savings from a pension freeze therefore likely arise because workers
undervalue DB benefits and perceive themselves as no worse-off with a lower-cost DC plan.
       The fact that the pace of freezes has accelerated is suggestive of the idea that some of the
factors that we have identified have become more important over time. While we do not provide
evidence of long-term changes in potential cost saving, the long-term decline in nominal interest
rates certainly increases accruals under fixed benefit contracts, and the timing of firms' reneging
on implicit contracts may reflect their increasing market power in the labor markets they face.


                                                 32
REFERENCES
Aaronson, S., Coronado, J., 2005. Are firms or workers behind the shift away from DB pension
     plans? Finance and economics discussion series 2005-17. Board of Governors of the Federal
     Reserve System (U.S.), Washington.

Ballester, M., Fried, D., Livnat, J., 2002. Pension plan contributions and financial slack. Working
     paper. New York University, New York.

Beaudoin, C., Chandar, N., Werner, E., 2010. Are potential effects of SFAS 158 associated with
    firms' decisions to freeze their defined benefit pension plans? Review of Accounting and
    Finance 9, 424­451.

Belt, B., 2005. Testimony before the Committee on Education and the Workforce. U.S. House of
      Representatives, Washington.

Benzoni, L., Collin-Dufresne, P., Goldstein, R., 2007. Portfolio choice over the life-cycle when
    the stock and labor markets are cointegrated. Journal of Finance 62, 2123­2167.

Bergstresser, D., Desai, M., Rauh, J., 2006. Earnings manipulation, pension assumptions, and
     managerial investment decisions. Quarterly Journal of Economics 121, 157­195.

Beshears, J., Choi, J., Laibson, D., Madrian, B., Zeldes, S., 2014. What makes annuitization more
     appealing? Journal of Public Economics 116, 2­16.

Bewley, T., 1999. Why wages don't fall during a recession. Harvard University Press, Cambridge,
    MA.

Black, F., 1980. The tax consequences of long-run pension policy. Financial Analyst Journal 36(4),
     21­28.

Bodie, Z., Marcus, A., Merton, R., 1988. Defined benefit versus defined contribution pension
     plans: What are the real trade-offs? In: Z. Bodie, J.B. Shoven, and D.A. Wise, eds., Pensions
     in the U.S. Economy. National Bureau of Economic Research, 139­162.

Brown, J., Liang, N., Weisbenner, S., 2007. Individual account investment options and portfolio
    choice: behavioral lessons from 401(k) plans. Journal of Public Economics 91, 1992­2013.

Brown, J., Kapteyn, A., Luttmer, E.F.P., Mitchell, O., Samek, A., 2019. Behavioral impediments
    to valuing annuities: complexity and choice Bracketing, NBER Working Paper 24101.

Bulow, J., 1982. What are corporate pension liabilities? Quarterly Journal of Economics 97, 435­
    452.

Butrica, B., Iams, H., Smith, K., Toder, E., 2009. The disappearing defined benefit pension and its
     potential impact on the retirement incomes of baby boomers. Social Security Bulletin 69(3),
     1­28.

Chen, J., Kacperczyk, M., Ortiz-Molina, H., 2011. Labor unions, operating flexibility, and the cost

                                                33
     of equity. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 46, 25­58.

Choi J., Laibson, D., Madrian, B., Metrick, A., 2004. For better or for worse: default effects and
     401(k) savings behavior. In: Wise, D.A. (Ed.), Perspectives in the Economics of Aging.
     University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 81­121.

Choy, H., Lin, J., Officer, M., 2014. Does freezing a defined benefit pension plan affect firm risk?
    Journal of Accounting and Economics 57, 1­21.

Clark, R., McDermed, A., 1990. The choice of pension plans in a changing regulatory
     environment. American Enterprise Institute, Washington

Cocco, J., 2014. Corporate pension plans. Annual Review of Financial Economics 6, 163­184.

Cocco, J., Volpin, P., 2007. The corporate governance of defined benefit pension plans: evidence
    from the United Kingdom. Financial Analysts Journal 63, 70­83.

Cocco, J., Volpin, P., 2013. Corporate pension plans as takeover deterrents. Journal of Financial
    and Quantitative Analysis 48, 1119­1144.

Cohen, L., Schmidt, B., 2009. Attracting flows by attracting big clients. Journal of Finance 64,
    2125­2151.

Comprix, J., Muller, K., 2011. Pension plan accounting estimates and the freezing of defined
    benefit pension plans. Journal of Accounting and Economics 51(1-2), 115­133.

Copeland, C., VanDerhei, J., 2010. The declining role of private defined benefit pension plans:
     who is affected, and how. In: Clark, R., Mitchell, O. (Eds.), Reorienting Retirement Risk
     Management. Oxford University Press, Oxford, England, 122­136.

Coronado, J., Sharpe, S., 2003. Did pension plan accounting contribute to a stock market bubble?
    Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, 323­359.

Dolls, M., Doerrenberg, P., Peichl, A., Stichnoth, H., 2018. Do retirement savings increase in
     response to information about retirement and expected pensions? Journal of Public
     Economics 158, 168-179.

Feldstein, M., Seligman, S., 1981. Pension funding, share prices, and national savings. Journal of
     Finance 36(4), 801­824.

Fitzpatrick, M., 2015. How much do public school teachers value their pension benefits? American
     Economic Journal: Economic Policy 7(4), 165­188.

Franzoni, F., Marin, J., 2006. Pension plan funding and stock market efficiency. Journal of Finance
     61, 921­956.

Friedberg, L., Owyang, M., 2004. Explaining the evolution of pension structure and job tenure.
     NBER working paper 10714.

                                                34
Friedberg, L., Owyang, M., Sinclair, T., 2006. Searching for better prospects: endogenizing falling
     job tenure and private pension coverage. Topics in Economic Analysis and Policy 6(1),
     Article 14.

Geanakoplos, J., Zeldes, S., 2018. The market value of social security. Working paper, Columbia
    University.

Geanakoplos, J., Zeldes, S., 2010. Market valuation of accrued social security benefits. In: Lucas,
    D. (Ed.), Measuring and Managing Federal Financial Risk. University of Chicago Press,
    Chicago, 213­233.

Government Accountability Office, 2008. Defined benefit pensions: plan freezes affect millions
    of participants and may pose retirement income challenges. Report to congressional
    addressees. Washington.

Gustman, A., Steinmeier T., 1992. The stampede towards defined contribution plans. Industrial
    Relations 31, 361­369.

Gustman A., Steinmeier T., 2014. Integrating retirement models: Understanding household
    retirement decisions. Research in Labor Economics 80, 81-114.

Heckman, J., Vytlacil, E., 2007. Econometric evaluation of social programs: causal models,
    structural models, and econometric policy evaluation. In: Heckman, J., Leamer, E. (Eds.),
    Handbook of Econometrics 6B. Elsevier, Amsterdam, 4779­4874.

Holzmann, R., 2013. Global pension systems and their reform. International Social Security
    Review 66(2), 1­29.

Howitt, P., March, 2002. Looking inside the labor market: a review article. Journal of Economic
    Literature 40, 125­138.

Ippolito, R., 1985. The labor contract and true economic pension liabilities. The American
     Economic Review 75, 1031-1043.

Ippolito, R., Thompson, J., 2000. The survival rate of defined benefit plans, 1987­1995. Industrial
     Relations 39, 228­245.

Jin, L., Merton, R., Bodie, Z., 2006. Do a firm's equity returns reflect the risk of its pension plan?
      Journal of Financial Economics 81, 1­26.

Klasa, S., Maxwell, W., Molina, H., 2009. The strategic use of corporate cash holdings in
     collective bargaining with labor unions. Journal of Financial Economics 92, 421­442

Kruse, D., 1995. Pension substitution in the 1980s: why the shift toward defined contribution
     plans? Industrial Relations 34, 218­241.

Lazear, E., 1979. Why is there mandatory retirement? The Journal of Political Economy 6, 1261­
     1284.

                                                 35
Lazear, E., 1983. Pensions as severance pay. In: Bodie, Z., Shoven, J. (Eds.), Financial Aspects of
     the United States Pension System. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 57­89.

Lazear, E., Moore, R., 1988. Pensions and turnover. In: Bodie Z., Shoven, J., Wise, D. (Eds.),
     Pensions in the U.S. Economy. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 163­88.

Love, D., Smith, P., Wilcox, D., 2011. The effect of regulation on optimal corporate pension risk.
     Journal of Financial Economics 101, 18­35.

Lucas, D., Zeldes, S., 2006. Valuing and hedging defined benefit pension obligations--the role of
     stocks revisited. Working paper, Columbia University.

Matsa, D., 2010. Capital structure as a strategic variable: evidence from collective bargaining.
     Journal of Finance 65, 1197­1232.

Matsa, D., Agrawal, A., 2013. Labor unemployment risk and corporate financing decisions.
     Journal of Financial Economics 108, 449­470.

McFarland, P., Pang, G., Warshawsky, M., 2009. Does freezing a defined-benefit pension plan
    increase company value? empirical evidence. Financial Analysts Journal 65(4), 47­59.

Milevsky, M., Song, K., 2010. Do markets like frozen defined benefit pension plans? an event
     study. Journal of Risk and Insurance 77, 893­909.

Mitchell, O., Fields, G., 1984. The economics of retirement behavior. Journal of Labor Economics
     42, 84­105.

Munnell, A., Soto, M., 2007. Why are companies freezing their pensions? Working paper 2007-
    22. Center for Retirement Research, Boston College, Boston.

Munnell, A., Quinby, L., 2012. Legal constraints on changes in state and local pensions. Brief
    SLP#25. Center for Retirement Research, Boston College, Boston.

Novy-Marx, R., Rauh, J., 2011. Public pension promises: how big are they and what are they
    worth? Journal of Finance 66, 1207­1245.

Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation, 2013. Single-employer DB plan freezes. Pension Benefit
     Guaranty Corporation, Washington.

Petersen, M., 1992. Pension reversions and worker-stockholder wealth transfers. Quarterly Journal
      of Economics 107, 1033­1056.

Petersen, M., 1994. Cash flow variability and firm's pension choice: a role for operating leverage.
     Journal of Financial Economics 36, 361­383.

Phan, H., Hegde, S., 2012. Pension contributions and firm performance: evidence from frozen
     defined benefit plans. Financial Management 42, 373­411.

Piketty, T., Saez, E., Stantcheva, S., 2014. Optimal Taxation of Top Labor Incomes: A Tale of
                                                36
     Three Elasticities. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 4(1), 230-271.

Pool, V., Sialm, C., Stefanescu, I., 2016. It pays to set the menu: mutual fund investment options
      in 401(k) plans. Journal of Finance 71, 1779-1812.

Pontiff, Jeffrey, Andrei Shleifer, and Michael S Weisbach, 1990. Reversions of Excess Pension
     Assets after Takeovers. Rand Journal of Economics 21(4), 600­613.

Poterba J., Rauh, J., Venti, S., Wise, D., 2007. Defined contribution plans, defined benefit plans,
     and the accumulation of retirement wealth. Journal of Public Economics 91, 2062­2086.

Rauh, J., 2006a. Investment and financing constraints: evidence from the funding of corporate
     pension plans. Journal of Finance 61, 33­71.

Rauh, J., 2006b. Own company stock in 401(k) plans: a takeover defense? Journal of Financial
     Economics 81, 379­410.

Rosen, S., 1974. Hedonic prices and implicit markets: product differentiation in pure competition.
    Journal of Political Economy 82, 34­55.

Rosenbaum, P., Rubin, D., 1983. The central role of the propensity score in observational studies
    for causal effects. Biometrika 70, 41­55.

Rosenbaum, P., Rubin, D., 1985. Constructing a control group using multivariate matched
     sampling methods that incorporate the propensity score. American Statistician 39, 33­38.

Rubin, J., 2007. The impact of pension freezes on firm value. Wharton Research Scholars Journal
     39.

Samwick, A., Skinner, J., 2004. How will 401(k) pension plans affect retirement income?
    American Economic Review 94, 329­343.

Shapiro, C., Stiglitz, J., 1984. Equilibrium unemployment as a worker discipline device. American
     Economic Review 74, 433­444.

Sharpe, W., 1976. Corporate pension fund policy. Journal of Financial Economics 3, 183­193.

Shivdasani, A., Stefanescu, I., 2010. How do pensions plans affect capital structure decisions?
     Review of Financial Studies 23, 1287­1323.

Simintzi, E., Vig, V., Volpin, P., 2015. Labor protection and leverage. Review of Financial Studies
     28, 561­591.

Stock, J., Wise, D., 1990. Pensions, the option value of work, and retirement. Econometrica 58,
     1151­1180.

Tepper, I., 1981. Taxation and corporate pension policy. Journal of Finance 36, 1­13.

Towers Watson, 2009. Employer Commitment to Retirement Plans in the United States,

                                                37
     Washington.

VanDerhei, J., 2006. Defined benefit plan freezes: Who's affected, how much, and replacing lost
    accruals. EBRI issue brief 291, Employee Benefits Research Institute, Washington.

Willis Towers Watson, 2018. Retirement offerings in the Fortune 500: A retrospective. Insider Vol
      28, No 2.

Yu, K., 2014. Excess of the PBO over the ABO and hard pension freezes. Review of Quantitative
     Finance and Accounting 46, 1-28.




                                               38
                                                 Table 1: Sample selection of defined benefit plans

This table describes our sample selection process. First, we identify all defined benefit (DB) plans filing Form 5500 with the Internal Revenue Service and
the Department of Labor (Column 1). Second, we extract the subset of plans sponsored by companies covered by Compustat (Column 2). Our methodology
requires the disclosure of the age-service matrix, which is only mandated for plans with more than 1,000 active participants. We therefore restrict the sample
based on whether the plan reported more than 1,000 active participants for at least one year during our sample period (Column 3). The age-service matrix is
disclosed in the attachments to Form 5500. We screen our sample for the availability of such attachments (Column 4). We manually search these filings for
the age-service matrices that contain participants and salary information. We report the number of plans for which participant information is available in
Column 5. For confidentiality purposes, the salary information is only disclosed for cells with more than 20 participants. We report the number of plans for
which salary information exists in Column 6. As a first screen test, we identify hard freezes based on the plan disclosure from Form 5500 (Column 7).
Separately, we identify all DB plans that disclose a cash balance feature (Column 8). When these plans disclose a cash balance plan (CB) table in the
attachments, we report it in Column 9.

    Fiscal                Linked to            w/ at least         w/         w/ participants   w/ salary         w/ hard           w/ CB         w/ cash
             Universe
     year                 Compustat           1,000 active    attachments          table         table          freeze code         code       balance table
               (1)           (2)                  (3)              (4)              (5)            (6)              (7)              (8)            (9)
    1999     27,733         3335                 1,061             45               45             35                0                5              0
    2000     39,270          4311                1,386             22               17              15               0                 5             0
    2001     40,984          4284                1,413             42               28              22               0                 6             0
    2002     40,904          4065                1,380             51               51              43               3                10             0
    2003     41,171          3912                1,373           1,228             1,205           925               53              271            214
    2004     41,285          3729                1,333           1,296             1,274           988               73              291            260
    2005     41,981          3745                1,342           1,322             1,307           991              100              313            270
    2006     42,413          3604                1,321           1,238             1,197           862              126              284            251
    2007     42,609          3429                1,286           1,175             1,137           780              159              292            255
    2008     47,376          3092                1,197            935               906            614              167              233            211
    2009     36,639          2605                1,055           1,044             1,035           705              189              307            265
    2010     17,208           526                 168             153               147             88               27               32            27
    2011       13
    Total    459,586        40,637               14,315          8,551             8,349          6,068             897             2,049          1,753

                                                                             39
 
                                                  Table 2: Sample statistics: Freeze plans versus non-frozen plans

     The table presents the characteristics of plans that have been frozen (for all years preceding the freeze) relative to all plans that have not been frozen. In Panel A,
     we report the average characteristics for freeze and non-freeze defined benefit (DB) plans (excluding cash balance (CB) plans), while in Panel B we focus on DB
     plans with a CB feature. Funding (%) is defined as plan assets minus plan liabilities divided by plan liabilities. Both plan assets and plan liabilities are collected
     from Form 5500. The pension liability disclosed in Form 5500 is commonly referred to as the accumulated benefit obligation (ABO) and represents the present
     value of all accrued benefits. Active participants (%) is the ratio between the number of active participants and the number of total participants, as reported in Form
     5500. Salary per active participant is calculated based on the age-service salary information. Service cost is the reported expected increase of pension benefits
     during the year, as reported in Form 5500. Payroll is the sum of all participants' salaries, as reported in the age-service tables. Discount rate is the rate used to
     discount future expected pension benefits, as reported in Form 5500. The benefit factor and salary growth are both estimated based on the collected age-service
     tables.

                                                       Panel A: DB excluding CB                                                     Panel B: CB only
                                                                       Non-                                        Freezes                 Non-
                                         N        Freezes       N                       Diff                  N                     N                        Diff
                                                                      Freezes                                                             Freezes
Sponsor level
 Total assets (sponsor) ($mil)             399     22,545       4,897     36,932      -14,387    ***         184      42,355      1,625      61,860         -19,505 *
  Market leverage                          366       0.34        4329         0.3        0.04    **          156        0.37      1502         0.33            0.04
  Interest coverage                        356       7.64        4313      10.23        -2.59    **          151        5.92      1475         8.57           -2.65 **
  EBITDA/Sales                             391       0.15        4614       0.17        -0.02    ***         172        0.18      1571          0.2           -0.02
Plan level
  ABO ($mil)                               409      397         4,981      713            -316   ***         181    2058          1,624    1182                 876   *
  ABO/Total assets (sponsor)               399 10.60%           4,622   8.10%             0.02   ***         181 11.10%           1,624   8.30%               0.028   *
  ABO/Payroll                              409 179.70%          4,977 232.80%          -53.0%    ***         176 241.60%          1,624 295.30%             -53.7%
  Payroll ($mil)                           411      232         5,023      333            -101   ***         184   868.26         1,625    607.4              260.9
  Payroll/Total assets (sponsor)           397   7.80%          4,634   4.80%           3.00%    ***         184   7.60%          1,625   4.50%              3.10%    ***
  Salary per active participant            411   51,904         5,022   58,578          -6,673   ***         181   54,775         1,619   62,213             -7,438
  Active participants (%)                  407 55.70%           4,973 50.20%            5.50%    ***         181 61.80%           1,620 54.60%               7.20%    ***
  Total participants                       409    9,522         4,988   13,810          -4,288   ***         181   33,890         1,624   23,149             10,741   *
  Funding (%)                              409  -6.20%          4,977   2.90%          -9.10%    ***         181  -1.34%          1,624   2.46%             -3.80%    *
  Service Cost/Payroll                     409   5.67%          4,978   6.57%          -0.90%    **          176   5.60%          1,624   7.90%             -2.30%
  Service Cost/Total assets                409   0.60%          4,974   0.40%           0.20%    ***         181   0.78%          1,624   0.41%              0.40%    ***
  Discount rate (%)                        411   6.15%          5,022   6.26%          -0.11%    ***         171   6.10%          1,625   6.30%             -0.10%    **
  Salary growth (%)                        411   4.45%          5,022   4.36%           0.09%                171   4.80%          1,625   4.30%              0.50%    *


                                                                                       40
       
                             Table 3: Projected defined benefit plan accruals for plans in absence of freeze (plan level)

In Panel A, we report summary statistics of various components used in the estimation of benefit accruals. Entry Ratio is calculated as the ratio of participants
with less than one year of service and total participants in the previous year. Exit Ratio is calculated based on the exit probability that we describe in the text,
calculated first at the cell level and then value-weighted using the number of total participants in the previous year. Salary Growth is a plan level variable,
calculated at the plan level based on the growth of salary and the number of participants at the cell level. Discount Rate comes from IRS Form 5500. Benefit
Factor calculation is described in the text. In Panel B we report the estimated accruals for freeze relative to non-freeze plans. For freezes, the table shows the
estimated accrual based on the age-service table for the year preceding the freeze. t,s is the estimated benefit accrual for regular plans. Non-freezes refer to the
group of plans that have not been frozen during the sample period. Ind Controls constrains the non-freezes group based on the two-digit SIC code and year. PS
Match1 selects a matched nonfreezes group based on propensity scores calculated based on two-digit SIC, ABO, and year. PS Match2 selects a matched non-
freezes group based on propensity scores calculated based on two-digit SIC, year, and the funding ratio. PS Match3 selects a matched non-freezes group based
on propensity scores calculated based on two-digit SIC, ABO, year, and the funding ratio.***, **, * indicate the statistical significance of 0.01, 0.05, and 0.1,
respectively, of the difference between the estimated benefit accruals of freezes relative to the control group for the first year following the freeze.
Panel A: Components of the DB accrual calculation (excluding CB)

                                                  Freezes                                                                     PS Match1
                                                     Salary         Discount       Benefit                            Exit       Salary     Discount      Benefit
                   Entry Ratio     Exit Ratio                                                        Entry Ratio
                                                     Growth           Rate         factor                             Ratio      Growth       Rate        factor
    MIN             0.01%              6.14%         -1.21%          4.59%           0.01%             0.01%         4.41%       0.36%        4.59%       0.07%
    MEAN            5.89%             10.82%         4.49%           6.15%           1.32%             5.78%         8.99%        4.44%       6.26%       1.26%
    MEDIAN           4.80%             8.90%         4.40%           6.10%           1.10%             5.31%         8.35%        4.47%       6.10%       1.09%
    MAX             46.10%            72.24%         11.18%          8.26%           4.00%             22.90%        38.17%      11.18%       8.50%       4.00%
    N                 116               116            116            116             116                116           116         116         116         116

Panel B: t,s / Total assets, freeze plans versus non-frozen plans (excluding CB)

                                                         Savings from current and future workers                           Savings from current workers only
                       No. sponsors                  Year +1               Year +5              Year +10                      Year +10              Year +45
    Freezes                 116                      0.0041                0.0181               0.0321                        0.0312                0.0514
    Non-freezes            4896                      0.0026***             0.0119***            0.0217***                     0.0200***             0.0326***
    Ind Controls           1634                      0.0026***             0.0119***            0.0219***                     0.0199***             0.0330***
    PS Match1               116                      0.0022***             0.0103***            0.0192***                     0.0173***             0.0287***
    PS Match2               116                      0.0023***             0.0108***            0.0198***                     0.0181***             0.0300***
    PS Match3               116                      0.0022***             0.0102***            0.0188***                     0.0173***             0.0289***
                                                                                41
 
                               Table 4: Projected cash balance plan accruals for plans in absence of freeze (plan level)
In Panel A, we report summary statistics of various components used in the estimation of benefit accruals for CB plans. Entry Ratio is calculated as the ratio of
participants with less than one year of service and total participants in the previous year. Exit Ratio is calculated based on the exit probability that we describe
in the text, calculated first at the cell level and then value-weighted using the number of total participants in the previous year. Salary Growth is a plan level
variable, calculated at the plan level based on the growth of salary and the number of participants at the cell level. Discount Rate and Pay Credit come from IRS
Form 5500. In Panel B we report the estimated accruals for CB freeze relative to CB non-freeze plans. t,s is the estimated benefit accrual for regular plans. t,sCB
is the estimated benefit accrual for CB plans. PS Match1 selects a matched nonfreezes group based on propensity scores calculated based on two-digit SIC,
ABO, and year. PS Match2 selects a matched non-freezes group based on propensity scores calculated based on two-digit SIC, year, and the funding ratio. PS
Match3 selects a matched non-freezes group based on propensity scores calculated based on two-digit SIC, ABO, year, and the funding ratio.***, **, * indicate
the statistical significance of 0.01, 0.05, and 0.1, respectively, of the difference between the estimated benefit accruals of freezes relative to the control group for
the first year following the freeze.

Panel A: Components of the CB accrual calculation

                                            CBP Freezes                                                                      CBP PS Match1
                                                 Salary       Discount       Pay                                        Exit       Salary      Discount        Pay
                  Entry Ratio     Exit Ratio                                                           Entry Ratio
                                                 Growth         Rate        Credit                                      Ratio      Growth        Rate         Credit
    MIN               0.04%        5.01%          -0.66%       4.98%       2.00%                          0.01%         4.33%      -2.67%        4.98%        2.00%
    MEAN              7.00%        9.10%           4.35%       6.02%       4.80%                          7.00%         9.18%      4.32%         6.20%        4.26%
    MEDIAN            7.01%        9.21%           4.19%       6.01%       4.97%                          6.26%         8.66%      4.35%         6.10%        4.05%
    MAX              30.80%        14.02%          8.65%       8.25%       10.29%                        30.54%        17.04%      11.79%        8.25%        7.80%
    N                   40           40              40          40          40                             40            40         40            40           40


Panel B: t,sCB / Total assets, freeze plans versus non-frozen plans (CB only)

                   No. Plans                   Savings from current and future workers                                    Savings from current workers only
                       Obs               Year +1                   Year +5                Year +10                         Year +10                  Year +45
    Freezes            40              0.0027                    0.0119                    0.0190                         0.0176                    0.0242
    PS Match1          40              0.0019*                   0.0081*                   0.0128*                        0.0122*                   0.0166*
    PS Match2          40              0.0016***                 0.0070**                  0.0117**                       0.0105**                  0.0150**
    PS Match3          40              0.0011***                 0.0050***                 0.0084***                      0.0076***                 0.0105***




                                                                                     42
 
       Table 5: Decomposition of accrual differences between freeze and non-freeze firms

This table decomposes the differences between freeze firms and propensity score­matched control plans
into benefit-related parameters, demographic factors, and the size of the labor force relative to firm assets.
In each panel, the starting point is the counterfactual prospective defined benefit (DB) accruals for freeze
plans. The characteristics of each plan are then replaced with those of the propensity score­matched controls
sequentially and cumulatively, and the prospective DB accruals are re-calculated.

                                                                t,s /TA           t,s /TA        t,s /TA
                                                               (Year + 1)       (Year + 5)     (Year + 10)

    Freezes                                                      0.0041           0.0181          0.0321

    Sequential changes in characteristics to PS Match1
     Plan-level scaling
      Sponsor assets                                             0.0057           0.0275          0.0537
      Total participants                                         0.0031           0.0151          0.0312
     Plan-age-service distribution
      Cell participants                                          0.0026           0.0133          0.0282
      Cell salaries                                              0.0027           0.0131          0.0261
     Plan-level assumptions
      g (salary growth)                                          0.0026           0.0125          0.0247
      i (discount rate)                                          0.0025           0.0123          0.0241
      k (accrual factor)                                         0.0022           0.0103          0.0192

    Sequential changes in characteristics to PS Match2
     Plan-level scaling
      Sponsor assets                                             0.0036           0.0174          0.0331
      Total participants                                         0.0033           0.0157          0.0302
     Plan-age-service distribution
      Cell participants                                          0.0027           0.0136          0.0270
      Cell salaries                                              0.0028           0.0137          0.0276
     Plan-level assumptions
      g (salary growth)                                          0.0028           0.0137          0.0286
      i (discount rate)                                          0.0028           0.0143          0.0305
      k (accrual factor)                                         0.0023           0.0108          0.0198

    Sequential changes in characteristics to PS Match3
     Plan-level scaling
      Sponsor assets                                             0.0047           0.0215          0.0410
      Total participants                                         0.0030           0.0143          0.0281
     Plan-age-service distribution
      Cell participants                                          0.0026           0.0130          0.0259
      Cell salaries                                              0.0028           0.0137          0.0272
     Plan-level assumptions
      g (salary growth)                                          0.0028           0.0135          0.0270
      i (discount rate)                                          0.0028           0.0135          0.0271
      k (accrual factor)                                         0.0022           0.0102          0.0188



                                                     43
 
                                    Table 6: Probability of plan freeze as a function of defined benefit accruals

This table shows the linear probability estimation of a plan freeze. The dependent variable is 1 if the plan is frozen next year and 0 otherwise. Plan-year
observations after the plan has been frozen are excluded. t,t+1 /TA is the estimated benefit accrual for regular plans, normalized by the total assets (TA) of the
sponsor. ABO is the accumulated benefit obligation. Plan Funding (%) is defined as plan assets (PA) minus plan liabilities (or ABO) divided by plan liabilities.
Both plan assets and plan liabilities are collected from Form 5500. Unionized is a categorical variable equal to 1 if the plan is represented by a union and 0
otherwise. EBITDA/Sales refers to earnings before interest, taxes, and depreciation and amortization expenses, normalized by total sales. Interest coverage is
the ratio between EBIT and the interest payments on debt. Labor Tightness is defined as the ratio of number of vacancies and unemployment (2-digit NAICS
code by year), as reported by BLS. Tenure is the average numbers of years with the company, from Consumer Population Survey (2-digit NAIC code by year).
Mobility Separations and Mobility Hires are job to job separations and hire divided by the beginning of the year employment (Census data). P-values are
reported in parentheses. * denotes significance at the 0.10 level, ** at the 0.05 level, and *** at the 0.01 level.

                                       (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)              (6)             (7)             (8)
                                                                                      Labor                                         Mobility         Mobility
    Labor market variable                                                                            Tenure         Tenure<5
                                                                                    Tightness                                      Separations        Hires
    t,t+1 / TA                      1.725**          1.287*            1.075         1.928***        1.799***        1.717**         1.556**         1.571**
                                    (0.011)          (0.092)         (0.432)          (0.005)         (0.009)         (0.011)         (0.019)         (0.018)
    ABO (log)                      -0.005***       -0.005***          -0.005        -0.005***       -0.004***       -0.005***       -0.004***       -0.004***
                                    (0.000)          (0.000)         (0.108)          (0.000)         (0.001)         (0.000)         (0.001)         (0.001)
    PLAN FUNDING                   -0.028***       -0.032***       -0.031***        -0.024***       -0.022***       -0.033***       -0.028***       -0.028***
                                    (0.010)          (0.001)         (0.008)          (0.006)         (0.007)         (0.001)         (0.008)         (0.008)
    EBITDA/ SALES                    -0.003           -0.002          -0.003          -0.008           -0.005          -0.006          -0.005          -0.006
                                    (0.679)          (0.772)         (0.596)          (0.369)         (0.542)         (0.491)         (0.545)         (0.503)
    INTEREST COVERAGE              -0.009***       -0.008***         -0.007*        -0.009***       -0.009***       -0.008***       -0.009***       -0.009***
                                    (0.001)          (0.002)         (0.066)          (0.002)         (0.002)         (0.003)         (0.002)         (0.002)
    UNIONIZED                      -0.012***       -0.011***        -0.013**        -0.012***        -0.010**        -0.010**       -0.012***       -0.011***
                                    (0.001)          (0.004)         (0.031)          (0.001)         (0.014)         (0.011)         (0.002)         (0.003)
    LABOR MKT                                                                         0.020*        -0.003***        0.022***         0.337*         0.416**
                                                                                      (0.075)         (0.001)         (0.002)         (0.056)         (0.035)
    Constant                     0.341***          0.336***           -0.036         0.550***        0.561***        0.339***        0.325***        0.323***
                                 (0.000)            (0.000)          (0.714)          (0.000)         (0.000)         (0.000)         (0.000)         (0.000)
    Year FE                      YES                 YES               YES             YES              YES             YES             YES             YES
    Industry FE                  NO                  YES                NO              NO               NO              NO              NO              NO
    Firm FE                      NO                   NO               YES              NO               NO              NO              NO              NO
    Observations                 4,712               4,712             4,712           4,581            4,587           4,712           4,607           4,607
    R-squared                    0.050               0.061             0.349           0.062            0.063           0.054           0.043          0.043
                                                                               44
 
                                      Table 7: Estimated cost savings as a share of payroll at the sponsor level
The table presents the estimated cost savings that emerge from pension plan freezes at the sponsor level. Panel A focuses on regular freezes, while Panel B
focuses on CB plan freezes. Current Payroll is the sum of all participants' salaries for the year preceding the freeze. PV Future Payroll is the present value
of all current and future participants' future salaries. TA denotes the total book assets of the sponsoring firm. t,s is the estimated benefit accrual for regular
plans, aggregated at the sponsor level. t,sCB is the estimated benefit accrual for CB plans, aggregated at the sponsor level. d401k is the increase in the 401(k)
contribution following the freeze. Difference is the difference between the t,s and d401(k) lines.

Panel A: Defined benefit plan freezes
                                                                       Savings from current and future                         Savings from current
                                                         No.                      workers                                          workers only
                                                       sponsors
                                                                      Year +1      Year +5      Year +10                     Year +10         Year +45
    t,s /Current payroll [counterfactual]                113          0.0612       0.2755        0.4959                       0.4758            0.7910
    d401k /Current payroll [estimated actual]            113          0.0263       0.0863        0.1039                       0.0983            0.1659
    Difference                                           113          0.0349       0.1892        0.3920                       0.3775            0.6250
    t,s /TA [counterfactual]                             113          0.0043       0.0191        0.0338                       0.0329            0.0542
    d401k /TA [estimated actual]                         113          0.0006       0.0021        0.0026                       0.0025            0.0034
    Difference                                           113          0.0037       0.0171        0.0312                       0.0304            0.0508
    t,s, / PV Future payroll [counterfactual]            113          0.0610       0.0764        0.1085                       0.1112            0.1634
    d401k / PV Future payroll [estimated actual]         113          0.0279       0.0279        0.0279                       0.0279            0.0279
    Difference                                           113          0.0331       0.0485        0.0806                       0.0833            0.1354

Panel B: Cash balance plan freezes
                                                                        Savings from current and future                          Savings from current
                                                   No. sponsors                     workers                                           workers only
                                                                    Year +1        Year +5        Year +10                      Year +10         Year +45
                                                                     0.0406           0.1826             0.3050                  0.2729              0.4011
                                                       39
    d401k/ payroll [estimated actual]                  39            0.0119           0.0488             0.0673                  0.0561              0.0631
    Difference                                         39            0.0287           0.1338             0.2377                  0.2169              0.3380
    t,sCB / TA [counterfactual]                        39            0.0030           0.0129             0.0207                  0.0193              0.0268
    d401k/ TA [estimated actual]                       39            0.0005           0.0021             0.0028                  0.0025              0.0029
    Difference                                         39            0.0024           0.0108             0.0179                  0.0168              0.0238
    t,sCB / future payroll [counterfactual]            39            0.0431           0.0530             0.0708                  0.0637              0.0823
    d401k/ future payroll [estimated actual]           39            0.0124           0.0124             0.0124                  0.0124              0.0124
    Difference                                         39            0.0307           0.0406             0.0584                  0.0513              0.0699

                                                                               45
 
                                    Table 8: Ex post salary growth

The table presents the actual salary growth before and after the freeze for freeze plans and their controls.
Previous years refers to all years before the freeze, and Year+1 refers to the first year after the freeze was
implemented. Ind Controls constrains the non-freezes group based on the two-digit SIC code and year. PS
Match1 selects a matched non-freezes group based on propensity scores calculated based on two-digit SIC,
ABO, and year. PS Match3 selects a matched non-freezes group based on propensity scores calculated
based on two-digit SIC, ABO, year, and the funding ratio.


                                                      Previous
                                  Previous years                              Year+1         Year+1
                          N                            years
                                     (MEAN)                                  (MEAN)        (MEDIAN)
                                                     (MEDIAN)

    Freezes               72          4.35%               4.40%               2.56%           3.14%

    Ind Controls        1,150         4.41%               4.41%               4.86%           3.78%

    PS Match1             72          4.44%               4.53%               5.72%           4.91%

    PS Match2             72          4.12%               3.87%               3.68%           3.40%

    PS Match3             72          4.07%               4.26%               5.31%           3.90%




                                                     46
 
    Figure 1: Annual employer cost as a percent of salary ( , /Yt) in defined contribution,
                          defined benefit, and cash balance plans

The figure shows the expected annual cost, as a percentage of salary, to the sponsor over time for one
worker hired at age 25 and remaining with the firm until age 65. We calibrated the graph to averages that
we estimate from our data. The salary growth is 4.5% per year, the discount rate is 6.1%, and the benefit
factor is 1.3%. The employer contribution to the DC plan is set at 2.6% per year. The CBP flat pay rate is
4.1%.




                                                   47
 
                                  Figure 2: Projected benefit accruals for freezes and controls

The table shows projected benefit accruals as a percentage of the payroll and of total sponsor assets for
traditional defined benefit plans (Panel A) and cash balance plans (Panel B). Each graph includes estimates for
three different groups: freezes, non-freezes, and propensity control plans.

Panel A: Benefit accruals for regular defined benefit plans




Panel B: Benefit accruals for defined benefit plans with a cash balance feature


                          Projected CB Accrual/Total Assets                                                                                   Projected CB Accrual/ Payroll
   .03




                                                                                    0 .05 .1 .15 .2 .25 .3 .35 .4 .45 .5 .55 .6
   .025
   .02
   .015
   .01
   .005
   0




              1   2   3       4         5         6          7         8   9   10                                                 1   2   3     4           5          6          7           8   9   10
                                      Years ahead                                                                                                         Years ahead
                                  dCB/TA (propensity score controls)                                                                                dCB/Payroll (freezes)
                                  0 ag_all                                                                                                          dCB/Payroll (propensity score controls)




                                                                                                              48
           
                               Figure 3: Age distributions and service distributions for freeze and control firms

The figure shows the age distribution and the service distribution for freeze firms, non-freeze firms, and propensity score matched controls. ***, **, *
indicate the statistical significance of 0.01, 0.05, and 0.1, respectively, of these differences.




    Age Group                  1           2            3           4              5           6           7           8            9           10
    Age                       <20        20-24        25-29       30-34          35-39       40-44       45-49       50-54        55-59        60-64
    Differences
     Freeze - All Controls              0.005*        0.001       -0.001         -0.005      -0.014*    -0.015***   -0.006***    0.024**       0.012
     Freeze - PS Match                  0.008*        0.001       0.001           0.005       -0.006     -0.021*     -0.014**     0.013        0.010

    Service Group              1           2            3           4              5           6           7           8            9           10
    Service                    <1         1-4          5-9        10-14          15-19       20-24       25-29       30-34        35-39        40-44
    Differences
     Freeze - All Controls    -0.007   0.042***      -0.017*      -0.003        -0.013***   -0.030***   -0.006***   0.010***    0.017***       0.006
     Freeze - PS Match       -0.012*   0.062***       -0.021      0.002           0.001      -0.029**    -0.025*      0.004       0.012        0.006

                                                                           49
 
                                Figure 4: Estimated cost savings by age groups

The figure shows the estimated cost savings projected 10 years into the future, for three age clusters, including current and
future workers: a) 20 to 34 years old, b) 35 to 49 years old, and c) 50 to 65 years old. The cost savings are calculated as
the difference between the counterfactual accrual benefits and the actual change in 401(k) contribution, relative to the
current plan level payroll and sponsor total assets.




                                                           50
      
