                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         BANK MARKET POWER AND MONETARY POLICY TRANSMISSION:
                EVIDENCE FROM A STRUCTURAL ESTIMATION

                                          Yifei Wang
                                        Toni M. Whited
                                          Yufeng Wu
                                         Kairong Xiao

                                      Working Paper 27258
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27258


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                  1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                    Cambridge, MA 02138
                                           May 2020
We would like to thank Harjoat Bhamra, Marco Bonomo, Yasser Boualam, Dean Corbae, Olivier
Darmouni, Itamar Dreschler, Mark Egan, Brent Glover, Valentin Haddad, Ali Hortacsu, Frank de
Jong, Erica Li, Gregor Mavtos, Patricia Mosser, Stijn van Nieuwerburgh, Neil Pearson, George
Pennacchi, Alexi Savov, David Sraer, Olivier Wang, and Pavel Zryumov for their helpful
comments and discussions. We also thank participants at the CICF, EFA, FIRS, the Chicago
Booth Asset Pricing Conf., the Financial Innovation and Risk Management Conf., the FMA Wine
Country Finance Conf., the FRBSF Conf. on Advances in Financial Research, the Macro-Finance
Society Workshop, the NBER SI, the Northeastern University Finance Conf., the RCFS Conf.,
the Short-Term Funding Markets Conf., the University of Connecticut Conf., the UBC Summer
Conf., the Stanford Institute for Theoretical Economics (SITE) Summer Workshop, the SFS
Cavalcade, and seminar participants at the Bank of Canada, Chicago Booth, Columbia
University, CUHK, Georgetown University, Johns Hopkins University, Northwestern University,
the FDIC, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve Board, ITAM, INSPER,
the University of Lausanne, the University of Michigan, the University of Rochester, UIUC,
Wharton, Harvard University, MIT, and Wirtschaftsuniversitat Wien. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Yifei Wang, Toni M. Whited, Yufeng Wu, and Kairong Xiao. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Bank Market Power and Monetary Policy Transmission: Evidence from a Structural Estimation
Yifei Wang, Toni M. Whited, Yufeng Wu, and Kairong Xiao
NBER Working Paper No. 27258
May 2020
JEL No. E51,E52,G21,G28

                                        ABSTRACT

We quantify the impact of bank market power on monetary policy transmission through banks to
borrowers. We estimate a dynamic banking model in which monetary policy affects imperfectly
competitive banks' funding costs. Banks optimize the pass-through of these costs to borrowers
and depositors, while facing capital and reserve regulation. We find that bank market power
explains much of the transmission of monetary policy to borrowers, with an effect comparable to
that of bank capital regulation. When the federal funds rate falls below 0.9%, market power
interacts with bank capital regulation to produce a reversal of the effect of monetary policy.


Yifei Wang                                     Yufeng Wu
University of Michigan                         University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Finance Department                             340D Wholers
701 Tappan St., Suite R5431                    1206 S Sixth Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109                            Champaign, IL 61820
wangyf@umich.edu                               yufengwu@illinois.edu

Toni M. Whited                                 Kairong Xiao
Ross School of Business                        Columbia University
University of Michigan                         Uris 822
701 Tappan Ave.                                3022 Broadway
Ann Arbor, MI 48109                            New York, NY 10027
and NBER                                       kairong.xiao@gsb.columbia.edu
twhited@umich.edu
    We examine the quantitative impact of bank market power on the transmission of mone-
tary policy through the banking system. Interest in this question has sharpened after three
decades of consolidation in the banking industry that has softened competitive pressure.
Indeed, recent research oers qualitative evidence that bank market power aects the pass-
through of monetary policy to the supply of loans (Scharfstein and Sunderam 2016; Drechsler,
Savov, and Schnabl 2017). Yet market power is not the only friction in the banking system
that influences pass-through. For example, traditional analysis of monetary policy trans-
mission focuses on regulatory constraints, such as bank reserve or capital requirements, as
the central frictions that influence monetary policy transmission (e.g., Bernanke and Blinder
1988; Kashyap and Stein 1995). However, the qualitative nature of all of this evidence leaves
open the question of the relative magnitude of traditional versus market-power transmission
channels.
    We answer this question by using data on U.S. banks to estimate a dynamic banking
model with three frictions: regulatory constraints, financial frictions, and imperfect compe-
tition. The estimation allows our data to discipline the model parameters and thus expose
the relative magnitude of these three frictions. We find that bank market power plays an
important role in determining the degree of monetary policy transmission. In terms of mag-
nitude, the eects of bank market power are comparable to those of bank capital regulation,
while the eects of bank reserve requirements are limited.
    Our analysis produces two further results. First, we show that banks face nontrivial costs
when they access external financial markets. This friction plays a pivotal role in connecting
banks' deposit market power to their lending decisions, as external financing costs serve to
link banks' sources and uses of funds. We also show that these frictions help explain the
dierential sensitivity of lending to the policy rate for big and small banks.
    Second, we show that bank market power interacts with capital regulation to reverse the
eect of monetary policy when the federal funds rate is very low. Specifically, we estimate
that, when the federal funds rate is below 0.9%, further cuts in the policy rate can be
contractionary. Moreover, we find external validation of this reversal rate by showing in
a simple regression framework that the relation between bank capital and interest rates
switches sign at a threshold predicted by the model.
    To provide intuition for these results, we elaborate on the model. In an industry equilib-
rium, imperfectly competitive banks act as intermediaries between borrowers and depositors.


                                              1
Banks' lending decisions are dynamic for two reasons: a maturity mismatch between short-
term deposits and long-term loans and financial frictions that induce precautionary capital
accumulation. In this setting, monetary policy alters the federal funds rate. Because banks
are not price takers in deposit or loan markets, they choose the extent to which they pass
rate movements through to depositors and borrowers. The magnitude of this pass-through
depends on the tightness of regulatory constraints, the severity of financial frictions, and the
intensity of competition.
    These frictions in our model map into four channels of monetary policy transmission. The
first is the bank reserve channel, in which a high federal funds rate raises the opportunity cost
of holding reserves, thus contracting deposit creation (Bernanke and Blinder 1988; Kashyap
and Stein 1995). The second is the bank capital channel, in which a high federal funds
rate reduces bank capital because of a balance-sheet maturity mismatch and thus constrains
banks' capacity to lend (Bolton and Freixas 2000; Van den Heuvel 2002; Brunnermeier and
Sannikov 2016). The third is the deposit market power channel, in which a high federal
funds rate allows banks to charge higher markups on deposits, thus leading to a contraction
in deposits and loans (Drechsler et al. 2017). The fourth is the loan market power channel, in
which banks reduce markups to mitigate the eects of monetary tightening on loan demand
(Scharfstein and Sunderam 2016).
    To gauge the quantitative importance of these transmission channels, we estimate our
model using data on U.S. commercial banks from 1994 to 2017. Our estimation combines
methods used in the industrial organization literature (Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes 1995;
Nevo 2001) with those used in the corporate finance literature (Hennessy and Whited 2005;
Bazdresch, Kahn, and Whited 2018). We begin by using demand estimation techniques to
obtain the elasticities of loan and deposit demand to interest rates. We then plug these esti-
mates into our model and use simulated minimum distance to obtain estimates of parameters
that quantify financial frictions and operating costs. The sequential use of these two tech-
niques represents a methodological advance that enables us to consider a rich equilibrium
model that would otherwise be intractable to estimate.
    We use counterfactual experiments to assess the relative importance of each transmission
channel. We start with a model with all frictions as estimated and then subtract each friction
one at a time. We find that eliminating reserve requirements leaves the sensitivity of lending
to the federal funds rate nearly unchanged. Eliminating either capital regulation or deposit


                                               2
market power reduces this sensitivity, while eliminating loan market power raises it.
    These counterfactuals also show that rate cuts can be contractionary when rates are
already low. Low rates depress bank profits by reducing bank deposit market power, as
competition from cash intensifies. Lower profits then tighten the capital constraint and
reduce lending. This result helps explain sluggish bank lending growth observed in the
ultra-low interest rate environment after the 2008 financial crisis.
    Our paper contributes to the literature on the role of banks in transmitting monetary
policy (Bernanke and Blinder 1988; Kashyap and Stein 1995; Van den Heuvel 2002; Scharf-
stein and Sunderam 2016; Brunnermeier and Sannikov 2016; Drechsler et al. 2017). We are
the first to structurally estimate a dynamic banking model to quantify various transmission
channels. Prior to our work, little was known about the relative importance of these channels,
as this type of quantitative exercise is di cult to undertake using reduced-form methods.
Moreover, previous studies usually consider these transmission channels in isolation. For
example, Scharfstein and Sunderam (2016) and Drechsler et al. (2017) study market power
in the loan and deposit markets separately. However, little is known about the interactions
between channels. Thus, an important contribution of this paper is to provide a unified
framework within which to study these interactions. For example, we show that the relative
importance of deposit and loan market power depends on the level of the federal funds rate.
Deposit market power matters more important when the federal funds rate is low, while loan
market power becomes more important when the federal funds rate is high.
    Second, our paper is related to the theoretical literature on the eects of negative inter-
est rate policies (Brunnermeier and Koby 2016; Eggertsson, Juelsrud, and Wold 2017; Wang
2019; Campos 2019). While these studies are insightful, they typically treat the banking
sector with a high level of abstraction. In contrast, we provide a model that is su ciently
realistic to be directly mapped onto microeconomic data. Our paper also contributes to the
empirical literature on negative interest rate policy (Demiralp, Eisenschmidt, and Vlassopou-
los 2017; Heider, Saidi, and Schepens 2018; Basten and Mariathasan 2018). These studies
show that negative policy rates can have perverse eects on bank lending. Our results sug-
gest that such perverse eects can start to occur even before the policy rate turns negative
because a near-zero policy rate results in a compression of banks' deposit spreads. Therefore,
in countries such as the United States where the policy rate has never gone negative, the
banking sector could nevertheless be hurt by an ultra-low rate monetary policy.


                                              3
    Third, our paper is related to the literature on external financial frictions. Romer and
Romer (1990) argue that banks can easily replace deposits with external financing, so shocks
to deposits are unlikely to aect bank lending. In contrast, Kashyap and Stein (1995) argue
that external financing is costly for banks, so the quantity of deposits matters for bank
lending. Our study contributes to this debate, as our structural estimation approach allows
us to infer the degree of bank financing costs from the relative size of their deposit taking
and external borrowing. We find that this cost is economically significant and that frictions
related to bank balance sheets play an important role in the transmission of monetary policy.
    Finally, our paper contributes to the structural industrial organization literature on the
banking system (Egan, Hortacsu, and Matvos 2017a; Egan, Lewellen, and Sunderam 2017b;
Buchak, Matvos, Piskorski, and Seru 2018; Xiao 2018). While this work usually features a
static industry equilibrium, we introduce the dynamic adjustment of banks' balance sheets
to study the role of maturity transformation and financial frictions. Our paper is also
tangentially related to recent work that uses dynamic banking models to study optimal
capital regulation (Corbae and D'Erasmo 2013; Elenev, Landvoigt, and Van Nieuwerburgh
2016; Begenau 2018; Begenau and Landvoigt 2018). Our paper stands apart from this
literature in that we emphasize the role of imperfect competition. Moreover, our approach is
more empirical in nature, as we estimate, rather than calibrate, all of our model parameters.


I. Data and Stylized Facts
   Our main dataset is the Consolidated Reports of Condition and Income (Call Reports).
This dataset provides quarterly bank-level balance sheet information for U.S. commercial
banks. It includes deposit and loan amounts, interest income and expense, loan maturities,
salary expenses, and fixed-asset-related expenses. We merge the Call Reports with the FDIC
Summary of Deposits, which provides branch-level information on each bank since 1994 at
an annual frequency. The sample period is 1994­2017.
   We also use several other data sources. First, we retrieve publicly listed bank returns from
CRSP and link these returns to bank concentration measures using the link table provided
by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Banking industry stock returns are from Kenneth
French's website. We collect Federal Open Market Committee meeting dates from the FOMC
meeting calendar. Finally, we obtain the following time series from the Federal Reserve


                                              4
Economic Data (FRED) database: NBER recession dates, the eective federal funds rate,
two-year and five-year Treasury yields, the aggregate amount of corporate bonds issued by
U.S. firms, and the aggregate amounts of cash, Treasury bonds, and money-market mutual
funds held by households. Details regarding the construction of our variables are in Table 1.
    Table 2 provides summary statistics for our sample. Three patterns are of note. First,
mean deposit and loan market shares for the U.S. national market lie near the 90th percentile,
indicating a very skewed distribution of market shares in which a few large banks dominate
the market. Second, we see little variation in the number of employees per branch, but we
see both high variance and skewness in the number of branches per bank. This skewness is
consistent with the skewness in market shares, as the number of branches is highly correlated
with bank size. Third, we find that average loan maturity is 3.429 years.
    In Figure 1, we show the prices that banks charge for their deposits and loans. Panel
A depicts a time-series kernel regression of the average quarterly U.S. bank deposit spread
on the federal funds rate, where the deposit spread is the dierence between the federal
funds rate and the deposit rate. Because this spread measures the price that banks charge
for their depository services, in the absence of market power, one would expect to observe
constant deposit spreads that equal the marginal cost of providing deposits. However, we
find a positive relation between deposit spreads and the federal funds rate, which steepens
when the rate is close to zero. This relation implies that banks charge higher prices for their
depository services as the federal funds rate rises. Intuitively, if banks have market power, a
higher federal funds rate allows them to increase profits by raising markups above marginal
costs because depositors find cash costly to hold (Drechsler et al. 2017).
    Panel B of Figure 1 contains an analogous kernel regression of the average U.S. bank loan
spread on the federal funds rate, where the loan spread is the dierence between the loan
rate, adjusted for loan loss provisions, and the 5-year Treasury yield. We find that the loan
spread falls as the federal funds rate rises. This pattern is consistent with Scharfstein and
Sunderam (2016), who show that banks lower markups on loans in the face of rising rates
to mitigate the eects of falling loan demand. In sum, Figure 1 suggests that market power
creates wedges between the federal funds rate and the rates at which banks borrow and lend.
Furthermore, the sizes of these wedges depend on the level of interest rates.




                                              5
II. Model
    While this evidence suggests interesting equilibrium interactions between bank market
power and monetary policy, it does not reveal any underlying mechanisms behind these
patterns in the data. To understand this evidence further, we consider an infinite-horizon,
bank industry equilibrium model with three sectors: households, firms, and banks. In the
model, households and firms solve static discrete choice problems in which they choose from
several saving and financing vehicles. Banks act as intermediaries between households and
firms by taking short-term deposits from households and providing long-term loans to firms.1
    The richness of the model lies in the banking sector, as several frictions imply that
monetary policy aects the extent of intermediation that banks provide. First, competition
in the deposit and loan markets is imperfect, so banks strategically choose deposit and
loan rates to maximize their profits. Second, banks are subject to regulation. Reserve
regulation links the opportunity cost of taking deposits to the prevailing federal funds rate.
Capital regulation incentivizes banks to optimize their lending intertemporally with an eye
to preserving excess equity capital as a buer against future capital inadequacy. Third,
access to non-deposit external financing is more costly than taking deposits. This friction
implies that shocks to the quantity of deposits are transmitted to the supply of loans, as
banks cannot costlessly replace deposits with other borrowing. These frictions are important
because, in their absence, banks are simply pass-through entities and bond market interest
rates summarize monetary policy.

A. Households
   In our infinite-horizon, equilibrium model, at each time t, the economy contains a mass
Wt of households, each of which is endowed with one dollar. Households choose from among
the following investment options for their endowments: cash, bonds, and deposits, where the
deposits of each bank constitute a dierentiated product. If we index each option by j , the
households' choice set is given by Ad = {0, 1, . . . , J, J + 1}, with option 0 representing cash,
option J + 1 representing short-term bonds, and options 1, . . . , J representing deposits in
each bank. Because the households' problem is static, we drop the t subscript hereafter for

   1
    In reality, banks accept deposits from firms an extend loans to households. Therefore, in our model, the
households should be interpreted broadly as savers, and the firms should be interpreted broadly as borrowers.


                                                     6
convenience. We further assume that each depositor can choose only one option. This one-
dollar, one-option assumption is without loss of generality. For example, we can interpret
this setting as if households make multiple discrete choices for each dollar they have, and
the probability of choosing each of the options can be interpreted as a portfolio weight.
                                              d
    Each option is characterized by a yield, rj , and a vector of product characteristics, xd
                                                                                            j,
which capture the convenience of each option. For instance, a household might value the
number of branches and the number of employees per branch when choosing a bank. The
yield on cash is 0, and the yield on bonds is the federal funds rate, f , where we abstract
from dierences between short-term Treasury yields and the federal funds rate. All interest
rates are quoted in real terms, as we assume inflation expectations are anchored at zero,
but in the general equilibrium version of the model in Online Appendix G, we allow for an
endogenously determined inflation rate.
    The household chooses the best option to maximize its utility:

                                           d d        d d     d
                                max ui,j = i rj +      xj   + j + d
                                                                  i,j ,                           (1)
                                j 2A d


where households are indexed by i 2 1, 2, . . . , I . The utility for household i from choosing
                        d                                       d
option j is ui,j , and i  is the sensitivity to the yield rj      . We allow households to exhibit
varying sensitivity to yields to capture the evidence that some depositors are less yield-
sensitive than others, and that this heterogeneity impacts deposit rate-setting (Xiao 2018).
We model the distribution of depositors' yield sensitivity as a uniform distribution with a
mean, d , and a standard deviation,      d
                                           . The coe cients, d , are sensitivities to the non-rate
product characteristics, xdj , and j is the unobservable product-level demand shock. i,j is a
                                                                                              d

relationship-specific shock to the choice of option j by household i. d      i,j captures horizontal
dierentiation across banks. For instance, if household i lives close to bank j , then d         i,j is
large, so household i is more likely to choose bank j , holding other characteristics constant.
The optimal choice for household i is given by an indicator function:
                                      8
                                      <1, if u       ui,k , for k 2 Ad
                                               i,j
                               Ii,j =
                                d
                                                                                                   (2)
                                      :0, otherwise.

   We aggregate the optimal choices across all households to compute the deposit mar-
ket share of each bank j . Adopting the standard assumption that di,j follows a general-


                                                  7
ized extreme value distribution with a cumulative distribution function given by F () =
exp ( exp ( )), we can derive the standard logit market share, sd
                                                                j , as follows:

                   Z
 sd
  j
         d
        rj |f          Id
                        i,j dF () =

 I
 X                                                 d d      d d     d                                   (3)
                                               exp i rj +    xj   + j
        µd
         i       d
                                                                    PJ                              ,
             exp i f+       d xd        d
                                      + J      + exp ( d xd   d               d d      d xd     d
  i=1                          J +1       +1              c + c ) +   m=1 exp i rm +      m   + m

where µd i is the fraction of total wealth, W , held by households of type i. The numerator
represents the utility from depositing at bank j . Similarly, the first term in the denominator,
      d
exp i   f + d xd         d
                 J +1 + J +1 , represents the utility of holding Treasury bills, and the second
term, exp d xd        d
                c + c , is the utility of holding cash. The demand function for deposits of
bank j is then given by the market share multiplied by total wealth,

                                                d
                                           Dj r j | f = sd  d
                                                         j rj |f W.                                     (4)


B. Firms
    There is a mass, K , of firms, where we again drop the time subscript. Each firm wants to
borrow one dollar, so aggregate borrowing demand is K . Firms can borrow by issuing long-
term bonds or taking out long-term bank loans. We assume that each bank is a dierentiated
lender, given factors such as geographic location and industry expertise. Letting each option
be indexed by j , the firms' choice set is given by Al = {0, 1, . . . , J, J + 1}, where option
J + 1 represents bonds, options 1, . . . , J represent loans from each bank, and option 0 is the
option to not borrow at all.
    For tractability, we assume that both bonds and bank loans have the following repayment
schedule. In each period, the firm has to pay back a fraction,  , of its outstanding principal
plus interest. Thus, if the firm borrows one dollar at a fixed interest rate r, the repayment
stream, starting in the next period, is (1  )  ( + r)t , t = 0, . . . , 1. Accordingly, all firm
debt has an average maturity of 1/ periods.
    The long-term bond interest rate is given by an expected default cost, ¯, plus the expected




                                                        8
                                                ¯t , which is itself given by:
weighted average of future federal funds rates, f
                                          "1                    #
                                            X
                             ¯t =  ft + t
                             f                   (1  )n ft+n .                                        (5)
                                                     n=1

                                                                     l
   Each of the firm's financing options is characterized by a rate, rj , and a vector of product
                  l
characteristics, xj , capturing the convenience of using each of the financing options.
   The firm then chooses the best option to maximize its profits:

                                               l l         l l     l
                                     max i,j = i rj +       xj   + j + l
                                                                       i,j ,                          (6)
                                     j 2A l


                                                                     l
where i,j is the profits of firm i from choosing option j , and i      is the sensitivity to the interest
      l                                                              l                                 l
rate rj , which follows a uniform distribution with a mean,  , and a standard deviation,                 .
The sensitivities to non-rate characteristics, xl   j , are given by
                                                                         l       l
                                                                           , and j is the unobservable
                                    l
product-level demand shock. i,j is an idiosyncratic shock when firm i borrows from bank j .
The optimal choice of firm i is given by an indicator function:
                                        8
                                        <1, if          i,k , for k 2 Al
                                                i,j
                               Il
                                i,j   =                                                               (7)
                                        :0, otherwise.

   We aggregate the optimal choices across all the firms to compute the loan market share
of each bank j . Assuming that l    i,j follows a generalized extreme value distribution with
a cumulative distribution function given by F () = exp ( exp ( )), we can derive the
standard logit market share, sl
                              j , as follows:

                 Z
sl
 j
      l
     rj |f           Il
                      i,j dF () =

 I
 X                                                 l l       l l     l
                                               exp i rj +     xj   + j
       µl
        i       l
                                                                         PJ                     ,
            exp i (f + ) +      l xl        l
                                          + J            l l  l                      l l    l l xl
 i=1                               J +1       +1 + exp ( xn + n ) +        m=1   exp i   + m
                                                                                       rm +      m
                                                                                              (8)
where µli is the fraction of type i firms, and f is the long-term bond interest rate. The
numerator represents the utility from borrowing from bank j . Similarly, the first term in
                         l
the denominator, exp i     f + + l xl          l
                                        J +1 + J +1 , represents the utility from issuing bonds,
and the second term, exp l xl       l
                               n + n , is the utility of not borrowing. The demand function


                                                      9
for loans is then given by the market share multiplied by the total loan market size:

                                         l
                                    B j rj | f = sl  l
                                                  j rj |f K.                                     (9)


C. The Banking Sector
                                                           d                       l
   Each bank simultaneously sets its deposit rate, rj,t      , and its loan rate, rj,t , as a spread
below or above the federal funds rate, ft , which we assume is an exogenous state variable.
These rate-setting decisions implicitly determine the quantities of deposits to take from
                                                                                                  d
households and credit to extend to firms. For example, given each bank j 's choice of rj,t          ,
households solve the utility maximization problem as described in equation (1), which yields
                                                   d
the quantity of deposits supplied to bank j , Dj (rj,t ), which is given by equation (4). Because
households can hold cash, which has a return of zero, banks face a zero lower bound for
deposit rates:

                                                d
                                               rj,t     0.                                      (10)

                                               l
    Similarly, given each bank j 's choice of rj,t , firms solve their profit-maximization problem,
                                                                      l
which yields the quantity of loans borrowed from bank j , Bj (rj,t      ), given by equation (9). To
simplify notation, we suppress the dependence of loans and deposits on the relevant interest
rates, denoting them simply as Dj,t and Bj,t .
    Lending involves a maturity transformation between assets and liabilities. On the asset
side, let Lj,t denote the amount of loans the bank holds. As in the case of bonds, in each
period, a fraction,  , of a bank's outstanding loans matures. This assumption about long-
term loans captures a traditional maturity transformation role for banks, in which they
convert one-period deposits into long-term bank loans with maturity 1/ . As noted above,
                                                                            l
banks can also issue new loans at an annualized interest rate of rj,t         . The new loans, once
issued, have the same maturity structure as the existing ones, and the interest rate is fixed
over the life of the new loans. From the bank's perspective, the present value of interest
income is:
                                             1
                                             X (1        )n Bj,t rj,t
                                                                  l
                                    Ij,t =                            ,                         (11)
                                             n=0
                                                      (1 + )n



                                                   10
where    is the bank's discount factor, and a bank's outstanding loans evolve according to:

                                  Lj,t+1 = (1         ) (Lj,t + Bj,t ) .                      (12)

    We assume that in each period a random fraction of loans, t 2 [0,  ], becomes delinquent.
The bank takes as an exogenous state variable in its decision-making problem. Although
we assume that the bank writes o delinquent payments, with charge-os equal to Lt  t ,
defaulting on a payment in one period does not exonerate the borrower from future payments.
Therefore, delinquency does not aect the evolution of loans in equation (12).
    The rest of the asset side of each bank's balance sheet consists of reserves, Rt , and holdings
of government securities, Gt , which the bank can accumulate if the supply of funds exceeds
demand from the lending market. These securities earn the federal funds rate, ft .
    Next, we describe the liabilities side of the balance sheet. In each period, the bank
can obtain outside financing via deposits or via non-reservable borrowing, Nt . A typical
example of non-reservable borrowing is large-denomination CDs. As argued by Kashyap and
Stein (1995), because non-reservable borrowing is not insured by FDIC deposit insurance,
purchasers of this debt must concern themselves with the default risk of the issuing bank.
This consideration implies that the marginal cost of non-reservable borrowing is likely an
increasing function of the amount raised. Thus, we assume that non-reservable borrowing
incurs a quadratic financing cost beyond the prevailing federal funds rate, as follows:
                                                           N
                                                                      
                                  N                          Nt
                                      ( Nt ) =      ft +   ·             Nt .                 (13)
                                                         2 Dt

   The cost in equation (13) represents an important friction because, in its absence, banks
could always raise non-reservable funding to compensate for any deposit shortfalls. This
funding availability would disconnect banks' deposit-taking and lending decisions, so changes
in bank deposits induced by federal funds rate shocks would have no impact on lending.
   Banks also incur costs for serving depositors, such as hiring employees. We assume that
costs are linear in the amount of deposits:

                                            d              d
                                                 (Dt ) =       Dt .                           (14)

Similarly, we assume that lending incurs costs, such as paying loan o cers to screen loans

                                                     11
or maintain client relationships. Again, we assume a linear functional form:

                                               l             l
                                                   (Bt ) =       Bt .                                      (15)

Similarly, we model fixed operating costs and noninterest income, both of which we assume
to be independent of the deposit and lending rate decisions. Specifically, we let represent
the dierence between fixed operating expenses and noninterest income per unit of steady
state equity capital, denoted by E¯ . Therefore, the net fixed operating cost is E¯.
   The bank's holdings of loans, government securities, deposits, reserves, and non-reservable
borrowing must satisfy the standard condition that assets equal liabilities plus equity:

                             Lt + Bt + Rt + Gt = Dt + Nt + Et ,                                            (16)

where Et is the bank's beginning-of-period book equity. Et itself evolves according to:

                                 Et+1 = Et + t  (1                 )         Ct+1 ,                        (17)

where t represents the bank's total operating profits from its deposit-taking, security in-
vestments, and lending decisions,  denotes the linear tax rate on these profits, and Ct+1
is the cash dividends distributed to the bank's shareholders. This identity ends up being a
central ingredient in the model, as it links bank competition, which is reflected in profits,
with bank capital regulation. The profits in equation (17) are in turn given by:
                                                                                        N
                                                                                                 
                                  l                      d         d                        Nt           ¯ (18)
 t = I t   ( Lt + B t )  ( t +        ) + Gt  f t       rt   +          Dt         ft +   ·         Nt   E.
                                                                                        2 Dt

   Another central friction in the model is our assumption that a bank can increase its inside
equity only via retained earnings. Thus, there is no new equity issuance, which implies:

                                             Ct+1        0 8t.                                             (19)

This constraint reflects a bank's limited liability and thus implies that banks cannot raise
equity capital to replace deposits or non-reservable borrowing. In Section V, we replace
this assumption with costly equity issuance, finding only a limited impact on our results, as
banks' equity issuances are both tiny and rare, both in the extended model and the data.

                                                       12
   The next important ingredient in our model is regulation, namely, a capital requirement
and a reserve requirement:

                                   Et+1         ( Lt + B t ) ,                              (20)
                                     Rt         Dt .                                        (21)

Equation (20) implies that the bank's book equity at the beginning of the next period has
to be no smaller than a fraction, , of total loans outstanding. Equation (21) is the bank's
reserve requirement, which states that the bank has to keep a fraction, , of its deposits
in a non-interest-bearing account with the central bank. Zero interest on reserves implies
that the bank has no incentive to hold excess reserves, so equation (21) holds with equality.
While the Federal Reserve has paid interest on reserves since 2008, we show in Section IV
that modeling this newer policy has a limited impact on our model solution.

D. Monetary Policy
    We model monetary policy as a process for the real federal funds rate. This assumption
is motivated by the existence of price stickiness in the final goods sector, so the central bank
can alter the real rate. In addition, we allow the federal funds rate to be correlated with
loan charge-os, so their joint law of motion is given by:
      "                     # "            # "                     # "          #
         ln t+1     (ln )          f            ln t       (ln )             0
                             =               ·                      +             "t+1 ,     (22)
         ln ft+1    (ln f )       0 f           ln ft      (ln f )      0     f


where "t+1 has a standard bivariant normal distribution.
   Monetary policy aects banks in two ways. First, from equation (13), the federal funds
rate aects the marginal funding costs that banks pay in the non-reservable funding market.
Second, the short-term federal funds rate aects long rates through expectations. Thus, both
long and short rate movements aect banks' market power in the deposit and loan markets.

E. Bank's Problem and Equilibrium
   Figure 2 shows the sequence of events in each time period. The bank enters the period and
observes the federal funds rate, ft , and the realization of the fraction of defaults, t . Next,


                                               13
banks interact with households and firms by setting the loan and deposit spreads. The loan
and deposit demand functions then dictate the amount of deposits from households and
amount of loans to firms. Depending on the extent of these activities, the banks adjust their
reserves, holdings of government securities, and non-reservable borrowing. Finally, banks
collect profits at the end of the period and distribute dividends to shareholders.
     As noted above, loan and deposit demand depend on the rates oered by all banks in
                                                                                        d
the economy. Accordingly, when each bank chooses its own deposit and loan rates, rt       and
  l
rt , as well as non-reservable borrowing, Nt , and investment in government securities, Gt , it
rationally considers the choices made by other banks in both current and future periods. As
such, all of a bank's optimal choices depend on the composition of the banking sector, that
is, the cross-sectional distribution of bank states, which we denote by t . Letting P denote
the probability law governing the evolution of t , we can express the evolution of t as:

                                                         t+1    = P ( t ).                                           (23)

   In every period, after observing the federal funds rate, ft , and the random fraction of
defaulted loans, t , banks choose the optimal policy to maximize the expected discounted
cash dividends to shareholders:
                                                            1
 V (ft , t , Lt , Et   t)   =           max                        Ct+1 + EV (ft+1 ,   t+1 , Lt+1 , Et+1   t+1 )   , (24)
                                                  t t+1 } 1 +
                                   l ,r d ,G ,N ,R ,C
                                {r t   t    t  t




                                s.t.      (10), (13), (14), (15), (16), (17), (23).

   We define equilibrium in this economy as follows.

Definition 1 A stationary equilibrium occurs when:

  1. All banks solve the problem given by (24), taking as given the other banks' choices of
     loan and deposit rates.

  2. All households and firms maximize their utilities given the list of rates put forth by
     banks.

  3. In each period, the deposit and loan markets clear.


                                                                 14
   4. The probability law governing the evolution of the industry, P , is consistent with
      banks' optimal choices.

      One of the state variables for the banks' problem ( t ) is an object whose dimension de-
pends on the number of banks in the economy. This dimensionality poses a challenge to

solving the banks' problem numerically. To simplify the model solution, we follow Krusell
and Smith (1998) by considering a low-dimensional approximation of                      t.     Specifically, we
postulate that all information about        t   that is relevant to banks' optimization can be summa-

rized by the contemporaneous federal funds rate, ft . Accordingly, we define the equilibrium
average loan and deposit rates rl,i (ft ) and rd,i (ft ), respectively, as:

                                                          h                               i
                      d d,i           d d
                  exp(i r (ft ) +      x + d)                     d d
                                                              exp(i rj,t +    x +  d ) |ft ,
                                                                             d d
                                                                                                          (25)


                                                          h                             i
                        l l,i         l l
                    exp(i r (ft ) +    x + l)                     l l
                                                              exp(i rj,t +   x +  l )|ft ,
                                                                             l l
                                                                                                          (26)


where rl,i (ft ) and rd,i (ft ) summarize the choices of other banks, thereby allowing each bank
to derive its choices of deposit and loan rates.
      In solving the model, which we describe in detail in Online Appendix A, we ensure that

¯l,i (ft ) and r
r              ¯d,i (ft ) are consistent with equilibrium bank choices by iterating over their values
until we reach convergence. To check the accuracy of our solution, we regress the simulated
evolution of the aggregate deposit and loan rates on the perceived law of motion based on the

banks' beliefs. The R-squareds for these approximations are over 95% for the deposit market
and 99% for the loan market. Thus, although the banks do not consider the full distribution,

 t,   when making their decisions, their forecasting errors are small. This accuracy stems from

two mechanisms in the model. First, without any financial or regulatory constraints, banks
have static optimal deposit and loan rates. For example, in the lending market, the optimal

                                                     15
level of loans is set to equalize expected marginal interest income and funding costs, which is

a function of the current federal funds rate only. Therefore, the static optimal rate depends
only on the federal funds rate, but not other aggregate moments. Second, taking the loan
market as an example, although banks can deviate from the static optimum by charging

higher loan spreads, this behavior is limited by competition from other banks. Thus, banks
that deviate from the static optimum introduce only modest distortions into the other banks'
rate forecasts.

F. Monetary Policy Transmission in a Static Model

     In this subsection, we use a simplified version of the model to flesh out the intuition
behind the eects of frictions on monetary policy transmission.

F.1. Frictionless benchmark

     First, we examine how the economy behaves in a frictionless benchmark model. By
frictionless, we mean a version of our model with the following six features: (1) the bank

has no market power in either the deposit or the loan market, i.e., the deposit and loan
demand elasticities are infinite; (2) there are no frictions related to non-reservable borrowing,
      N
so         = 0; (3) the bank faces no capital requirement, so  = 0; (4) there is no reserve

requirement, so  = 0; (5) there is no maturity transformation; and (6) the operating costs,
 d          l
     and        , are zero. These features imply that the banks' problem can be viewed as static
in nature.

     In this case, banks choose deposit and loan rates, rd and rl , to maximize one-period
profits:

                                                   n                      o
                                                       l     d
                                 = max                 rB   r D   (B   D) f .               (27)
                                     {r l ,r d }




                                                            16
    When deposits fall short of loans, a bank can make up any funding shortfall, B       D, with

non-reservable borrowing at a cost equal to the federal funds rate, f , with no additional
financing costs. When there are excess deposits, the bank can invest any of this surplus,
D    B , in government securities and earn the federal funds rate, f . In the absence of balance

sheet frictions, the bank can optimize its choices for deposit and loan amounts separately.
    The optimal lending rates are given by the federal funds rate plus markups:
                                                            1
                                       l            B0
                                      r =f+                         ,                        (28)
                                                    B

and the optimal deposit rates are given by the federal funds rate minus markups:
                                                            1
                                           d        D0
                                      r =f                      .                            (29)
                                                    D

Under perfect competition, the elasticities,   B 0 /B and D0 /D, approach infinity, the markups
in equations (28) and (29) go to zero, and rl and rd approach the federal funds rate, f .

F.2. Imperfect competition

    When competition is imperfect, market power creates wedges between the federal funds
rate and the rates at which banks borrow and lend. As shown in Figure 3, the optimal
lending rate is higher than the federal funds rate and the optimal deposit rate is lower than

the federal funds rate because banks charge markups on loans and deposits. Furthermore,
the size of these wedges is also a function of the federal funds rate because its level influences
the attractiveness of bank deposits and loans relative to other outside options available to

households or firms. Specifically, in the deposit market, an increase in the federal funds rate
increases the opportunity cost of holding cash, which allows banks to charge larger markups
on deposits (e.g., Drechsler et al. 2017). In the lending market, oligopolistic banks do not



                                               17
fully pass through rate hikes to borrowers because full pass-through would result in a large

drop in loans and thus in profits. Instead, banks choose to lower loan markups to mitigate
the eects of falling loan demand (Scharfstein and Sunderam 2016).
      Overall, if banks have market power, they adjust markups charged on deposits and loans

in response to policy rate movements. Therefore, the pass-through of the policy rate to
deposit and lending rates deviates from one-to-one.

F.3. Balance sheet frictions

      Now consider the case in which banks face balance sheet frictions, so they incur additional

costs when using non-reservable borrowing. In this case, the banks' optimization problem
is:

                                                              n                           o
                                                                  l         d
                                          = max                   rB        r D     (N ) ,             (30)
                                                 {rl ,r d }


where (N ) is the cost of non-reservable borrowing and N = B D is the funding imbalance.
The presence of (N ) implies that the bank cannot costlessly replace lost deposits with non-

reservable borrowing, so shocks to deposits are transmitted to loans.

F.4. Reserve requirement

      Now consider the case in which banks face a reserve regulation requiring that, for ev-

ery dollar of deposits, the bank needs to keep a fraction, , of these deposits as reserves.
Assuming that the interest on reserves is zero, banks' optimization becomes:

                                        n                                             o
                                            l          d
                      = max                 rB       r D              (B + R      D) f , s.t. R   D.   (31)
                          {r l ,r d }


Because the interest rate on reserves is zero, the reserve constraint is binding, so we can solve
for the deposit spread, f               rd , as f . Intuitively, the opportunity cost of holding reserves,


                                                                       18
f , rises with the federal funds rate, widening the deposit spread, f     rd , as f rises. Deposit

intake then falls. If banks face balance sheet frictions so that they cannot perfectly replace
deposits with non-reservable funding, then the supply of loans falls together with deposits.

F.5. Capital regulation

   Now consider the case in which banks face regulation that requires bank capital to exceed

a certain fraction of bank assets. In this case, the banks' optimization problem becomes:


                    = max rl B       rd D   (B        D ) f + (E0 +     B ) .                (32)
                        {r l ,rd }


where E0 is initial capital,  is bank profit,  is the minimum capital requirement, and          is
the Lagrange multiplier on the capital constraint. Using the first order-condition for profit
maximization, we can solve for the lending spread, rl       f as .

   In the presence of capital regulation, equation (32) shows that shocks to bank capital
(E0 ) aect lending capacity. Although outside the scope of this static environment, one
important source of such shocks is maturity mismatch. Because deposits are short-term,

deposit rates rise when the federal funds rate increases. However, loans are long-term, so
only a fraction of loans matures, with the remaining loans carrying the same pre-fixed rate.
Hence, an increase in the federal funds rate temporarily reduces bank capital and tightens

the bank capital constraint.
   Another way that monetary policy aects bank capital is through market power. When
the federal funds rate approaches zero, the markup that banks can charge on their deposits

shrinks because of increasing competition from cash. A lower deposit markup depresses
banks' profits, so the capital constraint binds more tightly. As a result, an ultra-low-interest
policy may have a contractionary eect on bank lending.



                                                 19
III. Estimation
   In this section, we describe our estimation method, present results, and conduct counter-
factuals to measure the relative importance of various banking frictions for monetary policy
transmission.

A. Estimation procedure

   We estimate the model in two stages. First, we estimate the loan and deposit demand
functions. Second, we plug these estimates into the model and use simulated minimum

distance (SMD) to estimate the remaining parameters that describe banks' balance sheet
frictions.

   We estimate deposit and loan demand, given by equations (4) and (9), using the methods
in Berry et al. (1995) and Nevo (2001), where the set of bank characteristics used in the
demand estimation includes the number of branches, the number of employees per branch,

bank fixed eects, and time fixed eects. We provide a brief outline of our implementation
of this procedure, with a detailed explanation in Online Appendix B.
   We start with the definition of a market. For both our deposit and loan demand estima-

tion, we use the U.S. national market as the market definition, where each year constitutes
a separate market. This choice is necessary because data on many types of loans (e.g. com-
mercial and industrial loans) are not available at subnational levels. However, as shown in

Online Appendix C, our results are robust to estimating deposit demand at the local level.
   A key challenge in identifying demand elasticities is the natural correlation between either
                                                          d
deposit or loan rates and any unobservable demand shocks, j , that move the error terms in

the estimating equations. For example, a positive deposit demand shock can induce banks
to lower deposit rates. Therefore, we use a set of supply shifters as instrumental variables.

                                              20
In particular, following Dick (2007) and Ho and Ishii (2011), we use salaries and non-interest

expenses related to the use of fixed assets. Our identifying assumption is that customers
do not care about these costs, holding product characteristics constant. In this case, these
supply shifters are orthogonal to unobservable demand shocks and thus shift the supply curve

along the demand curve, allowing us to trace out the slope of the demand curve. Note that
our identification of the demand curve does not use variation in monetary policy. In fact,
any aggregate shocks are absorbed by time fixed eects, so our identification strategy avoids

a common challenge that studies of monetary transmission face, namely, the endogeneity of
monetary policy and aggregate bank credit supply.
   From this demand estimation, we obtain fitted values of the right-hand sides of equations

(3) and (8) as follows:

                              I
                              X                               d d     d
                 d
                                                      exp   ^i r j + qj
          Dj    rj   |f   =         µd
                                     i                         PJ  ^
                                                                                          W      (33)
                                              d           d) +                d d       d
                              i=1        exp ^i f + exp (qc        m=1  exp ^ i r m + q m

                 l
                                                    exp   ^ l rj
                                                               l    l
                                                                 + qj
           Bj   rj   |f   =                                       PJ  ^
                                                                                            K,   (34)
                              exp ^l f +                   l)+
                                                   + exp (qn                    l rm
                                                                      m=1 exp (^
                                                                                   l + ql )
                                                                                        m


      ^ is the number of banks used in the second-stage estimation, and q generically stands
where J

for an option's quality value, which is the utility derived from non-rate product characteris-
tics. As shown in Online Appendix B, q equals the fitted value of x +  . We normalize to
zero the quality values of saving via Treasury bills and of borrowing from the bond market.

Two features of equations (33) and (34) are of note. First, we assume homogeneous sen-
sitivity to loan rates, as allowing for heterogeneous sensitivities slows down the estimation
but minimally aects banks' rate-setting decisions. Second, we cannot estimate the quality
                         l
value of not borrowing, qn , from the demand estimation because we do not observe its share,
so we estimate it in our second-stage estimation.


                                                     21
   The final plug-in problem consists of inserting the estimated demand functions described

in equations (33) and (34) into the banks' dynamic problem (24). This plug-in problem
operationalizes the notion that banks set deposit and loan rates facing the above-specified
demand curves for deposits and loans.

   In the second stage, we estimate seven additional parameters using SMD, which produces
parameter estimates that minimize the distance between moments (or functions of moments)
generated by the model and their analogs in the data. We use ten moments to identify

the remaining seven model parameters. Parameter identification in SMD requires choosing
moments whose predicted values are sensitive to the model's underlying parameters. Our
identification strategy ensures that there is a unique parameter vector that makes the model

fit the data as closely as possible.
   First, we use banks' average non-reservable borrowing as a fraction of deposits to identify
                                           N
the cost of holding non-reservables,           . Intuitively, higher financing costs induce banks to

finance loans mainly through deposits, and less via borrowing. Next, we use the average
                                                                                             d
deposit and loan spreads to identify banks' marginal costs of generating deposits,               , and
                   l
servicing loans,       . Higher marginal costs lead banks to charge higher spreads in both deposit

and loan markets. Next, we use two moments to identify the net fixed operating cost,                 .
The first is average net non-interest expenses, scaled by assets. This moment measures the
costs that banks pay outside of their routine deposit-intaking and loan-servicing business.

The second moment is banks' average leverage ratio, which indirectly reflects fixed operating
costs, as higher fixed costs induce banks to operate with lower leverage. Next, we use banks'
average dividend yield to identify the discount rate, . Intuitively, a high discount rate makes

banks impatient, so they pay out more of their profits to shareholders instead of retaining
the funds to finance future business. Next, to identify the relative size of the deposit market,


                                                    22
                                                                       l
W/K , as well as the value of firms' outside option of not borrowing, qn , we include banks'

average deposit-to-asset ratio and the sensitivity of total borrowing to the federal funds rate,
which we estimate using a vector autoregression (VAR), the details of which are in Online
Appendix D. These two moments suit this purpose because holding banks' market shares

constant, when W/K increases, the value of deposits rises relative to loan value, leading
to a higher deposit-to-asset ratio. Next, when the outside option becomes less valuable,
its market share remains low, regardless of the federal funds rate. Thus, the sensitivity of
                                                                  l
aggregate corporate borrowing to the federal funds rate falls as qn falls. In addition, the high
                                               l
loan-to-deposit ratio is inversely related to qn because loan demand is weaker when firms
value the option to not borrow. Finally, we also include banks' average market-to-book ratio

to ensure that our model predicts the right valuation for banks.

B. Baseline Estimation Results

   Table 3 presents the point estimates for the model parameters. In Panel A, we start

with the statutory parameters. We set the corporate tax rate to its statutory rate of 35%
and the capital requirement to 6% according to Basel accord. According to the Federal
Reserve Board's Regulation D, the reserve ratios are 10% for transaction deposits, 1% for

saving deposits, and 0% otherwise. In our model, we include only one type of deposit, so
our estimate of the reserve ratio is a weighted average of these three requirements, where
the weights are the shares of a particular type of deposit in total deposits. We calibrate

the number of representative banks to be 6, which matches the average county-level banking
concentration in the data.
   Panel B presents the parameters that we can directly quantify in the data. Specifically,

we obtain the means, standard deviations, and autocorrelations of the federal funds rate and



                                              23
the bank-level loan default rate by direct estimation of the equation (22). Next, average loan

maturity, defined in Table 1, is approximately 3.5 years.
   Panel C in Table 3 provides the demand parameters from the first-stage BLP estimation,
with details of the estimation results presented in Table E1 in Online Appendix E. Not

surprisingly, we find that depositors react favorably to high deposit rates while borrowers
react negatively to high loan rates. Both yield sensitivities are precisely estimated, and
the economic magnitudes are significant. A one percentage point increase in the deposit

rate increases a bank's market share by 0.968%, while a one percentage point increase in
the loan rates decreases its market share by 1.424%. We also find that depositors exhibit
significant dispersion in their rate sensitivity. Finally, we estimate depositors' and borrowers'

sensitivities to non-rate bank characteristics. The estimates are also both statistically and
economically significant. A one percentage point increase in the number of branches increases
a bank's market share by 0.804% in the deposit market and 0.944% in the loan market.

In comparison, the sensitivity to the number of employees per branch is smaller. A one
percentage point increase in the number of employees per branch increases a bank's market
share by 0.714% in the deposit market and 0.630% in the lending market.

   Panel D of Table 3 presents the parameters from our second-stage SMD estimation. We
find that banks have a subjective discount rate of 4.5%, which is higher than the average
federal funds rate observed in the data. Given the discount rate, banks pay out 3% of their

equity value as dividends. Next, the cost of non-reservable borrowing is both statistically
and economically significant. At the average level of non-reservable borrowing (30% of
total deposits), a marginal dollar of non-reservable borrowing costs a bank 30 basis points

above the cost implied by the prevailing federal funds rate, where we calculate this cost
       N            N
as @       /@ N =       N = 0.010  0.3 = 0.003. Note that the mean deposit spread is 1.3%.


                                               24
Because banks equate the marginal costs of their funding sources, these numbers imply that

the marginal cost of expanding deposits averages 1.6%. This result implies that banks cannot
easily replace deposits with other funding sources. Therefore, shocks to bank deposits are
likely to be transmitted to bank lending. Finally, we find that banks incur a 0.9% cost of

maintaining deposits and a slightly lower 0.7% cost of servicing their outstanding loans.
   In Table 4, we compare the empirical and model-implied moments. The model is able
to match closely the banks' balance sheet quantities, the spreads they charge, and their

valuations. In both the data and the model, banks borrow non-reservable securities, which
amount to 30% of the deposit intake. In both the model and the data, the spreads that banks
charge in the deposit market are significantly smaller than those in the loan market. When

the federal funds rate is low, as it is in much of our sample, banks face stier competition
from cash, so they shrink deposit spreads.
   As an external model validation, in Figure 4 we plot the relation between banks' deposit

and loan rates and the federal funds rate, as implied by our model and as calculated from
our data, where we accompany the data calculations with a quarterly scatter plot. Note
that we do not use these relations in our moment-matching exercise, as we target only the

average levels of these rates. Figure 4 shows that the pass-through of the federal funds rate
in both the deposit and loan markets is less than one to one, as indicated by the less than
unitary slope of the plots. This result is consistent with the message in Table 3 and Table E1

in Online Appendix E, as it suggests that banks have significant market power. In addition,
our model-predicted deposit and loan rates track the pattern that we see in the actual data,
indicating that our model can quantitatively capture banks' pricing of their products in both

the deposit and loan markets.
   In a similar spirit, we examine how the market value of bank equity reacts to an unex-


                                             25
pected federal funds rate shock. In the data, a one percentage point increase in the federal

funds rate leads to a 1.93% drop in bank equity value. Although our model is not geared to
match asset-pricing moments, the same magnitude shock generates a 2.84% drop in equity
value. This result is important because models without market power can over-predict this

response. For example, if we model a bank as a replicating portfolio with a long position
in 3.5-year Treasuries and a short position in the federal funds rate with a leverage ratio of
10, then we find an 18% drop in equity value.2 On an intuitive level, bank market power

matters for this result because it allows banks to borrow at deposits rates that are relatively
insensitive to the policy rate, thereby dampening the impact of rate hikes on their net inter-
est margin (Drechsler et al. 2017). This result highlights the importance of accounting for

bank market power when analyzing banks' reactions to monetary policy shocks.


IV. Counterfactuals
A. Decomposing Monetary Policy Transmission

   We now examine the quantitative forces that shape the relation between aggregate bank
lending and monetary policy, as embodied in the federal funds rate. Table 5 depicts, for
dierent versions of our model, the percentage change in aggregate bank lending in response

to a one percentage point change in the federal funds rate. In row (1), for our model exactly
as specified in Section II, with all frictions as estimated in Table 3, find a response of 1.55%.
As shown in Online Appendix D, in our data, the impulse response of aggregate lending to

federal funds rate shocks is 1.6% over a three-year horizon. Although we do not target this
sensitivity, it is remarkably close to the figure produced by the model.


   2
    A maturity mismatch of 3.5 years implies a drop in asset value of 3.5%. A book leverage ratio of 10
and a market-to-book ratio of approximately two implies that equity value drops by 18% = 3.5%  10/2.


                                                  26
   We proceed by eliminating from the model the regulatory constraints and banks' market

power one at a time. As such, we analyze how the absence of each of these frictions aects the
transmission of monetary policy. Row (2) in Table 5 presents the results from a version of the
model without the reserve requirement. We find that the sensitivity of bank lending to the

federal funds rate decreases by 8%. This modest magnitude reflects the small amount of non-
interest-bearing reserves held by banks in our sample period.3 As a result, monetary policy
has a limited eect on banks' marginal costs of lending through the reserve requirement.

   This result provides insights into a recent policy debate over interest on excess reserves.
In October 2008, the Federal Reserve started paying interest on reserves. This move spawned
worry over the power of monetary policy to aect bank lending. For instance, a January 1,

2019 Wall Street Journal article titled "The Fed's Obama-Era Hangover" argues, "by paying
banks not to lend, the central bank diminished its ability to control interest rates" (Gramm
and Saving 2019). Another example is in an article in the American Banker on June 22,

2019 titled "Fed must stop rewarding banks for not lending," which says, "It was thanks
to interest on excess reserves that the Fed ended up stimulating so little in the economy,
despite its eorts to ease so much" (Michel and Selgin 2019). However, we find that this

concern is unwarranted, as the bank reserve transmission channel is not important during
our sample period. This result is also consistent with Xiao (2018), who shows that the
reserve requirement is not a quantitatively important feature that distinguishes commercial

banks from shadow banks.
   Row (3) in Table 5 presents the results from a version of the model that excludes the
capital requirement. We find that the presence of the capital requirement enhances monetary

policy transmission by 28% (1.548/1.120            1). This result connects two long-standing sets of
   3
     Since 2008, bank reserves have increased substantially. However, in this period, reserves started bearing
interest, which eectively eliminated the reserve channel.


                                                     27
reduced-form evidence on the bank capital channel. The first set establishes that monetary

policy shocks can trigger movements in bank capital because of the maturity mismatch on
banks' balance sheets (Flannery and James 1984; English, Van den Heuvel, and Zakrajsek
2018). The second set shows that bank capital has an economically significant impact on bank

lending (Peek and Rosengren 2000; Mora and Logan 2012). Because of the endogeneity of
bank capital, this second literature often exploits exogenous shocks to bank capital instead
of directly focusing on the role of monetary policy. Our paper bridges the two bodies of

empirical evidence by connecting monetary policy to bank lending through the bank capital
requirement. Moreover, we measure quantitative magnitude of this long-established channel.
   Row (4) of Table 5 shows the results from removing banks' deposit market power from the

model. In this case, banks receive fixed lump-sum profits equal to their oligopolistic profits
in the baseline case. They also use marginal cost pricing for deposit-intake decisions, setting
the deposit rate equal to the federal funds rate minus the bank's marginal cost of servicing

deposits. They then take as many deposits as depositors oer, given the deposit rate. We
find that once we eliminate market power in the deposit market, bank lending becomes less
sensitive to changes in the federal funds rate. A 1% increase in the federal funds rate causes

an almost one-to-one decrease in aggregate lending. This sensitivity is 36% (1.548/0.992 1)
smaller than the 1.55% sensitivity observed in the baseline case. Moreover, the change in
sensitivity is larger than that observed when we eliminate the capital requirement.

   Intuitively, if deposit market power is in place, when the federal funds rate increases, the
households' opportunity cost of holding cash rises, making cash less attractive relative to
bank deposits. Banks react by charging higher deposit spreads, thus lowering the amount of

deposits. Banks' lending decisions partially echo this decline in deposits because they need
to use expensive non-reservable borrowing to finance their loans when the amount of loans


                                              28
exceeds deposits. Thus, bank market power, combined with the non-reservable borrowing

cost, contributes to a negative relationship between bank lending and the federal funds
rate. Finally, this result is important because it highlights the interconnectedness of banks'
deposit-taking and lending businesses. Banks' market power in the deposit market is passed

on to the loan market and contributes to the sensitivity of bank lending to the federal funds
rate.
   Row (5) of Table 5 shows the results from removing banks' lending market power from the

model. To isolate the eect of loan market power, we allow banks to retain their oligopolistic
market power in the deposit market, but in the loan market, we assume banks act as price
takers. They adopt marginal cost pricing and set their loan rates equal to the funding

cost. We find that the presence of banks' loan market power makes the aggregate quantity
of loans less sensitive to the federal funds rate, with the sensitivity changing by      24%
(1.548/1.910   1). This result quantifies the intuition in Scharfstein and Sunderam (2016)

and Corbae and Levine (2019), who argue and show that loan market power allows banks
to cushion the eects of monetary tightening on lending by reducing markups on loans.
   Overall, we find that monetary transmission channels based on market power have com-

parable, if not larger, eects than channels based on regulation. Thus, our findings highlight
the importance of accounting for the banking system market structure in assessing monetary
transmission mechanisms.

B. Reversal Rate

   Does the sensitivity of lending to the federal funds rate depends on its level? In Panel A

of Figure 5, we show the amount of bank lending that corresponds to dierent levels of the
federal funds rate, where we normalize steady-state lending to one. We find that aggregate



                                             29
bank lending in the economy is hump-shaped. When the federal funds rate rises above a

certain threshold, a further increase has the usual eect of tightening lending. However,
when the rate is below the threshold, a rate increase actually expands lending.
   In Panel B, we plot the impulse response of aggregate bank lending to a monetary policy

shock, conditional on the current federal funds rate. A point (x, y ) in the plot means that
if the current federal funds rate is x, aggregate lending changes by y percent after a one
percentage point federal funds rate shock. As expected, we find a negative overall relation

between the federal funds rate and lending. This negative relation is reversed, however, in a
region where this rate is below 0.9%. We call this region a reversal-rate environment.
   To understand the mechanism behind the reversal rate, in Panel C, we plot the amount

of desired bank lending in a world with no capital requirements, and in Panel E, we plot the
level of bank capital. The corresponding impulse responses are in Panels D and F. First,
we see that desired lending always falls with the federal funds rate. However, the relation

between bank equity capital and the federal funds rate is also hump shaped, with a 2%
turning point at which the relation between bank equity and the federal funds rate flips sign.
   Two patterns in Panels C and E underlie the reversal rate. The intuition behind Panel

C is straightforward, as high funding costs deter firms from borrowing in equilibrium. The
intuition behind Panel E is more intricate and depends on the relative profitability of lending
and deposit taking. First, as the federal funds rate rises, depositors increasingly find holding

cash to be costly, so banks face weaker competition from cash in the deposit market. Hence,
bank profits from the deposit market rise with the federal funds rate. Second, bank profits
from lending decrease with the federal funds rate, as higher funding costs make firms' outside

option of not borrowing more appealing. Our parameter estimates imply that the deposit
market exerts more pressure on profits than the lending market when the federal funds


                                              30
rate is low. Thus, an increase in the rate leads to higher bank profits, which increases the

equity capital base. Banks accumulate equity capital instead of paying out their profits to
shareholders to avoid being capital constrained in the future. In contrast, in a region of
high federal funds rates, further rate increases erode bank capital via a standard maturity

mismatch argument.
   The reversal rate in Panel A arises because optimal lending is the smaller of two quantities:
desired and feasible lending. The former is the optimal amount of lending in the absence of

a capital requirement, and the latter is the maximal lending permitted by a bank's equity
capital. When the federal funds rate is low, given firms' equilibrium heavy demand for
loans in a low-interest-rate environment, desired lending exceeds the amount allowed by the

bank's equity. Thus, the capital requirement binds, and actual lending tracks the bank's
equity capital, which increases with the federal funds rate. When this rate is high, the
capital requirement is slack, and the actual quantity of lending is the desired amount.

   To understand more fully the dynamic response of bank lending to monetary policy
shocks, in Figure 6, we report the simulated response of bank lending to federal funds rate
shocks. The economy starts at time zero in an initial steady state with the federal funds

rate equal to the inflection point of 0.9%. At time 1, the federal funds rate either increases
to 2% or decreases to 0.1%, and it stays at that level afterwards until the economy reaches a
new steady state. Each variable in the graph is scaled by its level in the initial steady state.

   Panel A of Figure 6 depicts the response to an increase in the federal funds rate. In this
case, banks faces less competition from household demand for cash in the deposit market.
Thus, they behave more like monopolists by charging higher spreads, which in turn lower

household deposit demand. Lower deposit intake increases the need for banks to fund their
lending by turning to the market for non-reservable borrowing, which carries increasing


                                              31
marginal costs. A positive federal funds rate shock also increases the cost of capital in the

corporate sector, making firms more likely to switch to the outside option of not borrowing.
Both eects shrink lending. Because deposits have shorter durations than loans, deposits
drop sharply and converge almost instantaneously to the new steady state. In contrast, loan

quantity converges slowly as the bank replaces only a fraction,  , of its long-term loans in
each period. Non-reservable borrowing increases to fill the gap between deposits and loans.
   Panel B of Figure 6 depicts the responses to a decrease in the federal funds rate. On

the one hand, when this rate decreases, banks profit from having a maturity mismatch on
their balance sheets as the rates they pay on short-term liabilities decrease instantly, while
most of their long-term assets keep generating higher rates of return. This eect diminishes

gradually over time as existing loans mature and are repriced. On the other hand, a lower
federal funds rate leads to increasingly intense competition from cash in the deposit market.
The eect is especially strong as the federal funds rate approaches the zero lower bound, in

which case, the spreads that banks can charge in the deposit market are squeezed, leading
to a sharp drop in their profits. Given the persistence of the federal funds rate, lower
profits translate into slower retained earnings accumulation and lead to lower bank capital.

In the new steady state, banks take more deposits, which can support increased lending.
Indeed, lending increases in the first year. However, banks cannot sustain this higher level
of lending, as their capital requirements tighten in this extremely low federal funds rate

environment. Because total lending decreases, banks need less external financing and thus
less non-reservable borrowing.
   Note that in Figure 6, the lending falls when the federal funds rate changes in either

direction. Although the lending moves in the same direction, the driving force diers in the
two cases. When the federal funds rate increases, loans fall because higher spreads in the


                                             32
deposit market discourage households from making deposits. Banks turn to non-reservable

borrowing to fund loans, and because of increasing costs in this market, the amount of
lending is highly dependent on the quantity of deposits. Instead, when the federal funds rate
decreases, the loan amount decreases because of the binding capital requirement, which in

turn echoes changes in the banks' profit accumulation.
   We obtain external validation of the reversal-rate prediction from a reduced-form regres-
sion in which we examine the relation between bank equity returns and monetary policy

news on Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting days. We measure monetary
policy news released during FOMC meetings as changes in the two-year Treasury yield on
FOMC meeting days, following Hanson and Stein (2015). The advantage of examining

the two-year Treasury yield instead of the federal funds rate is that the former captures
the eects of "forward guidance" in FOMC announcements, which has become increasingly
important in recent years (Hanson and Stein 2015).4 The identifying assumption is that

unexpected changes in interest rates in a one-day window surrounding scheduled Federal
Reserve announcements arise largely from news about monetary policy because macroeco-
nomic fundamentals would not change discretely within such a short window. While our

sample period runs from 1994 to 2017, we exclude the dot-com bubble collapse (2000­2001)
and the financial crisis (2007­2009) because, in these crisis times, information other than
conventional monetary policy news could also be released in FOMC meetings.5

   Our model suggests that the relation between bank capital and the federal funds rate

   4
      As shown in Online Appendix F, our results are robust to using use one-year Treasury yields.
   5
      For instance, on January 28, 2009, the FOMC expressed its intent to purchase "large quantities of
agency debt and MBS . . . and stands ready to expand the quantity of such purchases and the duration of
the purchase program as conditions warrant." This unusual action signaled to the market that the Fed was
willing to support the banking system, leading to 12% one-day banking stock returns. Thus, in this event,
the Fed aected stock prices through the Fed put channel (Cieslak and Vissing-Jorgensen 2017), which is
outside our model.


                                                   33
changes sign around 2%, as shown in Panel E of Figure 5. Therefore, we split our data

sample using a 2% cuto for the federal funds rate. In Table 6, we report the regression
estimates. As shown in column (1), when rates are high, interest rates and returns are
negatively related. However, this conventional negative relation reverses sign in a low-rate

environment. As shown in column (2), a rate increase is associated with positive significant
bank equity returns. In other words, the market expects that an increase in rates will lead to
an increase in bank capital. This result is not driven by a steepening of the term structure,

as we control for changes in term spreads. As shown in Figure 7, the contrast between the
results in columns (1) and (2) can be seen in a simple scatter plot of bank industry excess
returns against monetary policy shocks on FOMC days.

   It is possible that the positive relation between monetary policy shocks and bank stock
returns during low-interest-rate environments could be driven by the central bank's economic
outlook (Nakamura and Steinsson 2018). To address this concern, in Online Appendix F,

we examine returns for all 49 Fama-French industries. We find that the banking industry
is the only industry exhibiting a switch from a negative to a positive interest sensitivity
in the low-interest environment. Furthermore, we use an alternative measure of monetary

policy shocks constructed by Jarocinski and Karadi (2018), who disentangle the potential
information shocks from monetary policy shocks. Our results are robust to this alternative
measure.

   In columns (3) and (4) of Table 6, we report the results of interacting changes in the
federal funds rate with a reduced-form measure of deposit market power, the Herfindahl-
Hirschman Index (HHI) of the local deposit market in which a bank operates, where we

define a local deposit market as a county. If a bank operates in several counties, the bank-
level HHI is the weighted average of local HHIs, weighted by the deposits of the bank in


                                             34
each county. We find that in a low-interest-rate environment, banks with greater deposit

market power experience higher positive returns. In summary, we find that monetary policy
has a nonmonotonic eect on bank capital. When the federal funds rate is high, the relation
between the short-term rates and bank capital is negative, but when this rate is low, the

relation is positive.
   Our finding that ultra-low interest rate policy impedes lending growth is related to Heider
et al. (2018), who show that the introduction of negative policy rates by the European

Central Bank in mid-2014 reduced lending by eurozone banks with greater reliance on deposit
funding. Our results show that such perverse eects can occur even when the rates are
positive because banks' deposit spreads are compressed by the low-rate environment.

   The reversal-rate result is informative about the sluggish recovery of bank lending in the
United States since the 2008 financial crisis. By the end of 2018, bank lending had increased
only about 25% cumulatively from its low in August 2009. In contrast, from trough to peak,

in all recessions since 1974, bank lending grew by 60%­120%. Although many factors such
as banking regulation may have contributed to this slow recovery, the ultra-low rate policy
could be an important factor.


V. Extensions and Robustness
A. Heterogeneous Transmission through Large and Small Banks

   We extend our analysis by examining whether monetary transmission depends empirically

on bank size, motivated by the finding in Kashyap and Stein (1995) that monetary policy has
a particularly strong eect on lending by small banks, as they cannot replace deposits with
frictionless access to non-reservable funding. However, one limitation of the data they use

is the absence of a measure of the actual cost of external finance. While they use bank size


                                             35
as a proxy for this cost, size is correlated with many other bank attributes, whose presence

compromises the interpretation of their results. For instance, small banks tend to lend to
small firms, whose credit demand is more cyclical. Therefore, the higher sensitivity of smaller
bank lending might be driven by demand rather than by financing frictions on the supply

side.
   To explore this issue, we split our sample at the 10th percentile of the bank size distribution
and estimating a subset of the model parameters separately for the large and small banks.

For these estimations, we hold constant across subsamples parameters describing household
preferences and macroeconomic conditions. We also fix the banks' discount rate because we
cannot identify it in the small-bank sample. Identification using dividend yields is infeasible

because many small banks do not report dividends. Also, many small banks are private, so we
cannot calculate their market-to-book ratios. We re-estimate all the remaining parameters.
                                                                                      N
   The results are in Table 7. We find that both external financing costs,                , and fixed

operating costs,   , are larger for small banks. This result is striking because we do not use
                                                    N
bank size as an identifying moment. Instead,            is identified from the fraction of assets
financed by non-reservables, and       is identified from the banks' net non-interest expense

and leverage ratios. These parameter dierences across samples imply that small-bank loans
are 37% more sensitive to the federal funds rate, with a       1.758 sensitivity for small banks
and a   1.103 sensitivity for large banks.

   Next, we examine how the sensitivity of lending to the federal funds rate depends on the
                        N                                                         N
frictions embodied in       and . If we reduce the small-bank financing cost,         , to the level
estimated for the large banks (0.006), the small-bank sensitivity of loans to the federal funds

rate falls to   1.364, a drop representing 61% of the dierence in loan sensitivity between
large and small banks. Because we allow only four parameters to dier across large and


                                               36
small banks, we eectively hold loan demand constant, thus isolating the eect of financial

frictions. This result is consistent with the hypothesis in Kashyap and Stein (1995) that
large and small banks have dierent external financing costs, which lead to dierences in
the transmission of monetary policy to credit supply. The fixed operating cost,       , explains

most of the remaining variation in monetary transmission. Small banks have relatively few
sources of non-interest income, so they have higher net operating costs, and they accumulate
equity buers more slowly. As a result, when rate hikes erode bank capital via the maturity

mismatch, this eect hits small banks more strongly, leading to a sharper reduction in
lending.

B. Changes in Transmission over Time

   In this subsection, we examine how the impact of monetary policy on bank lending has
changed over time. For example, in the past few decades, the average interest rate has
declined substantially, and the banking industry itself has experienced a large volume of

mergers, leading to increased concentration. To this end, we split our sample into two sub-
periods--early (1994­2005) and late (2006­2017). We then reestimate all model parameters
for the two sub-periods. The parameter estimates in Table 8 imply that the sensitivity of

lending to the federal funds rate has declined from 1.727% to 0.987% over time. This result
is consistent with evidence in the literature that monetary policy has had more muted eects
on real activity and inflation in recent decades (Boivin, Kiley, and Mishkin 2010).

   To understand the declining impact of monetary policy on bank lending, we categorize our
parameters into three groups. The first group includes macroeconomic conditions, such as the

federal funds rate and the loan charge-o processes, the regulatory constraints, and the loan
and deposit market sizes. The second group consists of measures of bank operating e ciency



                                             37
and financial frictions, namely discount rates, operating costs, and external financing costs.

The last group consists of parameters that govern banks' market power. It includes the
                                               ^, as well as the rate sensitivities that
number of competing banks in the local market, J
banks face in the deposit and loan markets, d and l . As seen in Table 8, over time, banks'

market concentration has risen, with the number of competing banks in the local market
falling from 7 to 5. However, both depositors and borrowers have become more rate-sensitive.
The adoption of new technology and a surge in Internet and mobile banking has lowered

the cost of searching. Thus, deposits and borrowers are more reactive to banks' rate setting.
Holding all else equal, this increased sensitivity decreases banks' market power.
   To gauge the overall eect of bank market power on the observed change in the federal

funds rate sensitivity, we eliminate the dierence in bank market power parameters across
the two subsamples by setting the late period values to those from early period. We find
that the gap between the early and late sensitivities declines by 18%.

   Table 8 also shows that fixed operating costs have fallen, likely because of bank mergers.
The consequent rise in profitability allows banks to accumulate healthier capital buers
that reduce their exposure to monetary policy. Furthermore, the cost of accessing the non-

reservable funding market has declined, so banks can better cushion fluctuations in deposits.
If we eliminate the dierence in bank operating and financing costs, the gap between the
early and late sensitivities declines by 16%.

   The remaining 66% of the gap is attributable to changes in macro-economic conditions.
In particular, we find that changes in the federal funds rate process play the most important
role in explaining the declining trend in the sensitivity of lending to the federal funds rate.

In particular, the average federal funds rate is much lower in our late period, so the economy
spends more time around the reversal-rate region, where monetary policy has a weaker, or


                                                38
even opposite, eect on bank lending decisions.

C. Model Robustness

   In this subsection, we examine the implications of several ingredients that we have left
out of the baseline model. First, instead of requiring dividends to be positive, we allow
                                                                  e
them to be negative, subject to a linear equity issuance cost,        . We re-estimate our model,
                      e
with the parameter        being identified by an additional moment: the ratio of bank equity
issuance to total assets. In the data, this moment is 2%. In our model, we find that an

equity issuance cost of 10% yields a predicted equity issuance rate that matches the value in
                           e
the data. The value of         is comparable the estimates for industrial firms in Hennessy and
Whited (2007).

   Second, we introduce time-varying discount rates. Specifically, we assume that banks
apply a discount rate of ft + ! . In our estimation, we identify ! from banks' dividend yields,
the same moment that we use to identify the constant discount factor in our baseline model.

We find that ! = 1.6%. As is the case with the baseline estimates, the spread between the
federal funds rate and banks' discount rates indicates that banks face substantial frictions in
their maturity transformation activity. Finally, our results concerning the decomposition of

monetary transmission and reversal rate are robust to these alternative model specifications.
   Another concern is that agents in our model are risk-neutral, while in reality loan spreads
contain a risk premium. To make the model and data moments comparable, we adjust

the data moment by subtracting a risk premium, which we calibrate following Giesecke,
Longsta, Schaefer, and Strebulaev (2011). They show that the credit risk premium in the
bond market roughly equals the expected default loss. After adjusting the data moment,

we re-estimate the model. We find that the only notable dierence in the new results lies



                                                39
in banks' estimated cost of serving loans, which becomes insignificantly dierent from zero.

This result suggests that banks' perceived costs in the loan market are driven almost entirely
by the default risk. Finally, we verify that our main predictions remain robust under this
re-estimation.

   Next, in Online Appendix G, we consider an extension of the model in which we endoge-
nize the federal funds rate. Briefly, our extended model contains a standard New Keynesian
block and a banking block, with the New Keynesian block determining the eects of pro-

ductivity and monetary policy shocks on the nominal short-term rate and inflation. The
banking block determines the transmission of the nominal short-term rate to the lending
rate. In this setting, the federal funds rate process is pinned down by a Taylor rule, which

depends on the monetary authority's policy as well as aggregate output and inflation.
   We assume a continuum of ex-ante homogeneous households with separable preferences
over real consumption and real money balances. These households face a two-stage decision

making process. First, they choose the quantity of consumption and money holdings given
aggregate prices. Second, they allocate their money demand across dierent options: cash or
deposits in any bank. Similarly, firms decide their optimal demand for capital and whether

to finance this demand via corporate bonds or bank loans. We model the banking sector as
in our baseline partial equilibrium setting discussed in Section II. The detailed model setup
and parameter calibrations are discussed in Online Appendix G.

   With the calibrated general equilibrium model, we first confirm that the relation between
the federal funds rate and aggregate bank lending is non-monotonic and hump-shaped. We
also repeat our decomposition of monetary policy transmission mechanisms using the general

equilibrium framework. We find that the sensitivity of loans to the federal funds rate is lower
than it is in our baseline model in Section A because our New Keynesian model implies a


                                              40
much weaker relationship between the federal funds rate and long-term real rate than what

we observe in the data. Nevertheless, our main conclusions remain valid. We find that the
qualitative eect of the reserve regulation remains limited, while both the deposit and loan
market power channels are quantitatively important in explaining monetary transmission.


VI. Conclusion
   The U.S. banking sector has experienced an enormous amount of consolidation. The mar-
ket share of the top five banks has increased from less than 15% in the 1990s to over 45% as

of 2017. This consolidation begs the question of whether bank market power has a quanti-
tatively important eect on the transmission of monetary policy. We study this question by
formulating and estimating a dynamic banking model with regulatory constraints, financial

frictions, and imperfect competition. This unified framework is useful because it allows us
to gauge the relative importance of dierent monetary policy transmission channels.
   In our counterfactuals, we show that the channel related to reserve requirements has

limited quantitative importance. In contrast, we find that channels related to bank capital
requirements and market power are very important. These quantitative findings are new to
an empirical literature dominated by qualitative results (Kashyap and Stein 1995; Scharfstein

and Sunderam 2016; Drechsler et al. 2017). We also find an interesting interaction between
the market power channel and the bank capital channel. If the federal funds rate is low,
depressing it further can actually contract bank lending, as reduced profits in the deposit

market impact bank capital negatively. Lastly, we show that accounting for bank market
power is key to understanding cross-sectional variation in banks' responsiveness to monetary
policy, while the interaction of bank market power with regulatory constraints explains most

of the decline in monetary transmission eectiveness over time.


                                             41
References
Basten, Christoph, and Mike Mariathasan, 2018, How banks respond to negative interest
  rates: Evidence from the Swiss exemption threshold, CESifo Working Paper Series 6901.
Bazdresch, Santiago, R. Jay Kahn, and Toni M. Whited, 2018, Estimating and testing
  dynamic corporate finance models, Review of Financial Studies 31, 322­361.
Begenau, Juliane, 2018, Capital requirements, risk choice, and liquidity provision in a busi-
  ness cycle model, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Begenau, Juliane, and Tim Landvoigt, 2018, Financial regulation in a quantitative model of
  the modern banking system, Manuscript, Stanford University.
Bernanke, Ben S., and Alan S. Blinder, 1988, Credit, money, and aggregate demand, Amer-
  ican Economic Review 78, 435­439.
Berry, Steven, James Levinsohn, and Ariel Pakes, 1995, Automobile prices in market equi-
  librium, Econometrica 63, 841­90.
Boivin, Jean, Michael T. Kiley, and Frederic S. Mishkin, 2010, How has the monetary trans-
  mission mechanism evolved over time?, in Handbook of Monetary Economics , volume 3,
  369­422 (Elsevier).
Bolton, Patrick, and Xavier Freixas, 2000, Equity, bonds, and bank debt: Capital struc-
  ture and financial market equilibrium under asymmetric information, Journal of Political
  Economy 108, 324­351.
Brunnermeier, Markus K., and Yann Koby, 2016, The reversal interest rate: An eective
  lower bound on monetary policy eective lower bound on monetary policy, Manuscript,
  Princeton University.
Brunnermeier, Markus K., and Yuliy Sannikov, 2016, The I theory of money, Manuscript,
  Princeton University.
Buchak, Greg, Gregor Matvos, Tomasz Piskorski, and Amit Seru, 2018, Fintech, regulatory
  arbitrage, and the rise of shadow banks, Journal of Financial Economics 130, 453­483.
Campos, Mauricio, 2019, Going negative at the zero lower bound: The eects of negative
  nominal interest rates, Working paper.
Cieslak, Anna, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, 2017, The economics of the Fed put,
  Manuscript, Duke University.
Corbae, Dean, and Pablo D'Erasmo, 2013, A quantitative model of banking industry dy-
  namics, Manuscript, University of Wisconsin.
Corbae, Dean, and Ross Levine, 2019, Competition, stability, and e ciency in the banking
  industry, Manuscript, University of Wisconsin.


                                             42
Demiralp, Selva, Jens Eisenschmidt, and Thomas Vlassopoulos, 2017, Negative interest rates,
  excess liquidity and bank business models: Banks' reaction to unconventional monetary
  policy in the Euro area, ECB Working Paper.
Dick, Astrid A, 2007, Market size, service quality, and competition in banking, Journal of
  Money, Credit and Banking 39, 49­81.
Drechsler, Itamar, Alexi Savov, and Philipp Schnabl, 2017, The deposits channel of monetary
  policy, Quarterly Journal of Economics 132, 1819­1876.
Egan, Mark, Ali Hortacsu, and Gregor Matvos, 2017a, Deposit competition and financial
  fragility: Evidence from the U.S. banking sector, American Economic Review 107, 169­
  216.
Egan, Mark, Stefan Lewellen, and Adi Sunderam, 2017b, The cross section of bank value,
  Manuscript, Harvard University.
Eggertsson, Gauti B., Ragnar E. Juelsrud, and Ella Getz Wold, 2017, Are negative nominal
  interest rates expansionary?, Manuscript, Brown University.
Elenev, Vadim, Tim Landvoigt, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, 2016, Phasing out the GSEs,
  Journal of Monetary Economics 81, 111­132.
English, William B, Skander J. Van den Heuvel, and Egon Zakraj   sek, 2018, Interest rate
  risk and bank equity valuations, Journal of Monetary Economics 98, 80­97.
Flannery, Mark J, and Christopher M James, 1984, The eect of interest rate changes on
  the common stock returns of financial institutions, Journal of Finance 39, 1141­1153.
Giesecke, Kay, Francis A. Longsta, Stephen Schaefer, and Ilya Strebulaev, 2011, Corporate
  bond default risk: A 150-year perspective, Journal of Financial Economics 102, 233­250.
Gramm, Phil, and Thomas Saving, 2019, The Fed's Obama-era hangover, The Wall Street
  Journal.
Hanson, Samuel G., and Jeremy C. Stein, 2015, Monetary policy and long-term real rates,
  Journal of Financial Economics 115, 429­448.
Heider, Florian, Farzad Saidi, and Glenn Schepens, 2018, Life below zero: Bank lending
  under negative policy rates, Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.
Hennessy, Christopher A., and Toni M. Whited, 2005, Debt dynamics, Journal of Finance
  60, 1129­1165.
Hennessy, Christopher A., and Toni M. Whited, 2007, How costly is external financing?
  Evidence from a structural estimation, Journal of Finance 62, 1705­1745.
Ho, Katherine, and Joy Ishii, 2011, Location and competition in retail banking, International
  Journal of Industrial Organization 29, 537­546.



                                             43
Jarocinski, Marek, and Peter Karadi, 2018, Deconstructing monetary policy surprises: The
  role of information shocks, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, forthcoming.
Kashyap, Anil K., and Jeremy C. Stein, 1995, The impact of monetary policy on bank
 balance sheets, Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 42, 151­195.
Krusell, Per, and Anthony A. Smith, 1998, Income and wealth heterogeneity in the macroe-
  conomy, Journal of Political Economy 106, 867­896.
Michel, Norbert, and George Selgin, 2019, Fed must stop rewarding banks for not lending,
 American Banker.
Mora, Nada, and Andrew Logan, 2012, Shocks to bank capital: Evidence from UK banks at
 home and away, Applied Economics 44, 1103­1119.
Nakamura, Emi, and J´  on Steinsson, 2018, High-frequency identification of monetary non-
  neutrality: The information eect, Quarterly Journal of Economics 133, 1283­1330.
Nevo, Aviv, 2001, Measuring market power in the ready-to-eat cereal industry, Econometrica
  69, 307­342.
Peek, Joe, and Eric S. Rosengren, 2000, Collateral damage: Eects of the Japanese bank
  crisis on real activity in the United States, American Economic Review 90, 30­45.
Romer, Christina D., and David H. Romer, 1990, New evidence on the monetary transmission
  mechanism, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, 149­213.
Scharfstein, David, and Adi Sunderam, 2016, Market power in mortgage lending and the
  transmission of monetary policy, Manuscript, Harvard Business School.
Van den Heuvel, Skander J., 2002, The bank capital channel of monetary policy, Manuscript,
  University of Pennsylvania.
Wang, Olivier, 2019, Banks, low interest rates, and monetary policy transmission,
 Manuscript, University of Pennsylvania.
Xiao, Kairong, 2018, Monetary transmission through shadow banks, Review of Financial
  Studies, forthcoming.




                                           44
                                   Table 1: Variable Definitions


Variable                                                Details of construction

Deposit market share                Deposits of a bank divided by the sum of deposits, cash, and Trea-
                                    sury bills in the U.S. economy.
Loan market share                   Loans of a bank divided by the sum of U.S. corporate and household
                                    debt.
Deposit rates                       Deposit interest expense divided by deposits.
Loan rates                          Loan interest income divided by loans outstanding.
No. of branches                     Number of local branches.
No. of employees per branch         Number of employees divided by number of branches.
Expenses related to fixed assets    Non-interest expenses related to the use of fixed assets divided by
                                    total assets.
Salary                              Total salary expense divided by total assets.
Reserve ratio                       10% times the weight of transaction deposits plus 1% times the
                                    weight of saving deposits.
Average loan maturity               Estimated maturity of each type loan weighted by the portfolio
                                    weight. Non-mortgage loan maturity is the repricing maturity and
                                    average prepayment adjusted mortgage duration is from Elenev
                                    et al. (2016).
Non-reservable borrowing share      Non-reservable borrowing divided by total deposits.
Deposit spread                      federal funds rate minus a deposit rate.
Loan spread                         A loan rate minus the corresponding five-year Treasury yield.
Deposit-to-asset ratio              Deposits divided by total assets.
Net noninterest expense             Noninterest expense minus noninterest income, divided by total as-
                                    sets.
Leverage                            Total assets divided by the book value of equity.
Market-to-book ratio                The market value of equity divided by the book value of equity.
Total credit-FFR sensitivity        Three-year impulse response coe cient of total credit to the federal
                                    funds rate estimated from a VAR.




                                                45
                                    Table 2: Summary Statistics

In this table, we report summary statistics for our sample. The sample period is 1994­2017. The total
size of the deposit market is defined as the sum of deposits, cash, and Treasury bills held by all U.S.
households and non-financial corporations. The total size of the loan market is defined as the sum of U.S.
corporate and household debt. Deposit and loan rates are calculated using interest expense and income.
Expense related to fixed assets and salaries are scaled by total assets. Deposit shares, loan shares, deposit
rates, loan rates, expenses related to fixed assets, salaries, and net noninterest expenses are reported in
percentages. Asset maturity is reported in years. "(vw)" indicates an asset-weighted mean, and "(ew)" in-
dicates an equal-weighted mean . The data sources are the Call Reports and the FDIC Summary of Deposits.


                               mean(vw)     mean(ew)          sd      p10      p25      p50      p75      p90
Deposit market shares             3.519        0.079         0.523    0.003   0.005    0.009    0.021    0.077
Loan market shares                1.368        0.033         0.207    0.001   0.002    0.004    0.009    0.034
Deposit rates                     1.706        2.032         1.292    0.166   0.873    2.085    3.150    3.714
Loan rates                        5.935        6.921         1.725    4.540   5.599    6.959    8.286    9.061
No. of branches                   1778        69.753        315.678   7.000   11.000   17.000   34.000   94.000
No. of employees per branch      53.736       18.338        17.433    9.109   11.188   14.306   19.556   28.500
Expenses of fixed assets          0.454        0.480         0.165    0.270   0.347    0.448    0.584    0.798
Salaries                          1.590        1.725         0.486    1.061   1.348    1.650    2.036    2.646
Net noninterest expenses          1.230        2.778         0.830    1.904   2.246    2.653    3.142    3.743
Loan-to-deposit ratio             0.816        0.815         0.170    0.598   0.710    0.821    0.925    1.022
Borrowing-to-deposit ratio        0.699        0.136         0.138    0.013   0.041    0.096    0.181    0.308
Deposit-to-asset ratio            0.707        0.805         0.082    0.691   0.763    0.822    0.866    0.895
Book leverage                    11.464       11.114         2.577    7.947   9.408    10.990   12.656   14.390
Asset maturity                    3.429        3.772         1.402    2.163   2.764    3.560    4.604    5.698




                                                       46
                                     Table 3: Parameter Estimates

In this table, we report the model parameter estimates. Panel A presents calibrated parameters. Panel B
presents values for parameters that can be calculated as simple averages or by simple regression methods.
Panel C presents results for parameters estimated via BLP. Panel D presents results for parameters
estimated via SMD. Standard errors for the estimated parameters are clustered at the bank level and
reported in brackets.


   Panel A: Statutory Parameters
c              Corporate tax rate                                                  0.350
               The reserve ratio                                                   0.024
               The capital ratio                                                   0.060
^
J              Number of representative banks                                        6
   Panel B: Parameters Estimated Separately
µ              Average loan maturity                                               3.429         [1.445]
¯
f              Log Federal Funds rate mean                                        0.297          [0.352]
   f           Std of Federal Funds rate innovation                                0.554         [0.135]
f              Log Federal Funds rate persistence                                  0.902         [0.103]
¯              Log loan chargeos mean                                             -1.300         [0.004]
               Std log loan chargeos innovation                                    0.961         [0.003]
               Log loan chargeos persistence                                       0.598         [0.002]
       f       Corr of Federal Funds rate innovation and log loan chargeos        -0.108         [0.003]
   Panel C: Parameters Estimated via BLP
d              Depositors' sensitivity to deposit rates                            0.968         [0.140]
   d           Dispersion of depositors' sensitivity to deposit rates              1.916         [0.403]
l              Borrowers' sensitivity to loan rates                               -1.424         [0.292]
 d
qd             Convenience of holding deposits                                     3.440         [0.251]
 d
qc             Convenience of holding cash                                         1.985         [0.242]
 l
ql             Convenience of borrowing through loans                              1.094         [1.065]
   Panel D: Parameters Estimated via SMD
               Banks' discount rate                                               0.045          [0.006]
W/K            Relative size of the deposit market                                 0.217         [0.040]
 l
qn             Value of firms' outside option                                     -9.641         [0.414]
   N
               Quadratic cost of non-reservable borrowing                         0.010          [0.003]
   d
               Bank's cost of taking deposits                                     0.009          [0.001]
   l
               Bank's cost of servicing loans                                      0.007         [0.003]
               Net fixed operating cost                                           0.015          [0.001]




                                                      47
                                     Table 4: Moment Conditions

In this table, we report the simulated versus the actual moments in the SMD estimation, along with the
t-statistics for the pairwise dierences. The dividend yield is defined as dividends over bank equity value;
the non-reservable borrowing share is defined as the ratio of non-reservable borrowing to total assets;
the sensitivity of corporate borrowing to the federal funds rate (FFR) is estimated via a vector autoregression.


                                            Actual Moment               Simulated Moment                t-stat

Dividend yield                                   3.38%                         3.00%                    -0.687
Non-reservable borrowing share                   29.9%                         27.0%                    -1.782
Std of non-reservable borrowing                  12.6%                         14.8%                     1.337
Deposit spread                                   1.29%                         1.28%                    -0.113
Loan spread                                      2.81%                         2.75%                    -0.374
Deposit-to-asset ratio                            0.699                        0.728                     1.022
Net noninterest expenses                         1.23%                         1.20%                    -0.822
Leverage                                         11.20                         11.69                     2.337
Market-to-book ratio                             2.061                         1.814                    -1.424
Credit-FFR sensitivity                           -0.995                        -0.975                    0.083




                                                      48
                    Table 5: Determinants of Monetary Policy Transmission

This table presents the results of a series of counterfactual experiments in which we examine the eects of
removing frictions from our model. The first column lists the frictions that are removed from the model.
The second column presents the sensitivity of loans to the federal funds rate (FFR) when the corresponding
frictions are removed. The third column presents the contributions of the corresponding frictions. All model
solutions are under the same set of parameters reported in Table 3.

                                                                                   
                                                                            ln l
                                           Sensitivity of Loans to FFR       f        Contribution %

     (1)     All frictions are present                    -1.548%                           /
     (2)        Reserve Regulation                        -1.426%                         7.88%
     (3)        Capital Regulation                        -1.120%                        27.65%
     (4)        Deposit Market Power                      -0.992%                        35.91%
     (5)        Loan Market Power                         -1.910%                        -23.39%




                                                    49
        Table 6: Monetary Policy Shocks and Bank Equity Returns on FOMC Days

In this table, we report the estimates of the relation between bank equity returns and monetary policy
shocks on FOMC Days. Monetary policy shocks are measured by one-day changes in the two-year
Treasury yield on FOMC days. HHI is the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index for the local deposit market in
which a bank operates. The sample includes all publicly traded U.S. banks from 1994 to 2017. The
sample for columns (1) and (3) constitutes observations in which the starting level of the federal funds
rate (FFR) is above 2%. The sample for columns (2) and (4) constitutes observations in which the
starting level of the federal funds rate is below 2%. We exclude observations during the collapse of the dot-
com bubble (2000­2001) and the subprime financial crisis (2007-2009). Standard errors are clustered by time.

                                  (1)                   (2)                   (3)                  (4)
                               High FFR              Low FFR               High FFR              Low FFR
 Policy shock                   -1.292                 2.202                 -0.639                -1.393
                                 [0.615]               [0.879]               [0.653]               [0.852]

 HHI*Policy shock                                                            -0.134               0.562
                                                                             [0.145]               [0.153]

    Term spread                  -0.634                2.336                 -0.667                 1.827
                                 [1.265]               [1.350]               [1.257]               [1.293]

 Market return                  0.297                 0.730                 0.295                 0.733
                                 [0.072]               [0.070]               [0.071]               [0.070]
 Observations                    27,257                33,805                27,257                33,805
 Adj. R2                          0.015                 0.123                 0.016                0.125




                                                     50
                                                        Table 7: Large Banks versus Small Banks

     In this table, we report the SMD estimation results for subsamples of large and small banks. Panel A contains the simulated versus the actual
     moments, along with the t-statistics for the pairwise dierences. In Panel B, we report the parameter estimates. d and l are banks' marginal costs
     of intaking deposits and servicing loans, respectively; is the net fixed operating cost, and N is the quadratic cost of borrowing non-reservables.
     The last column presents the sensitivity of loans to the federal funds rate (FFR). Standard errors clustered at the bank level are in brackets under
     the parameter estimates.

      Panel A: Moment conditions

                                                            Large Banks                                      Small Banks
                                             Actual          Simulated          t-stat                 Actual        Simulated            t-stat

     Dividends                                3.60%            2.95%            -1.929                     /                /                /
     Non-reservable borrowing share           35.5%            38.8%             2.130                  15.3%            15.1%            -0.577
     Std of non-reservable borrowing          19.0%            20.6%             0.726                  8.70%            7.58%            -1.992




51
     Deposit spread                           1.32%            1.33%             0.133                  1.25%            1.29%             0.915
     Loan spread                              2.67%            2.71%            0.280                   2.98%            2.83%            -3.193
     Deposit-to-asset ratio                    0.666           0.672            0.201                   0.784            0.793             0.788
     Net noninterest expense                  0.96%            1.01%            0.994                   1.70%            1.58%            -3.918
     Leverage                                 11.36            12.45            2.448                    10.78           11.16             2.499
     Market-to-book ratio                     2.061            2.009            -0.894                     /                /                /
     Total credit-FFR sensitivity             -0.995           -0.898           0.177                   -0.995           -0.960           0.064

      Panel B: Parameter Estimates
                             N                   d                 l                                                                         ln l
                                                                                                             Sensitivity of Loans to FFR (    f )

     Large Banks           0.006              0.010              0.006             0.002                                   -1.103
                           [0.0011]          [0.0003]          [0.0011]          [0.0001]
     Small Banks           0.016               0.009             0.007             0.029                                   -1.758
                           [0.0009]          [0.0005]          [0.0009]          [0.0001]
                           Table 8: Subsample Estimates: Early versus Late


In this table, we report the model parameter estimates for the early (1994­2005) and late (2006­2017)
subsamples. Panel A presents calibrated parameters. Panel B presents values for parameters that can be
calculated as simple averages or by simple regression methods. Panel C presents results for parameters
estimated via BLP. Panel D presents results for parameters estimated via SMD. Standard errors for the
estimated parameters are clustered at the bank level and reported in brackets.


                                                                    Early Subsample    Late Subsample
   Panel A: Calibrated Parameters
c          Corporate tax rate                                       0.350              0.350
           The reserve ratio                                        0.028              0.022
           The capital ratio                                        0.060              0.060
^
J          Number of representative banks                             7                  5
   Panel B: Parameters Estimated Separately
µ          Average loan maturity                                    3.178    [1.402]    3.195   [1.448]
¯
f          Log federal funds rate mean                              1.245    [0.205]   -0.920   [0.482]
   f       Std of log federal funds rate innovation                 0.552    [0.115]    0.951   [0.282]
f          Log federal funds rate persistence                        0.700   [0.252]    0.623   [0.213]
¯          Log loan chargeos mean                                   -1.647   [0.005]   -1.221   [0.007]
           Std of log loan chargeos innovation                      0.863    [0.004]    0.935   [0.005]
           Log loan chargeos persistence                             0.611   [0.003]    0.722   [0.004]
       f   Corr of federal funds rate innovation and chargeos       -0.064   [0.011]   -0.128   [0.006]
   Panel C: Parameters Estimated via BLP
d          Depositors' sensitivity to deposit rates                  0.743   [0.165]   0.925    [0.399]
   d       Dispersion of depositors' sensitivity to deposit rates    1.467   [0.498]    1.830   [0.965]
l          Borrowers' sensitivity to loan rates                     -1.025   [0.054]   -1.501   [0.082]
 d
qd         Convenience of holding deposits                           3.465   [0.358]    2.324   [0.470]
 d
qc         Convenience of holding cash                              1.763    [0.387]   -0.446   [0.430]
 l
ql         Convenience of borrowing through loans                   -0.005   [0.088]   1.804    [0.212]
   Panel D: Parameters Estimated via SMM
           Banks' discount rate                                     0.046    [0.012]    0.046   [0.017]
W/K        Relative size of the deposit market                       0.183   [0.051]   0.283    [0.022]
 l
qn         Value of firms' outside option                           -7.030   [0.568]   -9.689   [1.025]
   N
           Quadratic cost of non-reservable borrowing               0.010    [0.004]    0.010   [0.015]
   d
           Bank's cost of taking deposits                           0.009    [0.002]    0.009   [0.001]
   l
           Bank's cost of servicing loans                           0.005    [0.004]    0.008   [0.005]
           Net fixed operating cost                                 0.039    [0.001]    0.009   [0.001]




                                                        52
                                     Panel A: Deposit Spread




                                       Panel B: Loan Spread




             Figure 1: Deposit Spread, Loan Spread, and the Federal Funds Rate
In this figure, we plot kernel regressions of average deposit and loan spreads for U.S. banks on the federal
funds rate. We use an Epanechnikov kernel with a bandwidth of 0.66 for deposits and 0.61 for loans. The
sample period is 1985­2017. The data frequency is quarterly. The deposit and loan rates are constructed
using the Call Reports, and the federal funds rate is from the FRED database.




                                                    53
                                                        d
     Federal funds rate: ft   Banks set deposit rates: rj,t                                                         < 1 loans mature
                                                        l                     z
     Charge-os: t
                                                           ····
                                          loan rates: rj,t
                                                              ··
                                                               ··
                                                                ··········
                                                                               · Depositors
                                                                                             j,t
                                                                  ····· ··
                                                                       ····· ····· choose D rd |ft
                                                                            ·
                                                                           ··
                                                                            ·· ··· ·
                                                                         ··· ···s
                                                                                                   l
                                                                       ··            ··· Borrowers
                                                                                         choose B rj,t
                                                                    ···            ····
                                                                 · ·              ·                    |ft
                                                               ·· · ·······
                                                                           ·
                                                                                                                   Banks collect profits
                                                            ···      ·····
                               government securities, +                                                             and distribute dividends
                              Banks choose reserves, ···· ······
                                                       ······
                                                      ··
                               non-reservable borrowing

                                                                                                             ...
              ?                             ?                                                                                ? -
             t                                                                                                              t+1




54
                                         Figure 2: Timeline within a Period
                                r

                                                                                          rl




                                                                                               rd

                                                               1
                                                         B0
                                                         B




                                                               1
                                                         D0
                                                         D




                                                                                                    f
                                    0




              Figure 3: Deposit Rates, Loan Rates, and the Federal Funds Rate
This figure illustrates the relationship between deposit rates, loan rates, and the federal funds rates when
banks have market power in the deposit and loan markets. The federal funds rate is plotted on the x-axis,
and the deposit and lending rates are plotted on the y-axis.




                                                    55
                                 0.08                                                                     0.08

                                 0.07                                                                     0.07

                                 0.06                                                                     0.06

                                 0.05                                                                     0.05


                                 0.04                                                                     0.04




                                                                                              Loan rate




                  Deposit rate
                                 0.03                                                                     0.03


                                 0.02                                                                     0.02




56
                                 0.01                                                                     0.01


                                   0                                                                        0
                                        0.02         0.04          0.06        0.08                              0   0.02         0.04     0.06   0.08
                                               Fed        unds rate                                                         Fed    unds rate

                                               Raw data         Local polynomial smooth plots using raw data           Model predictions

                                                            Figure 4: Model-predicted versus Actual Rates
     This figure illustrates the relation between the federal funds rate and banks' deposit and loan rates. The circles represent a scatter of the raw data
     from 1984 to 2017, aggregated at the quarterly frequency. The dashed lines represent local polynomial smoothed plots based on the raw data, and
     the solid lines represent the relations predicted using the model.
     1.1                                                        2

    1.05
                                                                0
       1

    0.95                                                        -2

     0.9
                                                                -4
           0     0.02      0.04      0.06      0.08                  0    0.02      0.04      0.06      0.08




     1.1                                                         2

    1.05
                                                                 0
       1
                                                                -2
    0.95

     0.9                                                        -4
           0     0.02      0.04      0.06      0.08                  0    0.02      0.04      0.06      0.08




     1.1
                                                                 1

       1
                                                               0.5


     0.9                                                         0


     0.8                                                      -0.5
           0     0.02      0.04      0.06      0.08                  0    0.02      0.04      0.06      0.08



               Figure 5: Bank Capital, Bank Lending, and the Federal Funds Rate
This figure illustrates how bank capital and optimal lending vary with the federal funds rate. In all panels,
the federal funds rate is on the x-axis. In Panels A, C, and E, bank characteristics, scaled by their respective
unconditional average values, are on the y-axis. In Panels B, D, and F, the y-axis measures the impulse
response of bank characteristics to a one-percentage-point federal funds rate shock.




                                                      57
                                               Impulse re ponse to increases in the

                                   1.2                                                                    1.2




                                                                                                                   Capital/Non-reservables
             Bank oans/Deposit




                                   1.1                                                                    1.1


                                     1                                                                    1


                                   0.9                                                                    0.9


                                   0.8                                                                    0.8
                                          50          52             54        56        58             60



                                               mpulse response to decreases in the

                                  1.05                                                                    1.2




                                                                                                                Capital/Non-reservables
                                     1                                                                    1
              Bank oans/Deposit




                                  0.95                                                                    0.8


                                   0.9                                                                    0.6


                                  0.85                                                                    0.4
                                          50          52             54        56        58             60

                                         Bank oans         Deposit         Bank apital        Non-reservables


                                    Figure 6: Impulse Response to Federal Funds Rate Shocks
This figure illustrates banks' impulse responses to federal funds rate shocks. The economy starts at Year 0
when it is in the old steady state with the federal funds rate equal to 0.9%. In Year 1, the federal funds rate
either increases to 2% or decreases to 0.1%, and it stays at that level afterwards until the economy reaches
the new steady state. Each variable in the graph is scaled by the level in the old steady state in which the
federal funds rate is 0.9%.




                                                                      58
                                       High Federal Funds Rate




                                        Low Federal Funds Rate




                  Figure 7: Monetary Policy Shocks and Bank Equity Returns
This figure provides scatter plots of bank industry excess returns against monetary policy shocks on FOMC
days from 1994 to 2017. The excess returns are defined as the dierence between bank industry index returns
and market returns. Monetary policy shocks are measured by one-day changes in two-year Treasury yields
on FOMC days. The sample for the upper panel constitutes observations in which the starting level of the
federal funds rate is above 2%. The sample the lower panel constitutes observations in which the starting
level of the federal funds rate is below 2%. We exclude observations during the collapse of the dot-com bubble
(2000-2001) and the financial crisis (2007-2009). Bank industry stock returns are from Kenneth French's
website, and the two-year Treasury yield is from the FRED database.


                                                     59
                     Online Appendices:
 Bank Market Power and Monetary Policy Transmission: Evidence
                from a Structural Estimation



                Yifei Wang, Toni M. Whited, Yufeng Wu, and Kairong Xiao




                                           May 19, 2020




  
    Wang is from Cornerstone Research; ywang@cornerstone.com. Whited is from the University of Michigan
and the NBER; twhited@umich.edu. Wu is from the University of Illinois; yufengwu@illinois.edu. Xiao is
from Columbia University; kairong.xiao@gsb.columbia.edu.
Appendix A. Numerical Model Solution

In this Appendix, we summarize the numerical methods used to solve the model. As a
preliminary step, we discretize the state variable space. Our state space (s) consists of four
state variables: s  {f, , L, E }, where f is the federal funds rate,         is the annual loan
charge-o rate, L is the amount of outstanding loans, and E is bank equity. We set the
                                                                           ¯ = 8%. We set
federal funds rate to be in the range of 0.1% to 8%, that is, f = 0.1% and f
the boundaries for the loan charge-o rate,     and ¯, at 0.1% and 3%, respectively. We set the
                                   ¯ , at B/
upper bound for outstanding loans, L      ¯  , where B
                                                     ¯ is the level of lending determined

by equations (8) and (9) in the main text, when all banks in the economy are unconstrained
and price their loans at marginal cost, which is, in turn, the sum of the federal funds rate,
the marginal cost of servicing loans, and the expected default rate:


                                             ¯+
                                        rl = f     l
                                                       + ¯.


                                        ¯ , at 10% of L
We set the upper bound for bank equity, E             ¯ . We set the lower bounds of L and

E to be small positive numbers.

   Bank optimal policies are characterized by the set of choice variables, p  (B (rl ), D(rd ), G,
N, R, C ), where B (·) is new loans issued, D(·) is deposits, G is government securities held, N
is wholesale funding, R is reserves, and C is cash dividends. First, we solve for D(·), taking
B (rl ) as given. Let D be the unconstrained optimal deposit intake in the static model that
corresponds to the following deposit rate:

                                                       @ r d (D )
                                    rd = f     d
                                                                  .
                                                          @D


We then consider the following two cases. If D  (1                )   L+B   E , banks only hold
deposits and government securities. Because external financing is costly, it is never profitable


                                               1
for them to issue non-reservables and hold government securities at the same time. We can
verify that D = D yields the highest possible profit for banks.

   If D  (1     ) < L + B     E , banks issue non-reservables subject to the linear-quadratic
financing cost. At the same time, they also choose higher deposit intake to help close their
funding shortage. Banks increase their deposits until the marginal cost of doing so (and thus
deviating from the static optimum) equals the marginal cost of external financing. Banks'
choice of deposits solves the following equation:

                              @ D  r d (D )            d       N   N
                                                  f+       =         .                    (A.1)
                                  @D                               D


   After solving for D(·), we substitute it into equations (16), (17), (18), and (21) to obtain
other firm policies: {G, N, R}. Our last step is to do a grid search over C and B to find the
set of bank policies that yields the highest expected value. Finding the expected value for
banks involves iterating on the value function, the details of which are as follows:

                                                                               d
  1. Because we have savers with heterogeneous sensitivities to deposit rates, i , we ap-
     proximate the savers' rate sensitivities using a truncated uniform distribution, with
     mean d and standard deviation          d .
                                                                                   d
                                                  We then discretize the domain of i using 10
     equally spaced grid points.

                                   l                                                  d
  2. We conjecture the loan rate, r0 (f ), and the vector equilibrium deposit rates, r0 (f ), as
     functions of the federal funds rate.

  3. We conjectures bank value, V0 (f, , E, L), as a function of the state variables.

  4. For each set of (f, , E, L), we search for the bank's optimal policy (p) using the algo-
     rithm described above, and we update the bank's Bellman equation using equation (24)
     in the main text, which yields the updated value function for the bank, V1 (f, , E, L).

  5. We repeat Steps 2­3 until the initial and the updated value functions, V0 (f, , E, L)
     and V1 (f, , E, L), converge.

                                                  2
6. Taking the policy calculated in Step 3, and using the law of motion for the aggregate
  and idiosyncratic shocks described in equation (22), we can simulate a panel of banks,
                                                    d,j      l,j
  denoting the simulated deposit and loan rates by rt   and rt   , respectively, where j
  indexes the bank and t indexes time. We use simulated data to calculate the aggregate
                                         d           l
  average deposit rates and loan rates, r1 (f ) and r1 (f ), using equations (25) and (26) in
  the main text. Because we have heterogeneous savers, we need to forecast one average
                                              d
  deposit rate for each of the 10 discretized i classes.

7. We repeat Steps 1 through 5 using the updated deposit and loan rates as the banks'
                                                                               d
  conjectured equilibrium outcome. We keep iterating until the initial guess, r0 (f ) and
   l                                                           d           l
  r0 (f ), is consistent with the actual equilibrium outcome, r1 (f ) and r1 (f ), in the sim-
  ulated data.

8. As the last step, we assess the goodness-of-fit of this algorithm. Using the simulated
  panel of banks constructed in Step 5, for each bank in each period, we calculate the
  average deposit and loan rates oered by its competitors in the economy:


                                               1     Xh                                i
                  d d,i         d d   d                         d d          d d   d
              exp(i r
                    ¯j,t   +    x + )                       exp(i rm,t   +    x + ) ,      (A.2)
                                           ^
                                           J       1 m6=j


  and
                                               1     Xh                            i
                 exp(l r l
                       ¯j,t +    x + l) 
                                l l
                                                            exp(l rm,t
                                                                   l
                                                                       +     l l
                                                                             x + l) .      (A.3)
                                           ^
                                           J       1 m6=j


        ^ is the number of banks we include in our simulation in a given period. Note
  where J
                       d,i l
  that these rates, {r
                     ¯j,t  ¯j,t } can dier across banks even within a given period because we
                          ,r
  exclude the bank's own rates when computing the averages. We then run a regression
        d,i l                                                   d           l
  of {r
      ¯j,t  ¯j,t } on the banks' forecasted equilibrium rates, r1
           ,r                                                     (f ) and r1 (f ), calculated in
  Step 6, and the R-squareds for these regressions are reported in Subsection E.



                                               3
Appendix B. Demand Estimation Details

In this Appendix, we describe our demand estimation in detail. We start with a data
definition. We combine the data from tiny local banks, which we define as banks with fewer
than ten domestic branches or with market shares less than 0.001%. This aggregation is
useful because disaggregated data substantially slows down our demand estimation. It is
also innocuous because these tiny banks have limited influence on the equilibrium. After
combining tiny local banks, we have 753 banks on average in each year in our final sample.

      Next, we describe deposit demand, which is characterized by the following preference
parameters, d = d ,          d
                             ,
                                  d
                                      , where d and            
                                                               d
                                                                   are the mean and standard deviation of
                                                                   d
the sensitivity to deposit rates, and the vector                       contains the sensitivities to non-rate
characteristics.

      Following Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes (1995), we construct a nonlinear GMM estimator
for the preference parameters by exploiting a moment condition that is the product of in-
strumental variables, Z , and the unobservable demand shocks,  d . Formally, the estimator
is:
                                 ^d = arg min  d 0 Z 0 W
                                                                       1
                                                                           Z  d ,                      (B.1)
                                           d




where W is a consistent estimate of E [Z 0  0 Z ].

      We compute the unobservable demand shocks,  d , using the nested fixed-point algorithm
described in Nevo (2001). Specifically, for a given set of demand parameters d and the
actual market shares in the data, s0 , we can solve for the shocks,  d , as:


                              d d = s       1
                                                ( s0 |   d )
                                                                       d
                                                                    d rj +    d d
                                                                               xj   ,                  (B.2)


           1
where s        (·) is the inverse of the demand function specified by equation (3) in the main
text.


                                                         4
   A key challenge in identifying the demand parameters is the natural correlation between
               d                                d
deposit rates rj and unobservable demand shocks j . For example, banks might lower deposit
rates if they observe a positive demand shock. To identify the associated yield sensitivity,
we use a set of supply shifters, cj , as instrumental variables. Our particular supply shifters
are salaries and non-interest expenses related to the use of fixed assets. These shifters have
been used in previous studies, such as Dick (2007) and Ho and Ishii (2011). Our identifying
assumption is that customers do not care about these costs, holding product characteristics
constant. Therefore, these supply shifters are orthogonal to unobservable demand shocks
and thus shift the supply curve along the demand curve, allowing us to trace out the slope
of the demand curve. Formally, the vector of instrumental variables Z is defined as follows:


                                          Z = [x, c] ,                                   (B.3)



where c is a vector of supply shifters including salaries and non-interest expenses related
to the use of fixed assets, and x is a vector of non-rate bank characteristics including the
number of branches, the number of employees per branch, bank fixed eects, and time fixed
eects.

   Using the demand parameters estimated in the first stage, we can construct the empirical
demand system. Note that our data contain a large number of banks even after we combine
tiny local banks into one option in the demand estimation. This feature of the data poses a
challenge for the second-stage SMD estimation because estimating a dynamic model with a
large number of heterogeneous banks would be intractable. Therefore, we use the estimated
demand parameters in the first stage to construct a demand system with a small number,
^, of ex ante symmetric representative banks. We calibrate the number of representative
J
       ^, to match the average local banking concentration in the data, as measured by the
banks, J
HHI. Because the size distribution has a heavy left tail, this approach substantially reduces
the number of banks in the model while keeping the market concentration in the model close


                                               5
to what we observe in the data.
           ^ is much smaller than the sample size of 753 banks, we need to adjust the
   Because J
                                                                      ^ representative banks.
quality value of the non-rate product characteristics for each of the J
We let q generically denote the utility from the non-rate product characteristics. These
non-rate product characteristics include the number of branches, the number of employees
per branch, bank fixed eects, and time fixed eects. We then choose a quality value, q ,
                                                    ^ symmetric banks is the same as that
such that the sum of the exponential utility of the J
of J = 753 banks in the sample, as follows:

                                                  J
                                                  X                  
                                    ^ exp(q ) =
                                    J                    exp ^xj + ^j .                     (B.4)
                                                  j =1




   Equation (B.4) transforms the heterogeneous non-rate characteristics into symmetric
quality values while preserving market concentration and the sum of exponential utility.
We use (B.4) to obtain the quality values for cash and the deposits at bank m, which are
          d      d
given by qc and qm , respectively. We normalize the quality value of Treasury bills to zero.

   With the quality values in hand, we parameterize the deposit demand functions as:

                             I
                             X                               d d     d
                d
                                                     exp   ^i r j + qj
           Dj (rj |f )   =         µd
                                    i                         PJ  ^
                                                                                       W,   (B.5)
                                             d           d) +                d d     d
                             i=1        exp ^i f + exp (qc        m=1  exp ^  r
                                                                             i m + q m



where µd
       i represents the fraction of each type, i, of depositors. Finally, we draw 
                                                                                   d
                                                                                  ^i from a
discretized uniform distribution with a mean of ^ and a standard deviation of ^ .

   We estimate the loan demand function in a procedure that is similar to the one used to
estimate deposit demand except that we assume homogeneous sensitivity to loan rates, as
we find that introducing heterogeneity in loan-rate sensitivity considerably slows down the
estimation but has a limited impact on banks' rate-setting decisions. We include the same
set of supply shifters and non-rate characteristics as in the deposit market but allow the
sensitivities to these characteristics to dier from those in the deposit market.

                                                         6
   As in the case of deposit demand, we can use equation (B.4) to construct quality values
                                                                            l      l
for the absence of borrowing and for loans from bank m, which are given by qn and qm ,
respectively. We normalize the quality value of borrowing from the bond market to zero.

   With the quality values in hand, we parameterize the loan demand functions as:


                l
                                           exp  ^ l rj
                                                     l    l
                                                       + qlj
           B j rj f   =                                 P  J
                                                                                 K,   (B.6)
                          exp ^ l (f + ) + exp (qn
                                                 l)+                 l rm
                                                           m=1 exp (^
                                                                        l + ql )
                                                                             m



                                               l
Note that the quality value of not borrowing, qn , cannot be estimated from the demand
estimation because we do not observe its share. While this data limitation does not bias the
demand parameters, as this term is absorbed by fixed eects, it poses an issue for the SMD
part of our estimation because we need to plug the totality of B.6 into our dynamic model.
Therefore, we relegate this parameter to our second-stage estimation.




                                             7
Appendix C. Demand Estimation Using Local Market

                        Shares

In this Appendix, we check the robustness of the deposit demand estimation using a dierent
level of aggregation. For the estimation of the demand parameters in Table 3 in the main
text, market shares are defined at the U.S. national level. We now examine whether the
assumption of a national market aects the estimated demand parameters. We discuss an
alternative approach of using local deposit market shares and show that, both conceptually
and practically, using local market shares should lead to similar results.

   For illustration, we consider the simplest case of logit demand. In the context of logit
demand, the demand estimation in the main text is equivalent to the following regression:


                                   ln sj,t = rj,t + xj,t + j,t ,                             (C.1)



where sj,t is the market share of bank j in year t, rj,t is the deposit rate, xj,t represents other
non-rate characteristics.  is the yield sensitivity for the average depositor in the national
market.

   Alternatively, we can also estimate demand using a more disaggregate market definition.
This is feasible for the deposit market because branch-level deposit data are available from
the FDIC Summary of Deposits data. For instance, we can define the market as a county-year
combination and estimate the following regression:


                               ln sj,m,t = rj,m,t + xj,m,t + j,m,t ,                         (C.2)



where sj,m,t is the market share of bank j in county m in year t, rj,m,t is the deposit rate
and xj,m,t represents other non-rate characteristics, and  is the yield sensitivity of deposi-
tors. Note that the yield sensitivity, , estimated using disaggregate market shares has the

                                                8
same economic interpretation as the one estimated using aggregate market shares. Both
parameters measure the average yield sensitivities of depositors across all the local markets.
Therefore, conceptually, these two methods should produce similar results.

   Another way to understand the relation between these two levels of aggregation is to think
about the estimation in two steps. First, we estimate yield sensitivity county by county.
Second, we take a weighted average of the county-specific yield-sensitivity to calculate the
average yield sensitivity across all local markets. Again, this method is equivalent to imposing
the restriction that  is the same across markets in a pooled regression.

   Although the estimates from these two levels of aggregation are conceptually similar, it
is nonetheless possible that these two methods could lead to quite dierent outcomes. To
alleviate this concern, we re-estimate the banks' deposit demand using market shares defined
at the county level. The estimation results reported in Table C1 are quantitatively similar
to those in Table 3 in the main text. For instance, the estimated yield sensitivity is 0.903
with local market shares and 0.968 with national market shares.




                                               9
                     Table C1: Demand Estimation: Local Deposit Market

                                                                                              (1)
                                                                                           Deposit
 Yield sensitivity                                                                         0.903
                                                                                            [0.199]

 Log number of branches                                                                    0.509
                                                                                            [0.048]

 Log number of employees                                                                   0.322
                                                                                            [0.021]
 Bank F.E.                                                                                    Yes
 Year-Sector F.E.                                                                             Yes
 Year-County F.E.                                                                             Yes
 Observations                                                                              377,309
 Adj. R2                                                                                     0.399

This table reports the estimated deposit demand parameters using county-level market shares.
Yield sensitivity refers to the average sensitivity of the depositors to deposit rates. Log number of
branches refers to the sensitivity of the depositors to the log number of each bank's branches. Log
number of employees refers the sensitivity of the depositors to the log number of employees per
branch. The sample includes all U.S. commercial banks from 1994 to 2017. The data is from the
Call Reports and the Summary of Deposits.




                                                 10
Appendix D. Impulse Responses to Monetary Policy Shocks

In this Appendix, we report the impulse responses of bank loans and total credit in the
economy to monetary policy shocks. Following Bernanke and Blinder (1992), we estimate a
VAR including the federal funds rate, the unemployment rate, the log of the CPI, the log
level of bank loans, and the log of total credit. The frequency is monthly. We use six lags
of each variable. The sample period is from 1959 to 2017. The data are from the FRED
database provided by the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.

   We find that at a three-year horizon, a one percentage point monetary policy shock leads
to a 0.995% reduction in total credit in the economy. We use the impulse response result to
measure the sensitivity of total credit to the federal funds rates, which we report in Table
4. The bank loans are more sensitive to monetary policy shocks than is total credit. A one
percentage point increase in the federal funds rate translates into a 1.6% decrease in aggregate
bank loans. We do not directly target this impulse response result in our estimation, but we
report it as an untargeted moment in Subsection A and show that it is close to the model
prediction.




                                              11
                                                  Credit to FFR
                   0

                -0.2

                -0.4

                -0.6

                -0.8

                  -1

                -1.2

                -1.4

                -1.6

                -1.8
                          5      10      15     20      25        30   35     40      45


                                                 Loans to FFR
                 0.5


                   0


                -0.5


                  -1


                -1.5


                  -2


                -2.5


                  -3
                          5      10      15     20      25        30   35     40      45



Figure D1: Response of Total Credit and Bank Loans to a Shock to the Federal Funds Rate
The figure shows the impulse response of total credit (upper panel) and bank loans (lower panel) to a 1%
shock to the federal funds rate estimated by a VAR. The units of the x-axis are months. The units of the
y-axis are percent. The VAR includes the federal funds rate, the unemployment rate, the log of the CPI,
the log level of bank loans, and the log of total credit. Both bank loans and total credit are deflated by the
CPI. Total credit is defined as the sum of corporate and household debt. The frequency is monthly, and we
use six lags of each variable. The data are from the FRED database from the Federal Reserve Bank of St.
Louis.


                                                     12
Appendix E. Demand Estimate Results Details


                                      Table E1: Demand Estimation

In this table, we report the estimated deposit and loan demand parameters. The first column corresponds to
the deposit demand parameter estimates. The second column contains the loan demand parameter estimates.
Yield sensitivity () refers to the average sensitivity of depositors (borrowers) to deposit rates (loan rates).
Log No. of Branches ( 1 ) refers to the sensitivity of depositors (borrowers) to the log number of branches
that each bank operates. Log No. of Employees ( 1 ) refers to the sensitivity of depositors (borrowers) to
the log number of employees per branch. Yield sensitivity (  ) refers to the dispersion in the sensitivity
of depositors to deposit rates, with the dispersion set at 0 for firms. The sample includes all U.S. com-
mercial banks from 1994 to 2017. The data sources are the Call Reports and the FDIC Summary of Deposits.

                                                               Deposit                                Loan
 Yield Sensitivity ()                                          0.968***                            -1.424***
                                                                [0.140]                              [0.292]

 Log No. of Branches (   1)                                    0.804***                             0.944***
                                                                [0.012]                              [0.000]

 Log No. of Employees (    2)                                  0.714***                             0.630***
                                                                [0.015]                              [0.025]

 Yield Sensitivity Dispersion (   )                            1.916***
                                                                [0.403]

 Sector F.E.                                                      Y                                    Y
 Time F.E.                                                        Y                                    Y
 Observations                                                   18062                                18062
 Adj. R2                                                        0.966                                0.570




                                                      13
Appendix F. Additional Analysis of Monetary Policy

                       Shocks and Bank Equity Returns

In this Appendix, we provide additional evidence on the relation between monetary policy
shocks and stock returns. First, we replicate the results in Table 6 in the main text using
one-day changes in the one-year Treasury yield on FOMC days instead of using two-year
Treasury yields. The results reported in Table F1 confirm that this alternative measure
of monetary policy shocks leads to similar results. We still find a non-monotonic relation
between monetary policy shocks and the returns on bank equity, and the relation is more
pronounced in markets with higher bank concentration.

   We next examine the possibility that the positive announcement eects of bank stock re-
turns in a low interest rate environment could be driven by the information channel proposed
by Nakamura and Steinsson (2018). We perform two exercises to address this concern. First,
in Figure F1, we examine returns for all 49 Fama-French industries. If positive announce-
ment eects are mainly a consequence of the central bank's assessment of the economic
outlook, then we should see similar eects in other industries as well. However, we find
that the banking industry is the only industry exhibiting a switch from a negative interest
sensitivity to positive interest sensitivity in the low interest rate environment. Second, we
use the monetary policy shocks constructed by Jarocinski and Karadi (2018). Their measure
purges out the central bank information shocks from the surprises in federal funds futures on
FOMC days. Our results are robust to this alternative measure of a monetary policy shock.
This last result mitigates the concern that our reversal rate result is driven by a central bank
information eect.




                                              14
       Table F1: Monetary Policy Shocks and Bank Equity Returns on FOMC Days

                                   (1)                  (2)                  (3)                  (4)
                               High FFR              Low FFR             High FFR              Low FFR
 Policy shock                   -1.365                 1.290               -0.103               -2.623
                                 [0.597]              [1.326]             [1.019]               [2.108]

 HHI*Policy shock                                                           -0.303              0.740
                                                                            [0.262]             [0.372]

    Term spread                  -0.605               2.944                 -0.471              2.644
                                 [0.688]               [1.103]              [0.696]             [1.070]

 Market return                   0.298                0.727                0.296                0.730
                                  [0.074]              [0.069]              [0.073]              [0.069]
 Observations                     27,257               33,805               27,257               33,805
 Adj. R2                           0.015                0.124                0.016                0.125

This table reports the estimates of the relation between bank equity returns and monetary policy shocks on
FOMC days. Monetary policy shocks are measured by the one-day changes in the one-year Treasury yield on
FOMC days. HHI is the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index of the local deposit market in which the bank operates.
The sample for columns (1) and (3) constitutes observations in which the starting level of the federal funds
rate is above 2%. The sample for columns (2) and (4) constitutes observations in which the starting level
of the federal funds rate is below 2%. We exclude observations during the collapse of the dot-com bubble
(2000-2001) and the financial crisis (2007-2009). The standard errors are clustered by time.




                                                    15
                                        High Federal Funds Rate




                                        Low Federal Funds Rate




                 Figure F1: Monetary Policy Shocks and Bank Equity Returns
This figure provides the scatter plot of bank industry excess returns against monetary policy shocks on
FOMC days from 1994 to 2017. The excess returns are defined as the dierence between bank industry
index returns and the market returns. Monetary policy shocks are measured by the change in the 3-month
federal funds future subtracting central bank information shocks (Jarocinski and Karadi 2018). The sample
for the upper panel constitutes observations in which the starting level of the federal fund rate is above 2%.
The sample for the lower panel constitutes observations in which the starting level of the federal fund rate is
below 2%. We exclude observations during the collapse of the dot-com bubble (2000-2001) and the financial
crisis (2007-2009). Bank industry stock returns are from Kenneth French's website and the monetary policy
shocks are from the website of the American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics.

                                                      16
                Figure F2: Monetary Policy Shocks and Bank Equity Returns
The figure shows the sensitivity of bank and other industry stock portfolios to monetary policy shocks on
the FOMC days. The bars present the coe cients from regressions of Fama-French 49 industry returns on
the change in the two-year Treasury rate over a two-day window around FOMC meetings, as in Hanson and
Stein (2015). The sample includes all scheduled FOMC meetings from 1994 to 2017. The left panel uses
a sample in which the federal funds rate (FFR) is above 2%. The right panel uses a sample in which the
federal funds rate is below or equal to 2%. The industry returns are from Kenneth French's website. The
two-year Treasury rate is obtained from the FRED database.




                                                   17
Appendix G. Extended General Equilibrium Model

In this section, we extend our model by embedding it in a general equilibrium framework, thus
achieving three goals. First, instead of assuming an exogenous federal funds rate process,
in this setting, we let this rate be pinned down by a Taylor rule, which depends on the
monetary authority's policy, as well as on aggregate economic variables such as output and
the inflation rate. Second, this setting allows us to have a meaningful distinction between
nominal and real interest rates. Third, we can endogenize the relations between the interest
rate, household liquid wealth, W , and corporate borrowing demand, K .

   Our model contains a standard New Keynesian block and a banking block. The New
Keynesian block determines the eects of productivity and monetary policy shocks on the
nominal short-term rate and the inflation rate. The banking block determines the eect of
the nominal short-term rate on bank lending rates.


G.1. The New Keynesian Block

There is a representative household with time-separable preferences. The household chooses
real consumption, Ct , and real money balances, Mt /Pt , to maximize its utility, given the
aggregate interest rate and price level:1

                                                1
                                                X              1
                      {Ct , Mt } = arg max E0          t
                                                                   (Ct1   + µ (Mt /Pt )1        ),            (G.1)
                                                t=0
                                                           1


subject to the following budget constraint:

                           1            1              1
             Pt C t            Mt            St          ¯  Ot  T t + Mt        1   + St   1   + Ot 1 ,       (G.2)
                        1 + iM
                             t        1 + it          1+i t

  1
    Note that we recycle the symbol C to denote the household's consumption, and                 to denote the house-
hold's discount rate.




                                                       18
where Mt is nominal money balances, Pt is the price of the consumption good, µ is the
utility weight on real money balances, and iM
                                            t is the nominal interest return earned on Mt ,

the determination of which we discuss below in equations (G.13) and (G.14) in Section G.3.
Tt represents the sum of government transfers and the dividend payments received from firms
and banks. Besides money, the household also holds other short-term investment securities,
such as non-reservables issued by banks, St , and long-term corporate bonds issued by firms,
Ot . The return from holding short-term investment securities equals the nominal federal
funds rate target chosen by the monetary authority, it . The return on long-term corporate
                                                                          ¯
bonds equals the expected weighted average of future federal funds rates, it:

                                                "   1
                                                                           #
                                                    X
                                 ¯
                                 it   it + Et              (1       n
                                                                   ) it+n .             (G.3)
                                                    n=1



   In the following discussion, we use the generic symbol i to denote nominal rates and r to
denote real rates. The short-term real rate is given by the short-term nominal rate minus
the short-term inflation rate:
                                           r t = it        t .                          (G.4)



   The long-term real rate is given by the long-term nominal rate minus the long-term
inflation rate:
                                           r    ¯
                                           ¯t = i t        ¯t ,                         (G.5)



where the long-term inflation rate, ¯t , is defined as the expected weighted average of future
short-term inflation rates in a way analogous to equation (G.3).

   Optimal household demand for money equates the marginal rate of substitution between
consumption and money with the opportunity cost of holding money:

                                                                               1
                                      1            1                1
                            M t =  Pt C t                                          .    (G.6)
                                                1 + iM
                                                     t            1 + it

                                                     19
We define Wt  Mt /Pt as household liquid wealth, which is total real balances that the
household invests in money in a given period.

   The first order-condition for optimal consumption is given by:

                                               1
                             ct = Et [ct+1 ]       ( it       Et [t+1 ]     ) ,                    (G.7)



where ct  ln(Ct ) is log consumption, t+1  ln(Pt+1 /Pt ) is the one-period inflation rate,
and  = ln( ) is the log discount rate.

   On the production side, there exist two types of firms: intermediate and final goods pro-
ducers. The price of the intermediate good is flexible, while the price of the final consumption
good is set as in Calvo (1983) with staggered pricing.

   We assume that a representative intermediate good firm uses capital to produce an in-
termediate good with a decreasing returns to scale technology. The firm chooses its optimal
capital stock by solving the following static optimization problem:


                                                                       l
                                Ut = max Zt At Kt             Kt (1 + rt ),                        (G.8)
                                        Kt




where Ut is firm profits, which is distributed to the household at the end of each period as
                                   l                    1
dividends. In addition, Zt = (1 + rt )/( At Kt              ) is the real price of the intermediate good,
  is the curvature of the firm's production function, and At is aggregate productivity, which
follows an AR(1) process in logs, given by:


                                   ln(At )  at = a at           1   + "a
                                                                       t.




       l
Next, rt is the real cost of capital, which equals the weighted average of the real interest rates
                                                                    l
on corporate bonds and bank loans. We discuss the determination of rt in equation (G.13)
in Section G.3, below. Corporate bonds and loans are long-term. As we assume in Section II


                                                   20
in the partial equilibrium setting, firms have to pay back a fraction,  , of their outstanding
principal plus interest in each period. Taking the first derivative of equation (G.8), the firm's
optimal demand for capital can be written as:

                                                                            11
                                                              Zt At
                                              Kt =                l
                                                                                      .                                         (G.9)
                                                             1 + rt


    The intermediate good is then sold to a unit continuum of final good producers indexed by
i 2 [0, 1], each producing its own retail good variety by costlessly assembling the intermediate
good into a final variety, Yt (i), which is heterogeneous across producers. Aggregate output,
Yt , is then given by:
                                                Z        1                           ""1
                                                                            1
                                                                        1
                                          Yt                 Y t ( i)       "   di         ,                                   (G.10)
                                                     0



where " is the elasticity of substitution between final varieties. On each date, only a fraction,
1      , of the final good firms can reset their prices, and firms choose optimal pricing to
maximize their expected profits, taking into account future price rigidity, as follows:

                               1
                                          "                                                                           !#
                               X                                                             Pt (i)
                                                                                                         "
          Pt (i) = arg max             k Et Qt,t+k       ( P t ( i)              t +k )                      Yt + k        .   (G.11)
                                k=0
                                                                                             Pt + k


                    k
Here, Qt,t+k            (Ct+k /Ct )    (Pt /Pt+k ) is the stochastic discount factor for nominal payos,
and    t +k   is the nominal marginal cost for retailers, which equals the nominal price of the
intermediate good, Pt+k Zt+k . The real price of the intermediate good, Zt+k , is determined
by the optimality condition for the intermediate good firm in equation (G.9).

    Following the textbook treatment in Chapter 3 of Gal´
                                                        i (2015), we can derive the new Key-
nesian Phillips curve (NKPC) based on our specification of the consumption and production
sides of the economy, as follows:


                                         t = Et [t+1 ] + y
                                                         ~t + r
                                                              ~tl
                                                                  ,                                                            (G.12)


                                                               21
where y
      ~t = ln(Yt )     ln(Ytn ) and r
                                    ~tl    l
                                        = rt                   ln
                                                              rt  are the deviations of log output and the
cost of capital from their flexible-price counterparts (indicated by the superscript n). The
                  (1  )(1       )(1   )                   (1  )(1            )
coe cients,                 
                                          and                  
                                                                                 , embody price stickiness ( ) and the
curvature of the production function ( ). The flexible-price output and cost of capital can
be found by setting the price stickiness parameter,  , to zero.


G.2. The Banking Sector

We model the banking sector as in our baseline partial equilibrium setting discussed in
                                                         d
Section II. Specifically, given bank j 's deposit rate, rj,t , bank j 's deposit market share is
pinned down by equation (3). To derive the demand for deposits from bank j , Dj,t , we
multiply the bank's deposit market share by aggregate liquid wealth, Wt , from equation
(G.6). Similarly, to derive the demand for loans from bank j , Bj,t , we multiply bank j 's loan
market share, (8), by firms' aggregate borrowing needs, Kt , from (G.9).

   Note that both Kt and Wt are time-varying in the general equilibrium setting and are
determined endogenously along with other aggregate variables, such as consumption, price
levels, and interest rates. When each bank sets its rates, it treats aggregate variables,
including Kt and Wt , as fixed. The aggregate interest rate in the loan market is defined as
the market-share weighted average of banks' lending rates and the corporate bond interest
rate. Similarly, the aggregate interest rate in the deposit market is defined as the market-
share weighted average of banks' deposit rates, the interest rate of Treasury bills, and the
real return on cash:
                                                         X
                                                 l
                                                rt =              sl      l
                                                                   j,t · rj,t ,
                                                         j 2A l
                                                         X                                                     (G.13)
                                                 d
                                                rt   =            sd
                                                                   j,t   ·    d
                                                                             rj,t ,
                                                         j 2A d




where Al and Ad are the choice sets for firms and the household, respectively. Note that we
expand the definition of sl
                          j,t in equation (G.13) to include not only bank j 's market share in




                                                            22
the loan market but also the share of firm borrowing done in the corporate bond market.
Similarly, we expand the definition of sd
                                        j,t to include not only bank j 's market share in the

deposit market, but also the fraction of wealth invested in government bonds and cash.
                               l        d
Naturally, the definitions of rj,t and rj,t expand to include the corresponding interest rates
on corporate bonds and deposit options. In equilibrium, the sum of the inflation rate and
the aggregate real interest rate in the deposit market equals the nominal return on money:


                                             iM    d
                                              t = rt +  t .                                               (G.14)



G.3. Monetary Policy and Equilibrium

The monetary authority chooses the short-term nominal rate, following a Taylor rule:


                                     it =    0   +      t   +   yy
                                                                 ~t   + vt ,                              (G.15)



where      and   y   are non-negative coe cients determined by the central bank. They indicate
the strength of the interest rate response to inflation and the output gap. vt is the Taylor
rule residual, which follows an AR(1) process, given by vt = v vt                    1   + "v
                                                                                            t.

   If the banking system is frictionless, bank lending rates are the same as the bond market
                                                       l
interest rate, and firms' cost of capital is given by rt =¯
                                                          it                   ¯t + ¯t , where ¯t is the expected
                                                                               
default cost. In this case, the economy is characterized by a standard three-equation system
in the New Keynesian literature: the NKPC, the monetary policy Taylor rule, and the DIS
curve, which is the first order-condition for optimal consumption, given by equation (G.7).
We reproduce these three equations below:

                                             1
                           ct = Et [ct+1 ]       (it    Et [t+1 ]        ) (DIS)

                                     t = Et [t+1 ] + y
                                                     ~t + r
                                                          ~tl
                                                              (NKPC)                                      (G.16)

                                      it =   0   +      t   +   yy
                                                                 ~t   + vt (MP)

                                                       23
    However, in the presence of financial frictions, bank lending rates deviate from bond
market interest rates, and firms' costs of capital depends on frictions in the banking sector
such as bank market power and regulatory constraints. Specifically, in each period, after
observing aggregate productivity, at , the monetary policy shock, vt , and the fraction of
defaulted loans,           t,   banks decide optimal policies to maximize the expected discounted value
of cash dividends to shareholders:

                                                                      1
V (at , vt , t , Lt , Et        t)   =            max                          Ct+1 + EV (at+1 , vt+1 ,   t+1 , Lt+1 , Et+1    t+1 )   ,
                                            l ,r d ,G ,N ,R ,C
                                         {r t   t    t  t  t t+1 }   1+
                                                                                                                              (G.17)
                                           d
                           s.t.           rt + t         0           (13), (14), (15), (16), (17), (23),



where      t   denotes the cross-sectional distribution of bank states. Letting P                                     denote the
probability law governing the evolution of                                t:   t+1   = P ( t ).

    We define the equilibrium in this economy as follows.

Definition 1 An equilibrium consists of i) banks' optimal deposit intake and loan supply, ii)
the household's optimal consumption and savings allocations, iii) firms' optimal investment
and pricing decisions, iv) aggregate consumption, output, inflation, and interest rates, such
that

   1. The household optimizes its consumption and savings decisions as in equation (G.1),
      given aggregate variables.

   2. All firms choose optimal investment and pricing as in equations (G.8) and (G.11),
      given aggregate variables.

   3. All banks solve the problem given by equation (G.17), taking as given the other banks'
      choices of loan and deposit rates and aggregate variables.

   4. The probability law governing the evolution of the banking industry is consistent with
      banks' optimal choices.

   5. Aggregate consumption, output, and inflation are consistent with the household's and
      firms' optimal decisions.



                                                                          24
  6. Aggregate interest rates are consistent with banks' pricing in the deposit and loan mar-
     kets.

  7. In each period, the household's and firms' demand for deposits and bank loans equal
     banks' supply.

  8. In each period, the bond market clears so that the household's holdings of corporate
     bonds and non-reservable claims equal the issuance by firms and banks, respectively.

  9. In each period, the goods market clears so that household consumption plus firm in-
     vestment equals total output.


G.4. Calibration and results

We divide our parameter calibration into two groups. We first set the parameters of the
New Keynesian block to standard values in the literature. The banking block is novel, so
we rely on our parameter estimates reported in Table 3. Note that we do not re-estimate all
parameters in the general equilibrium model because the additional aggregate state variables
in this setup add model complexity, which makes re-estimation infeasible.

   We follow the calibration in Gal´
                                   i (2015), Chapter 3, to set the parameters pertaining to the
non-banking sectors. We set the household's intertemporal elasticity of substitution, 1/ , to
1, and its discount rate, , to 0.96. The curvature of the intermediate good firms' production
function, , is 0.33. The price stickiness parameter,  , is set to 0.2. The Taylor-rule responses
to the output gap and inflation, { y ,     },   are set to {0.5, 1.5}, and the constant term,   0,   is
calibrated at   4.3 to match the average short-term interest rate in the sample period. The
utility weight on real money balances,  , is calibrated at 0.43 to match the ratio of aggregate
consumption to money balances. The persistence of the log aggregate productivity shock, a ,
and its standard deviation,   a,   are calibrated at 0.66 and 0.10, respectively. The persistence
of the monetary policy shock, v , and its standard deviation,        v,   are calibrated at 0.06 and
0.9, respectively. Finally, we set the elasticity of substitution between the dierentiated final
output goods, ", to 6, which implies a steady-state markup of 20%.

   With the calibrated general equilibrium model, we examine the relation between aggre-


                                                  25
gate bank loans and the monetary policy shock. The results, shown in Figure G1, confirm our
result from the partial equilibrium model that the eect of monetary policy is non-monotonic
and hump-shaped. We also repeat our decomposition of monetary policy transmission mech-
anisms using the general equilibrium framework, with the results reported in Table G1. First,
consistent with the results from the partial equilibrium model, we find that the quantita-
tive eect of the reserve requirement remains limited. Second, the eect of bank deposit
market power is quantitatively similar to that reported in Table 5. Intuitively, the deposit
market power channel depends on the competition between bank deposits and a zero-return
storage technology such as cash. This mechanism is nearly unaected by endogenizing mon-
etary policy. Third, the eect of loan market power becomes quantitatively weaker. The
underlying reason is that the calibrated persistence of the federal funds rate in the general
equilibrium setting is smaller than the estimated persistence used in our partial equilibrium
setting. Because the loan market power channel operates through the relative attractive-
ness of firms' outside option of not investing and the long-term real rates oered by banks,
loan market power becomes weaker when the persistence of the federal funds rate becomes
smaller. Fourth, the capital regulation channel is also slightly weaker, again because the
capital regulation channel operates through long-term rates. However, in the end, despite
these quantitative dierences, our main conclusions remain valid, as we find that both the
deposit and loan market power channels are quantitatively important. Moreover, the mon-
etary transmission channels based on market power have eects that are comparable to, if
not larger than, those based on regulatory mechanisms.




                                             26
                                     1.02


                                     1.01


                                        1
           Aggregate bank lending



                                     0.99


                                     0.98


                                     0.97


                                     0.96


                                     0.95
                                            0   0.01   0.02   0.03    0.04   0.05   0.06   0.07   0.08   0.09




                                    Figure G1: Aggregate Bank Lending and Monetary Policy Shocks
This figure illustrates how aggregate bank lending responds to monetary policy shocks in the general equi-
librium framework described in Section G in the Online Appendix. The monetary policy shock is on the
x-axis. On the y-axis, the amount of aggregate bank lending is scaled by the unconditional average bank
loan level.




                                                                     27
      Table G1: Monetary Policy Transmission in a General Equilibrium Framework

This table presents the results of a series of counterfactual experiments conducted using the general
equilibrium model described in Section G in the Online Appendix. The first column lists the frictions that
are removed from the model. The second column presents the sensitivity of loans to the federal funds rate
(FFR) when the corresponding frictions are removed. The third column presents the contributions of the
corresponding frictions.

                                                                                   
                                                                            ln l
                                           Sensitivity of Loans to FFR       f        Contribution %

     (1)     All frictions are present                   -1.090%                            /
     (2)       Reserve Regulation                        -1.064%                          2.39%
     (3)       Capital Regulation                        -0.918%                         15.78%
     (4)       Deposit Market Power                      -0.756%                         30.64%
     (5)       Loan Market Power                         -1.232%                         -13.03%




                                                   28
References
Bernanke, Ben, and Alan S. Blinder, 1992, The federal funds rate and the transmission of
  monetary policy, American Economic Review 82, 901­21.

Berry, Steven, James Levinsohn, and Ariel Pakes, 1995, Automobile prices in market equi-
  librium, Econometrica 63, 841­90.

Calvo, Guillermo A., 1983, Staggered prices in a utility-maximizing framework, Journal of
  Monetary Economics 12, 383 ­ 398.

Dick, Astrid A, 2007, Market size, service quality, and competition in banking, Journal of
  Money, Credit and Banking 39, 49­81.

Gal´
   i, Jordi, 2015, Monetary policy, inflation, and the business cycle: An introduction to the
 new Keynesian framework and its applications (Princeton University Press, Princeton,
 NJ).

Hanson, Samuel G., and Jeremy C. Stein, 2015, Monetary policy and long-term real rates,
  Journal of Financial Economics 115, 429­448.

Ho, Katherine, and Joy Ishii, 2011, Location and competition in retail banking, International
  Journal of Industrial Organization 29, 537­546.

Jarocinski, Marek, and Peter Karadi, 2018, Deconstructing monetary policy surprises: The
  role of information shocks, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, forthcoming.

Nakamura, Emi, and J´  on Steinsson, 2018, High-frequency identification of monetary non-
  neutrality: The information eect, Quarterly Journal of Economics 133, 1283­1330.

Nevo, Aviv, 2001, Measuring market power in the ready-to-eat cereal industry, Econometrica
  69, 307­342.




                                             29
