                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    MEASURING THE EFFECT OF STUDENT LOANS ON COLLEGE PERSISTENCE

                                            David Card
                                            Alex Solis

                                       Working Paper 27269
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27269


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2020




We are grateful to Susan Dynarski, Eva Mork, Pablo Munoz, and seminar participants at Helsinki
University, Lund University, and the Nordic Labor Summer Institute in Bergen for comments and
suggestions. We also thank Marcelo Lopez, Rodrigo Rolando, and Juan Salamanca from SIES at
the Ministry of Education of Chile; Gonzalo Sanhueza, Daniel Casanova, and Humberto Vergara
from the Catholic University of Concepcion; and Jorge Campos and Felipe Gutierrez from the
INGRESA commission for providing the data; and Carolina Solis for research assistance. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by David Card and Alex Solis. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Measuring the Effect of Student Loans on College Persistence
David Card and Alex Solis
NBER Working Paper No. 27269
May 2020
JEL No. I22

                                          ABSTRACT

Governments around the world use grant and loan programs to ease the financial constraints that
contribute to socioeconomic gaps in college completion. A growing body of research assesses the
impact of grants; less is known about how loan programs affect persistence and degree
completion. We use detailed administrative data from Chile to provide rigorous regression-
discontinuity-based evidence on the impacts of loan eligibility for university students who retake
the national admission test after their first year of studies. Those who score above a certain
threshold become eligible for loans covering around 85% of tuition costs for the duration of their
program. We find that access to loans increases the fraction who return to university for a second
year by 20 percentage points, with two-thirds of the effect arising from a reduction in transfers to
vocational colleges and one-third from a decline in the share who stop post-secondary schooling
altogether. The longer-run impacts are smaller but remain highly significant, with a 12 percentage
point impact on the fraction of marginally eligible retakers who complete a bachelor's degree.


David Card
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall, #3880
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
card@econ.berkeley.edu

Alex Solis
Department of Economics
Uppsala University
Box 513
SE-751 20 Uppsala, Sweden
alex.solis@nek.uu.se
1        Introduction

In many countries, including the U.S., college completion rates are far below 100%. A growing body of work

focuses on the e ects of nancial aid programs on persistence and degree attainment, exploiting discontinui-

ties or changes in eligibility rules to identify the impacts of grant-based aid.1 Much less is known about loan

programs, even though loans are now the dominant source of college nancing in the U.S. (Dynarski (2015)).

In contrast to grant-based aid, which lowers the cost of post-secondary schooling, loans only shift these

costs intertemporally. It is therefore unclear to what extent ndings from the analysis of grant programs can

inform our understanding of loan programs.

        In this paper, we present new evidence on the impacts of eligibility for loans that cover up to 85% of

tuition on the probability that students remain in university and ultimately obtain a degree.2 A key problem

for disentangling causal e ects on persistence or re-enrollment behavior is that many of the students who

are eligible for grants or loans in later years of their studies were eligible for the same (or similar) bene ts

prior to entering college. Eligible students may have been induced to enter college by the availability of these

bene ts, leading to selectivity biases in comparisons between eligible and ineligible enrollees. This concern

closely parallels the one identi ed by Ham and Lalonde (1996) in studying the e ects of training programs

on post-training employment dynamics.

        In their seminal studies of college persistence, DesJardins, Ahlburg, and McCall (2002) and Singell (2004)

addressed these selection biases using model-based correction procedures.3 In contrast, we use a design-

based approach that focuses on rst-year university students in Chile who initially enrolled without being

eligible for a loan, and then        retook the national university admission test (the Prueba de Selección Univer-

sitaria or PSU). Retakers with family incomes below the 80th percentile who achieve a minimum 475 point

score on the PSU are eligible for loans covering up to about 85% of tuition costs for the remainder of their
    1
      For example, Bettinger (2004) studies the e ect of the Pell program, Dynarski (2003) studies the Social Security Student Bene t
Program, Cornwell et al. (2006) study a scholarship program in Georgia, Cohodes and Goodman (2014) study a grant program in
Massachusetts, Bettinger (2015) studies a change in the nancial aid formula at Ohio colleges, Castleman and Long (2016) study an
aid program in Florida, Denning, Marx, and Turner (2019) study a program in Texas, and Barr (2019) studies the impact of the post-
911 G.I. Bill on veterans. Nguyen, Kramer, and Evans (2019) present a comprehensive meta-analysis of 43 studies of grant programs
on student enrollment and degree attainment. Dynarski and Scott-Clayton (2013) present a broad overview of research on nancial
aid programs.
    2
      For clarity throughout this paper, we refer to institutions that grant bachelor's degrees as "universities" and institutions that
grant shorter vocationally-oriented degrees and certi cates as "vocational colleges."
    3
      DesJardins, Ahlburg, and McCall (2002) t a stop-out hazard model with unobserved heterogeneity, while Singell (2004) estima-
tes a two-equation model with one equation representing initial enrollment and the other representing re-enrollment.




                                                                  2
studies.4 This rule sets up a regression discontinuity design that allows us to credibly identify the impacts

of loan eligibility on re-enrollment rates of retakers in their second and later years, and on ultimate degree

recipiency. Conceptually, our approach is similar to Denning (2019), who studies the e ect of reaching age

24 and being considered as nancially independent on loan and grant amounts obtained by college seniors

in Texas, though our retakers are entering their second year, rather than nal year, of studies.

    We implement this approach using a database that combines registry data for PSU test takers with admi-

nistrative records from all higher-education institutions in the country and information on degree recipients.

These data allow us to assess the validity of our regression discontinuity (RD) design and to track students

between institutions, ensuring that we do not misclassify students who change institutions as dropouts.5

They also allow us to identify whether students who leave the university system have withdrawn from post-

secondary schooling altogether or moved to vocational colleges, where tuition costs are lower and loans are

available to students based on high school GPA.6 Recent work by Bucarey, Contreras, and Muñoz (2018) and

Montoya, Noton, and Solís (2018) suggests that the main impact of loan eligibility for entering freshmen

in Chile is to shift students from vocational colleges to universities. We study a similar cross-institutional

substitution e ect in re-enrollment behavior.

    Our rst main nding is that loan eligibility for PSU-retakers has a large positive impact on university

re-enrollment rates in the second through fth years after initial matriculation. Marginally-eligible retakers

have a 21 percentage point lower rate of leaving university after their rst year than marginally ineligible

retakers, raising their persistence rate into the second year from 56% to 77%. These initial impacts fade

somewhat in subsequent years but persist through the fth year (the nominal duration of bachelor's programs

in Chile), leading to a large and signi cant 12 percentage point impact on bachelor's degree recipiency. We

show that these impacts are highly robust to speci cation issues such as bandwidth choice or the introduction

of controls for covariates.

    A second nding is that a key channel mediating the response to loans is a reduction in transfers to voca-
    4
      University admissions in Chile are based on a combination of PSU scores and high school grades (see Solís (2017)). The 475
point cuto is about 0.7 of a standard deviation below the mean score for all enrollees. As explained below, students who wish to
retake the PSU and become eligible for loans must also submit a socioeconomic veri cation form and are assigned a family income
quintile by the Chilean Tax Authority.
    5
      This type of misclassi cation arises when enrollment status is based on records at a single institution, as in DesJardins, Ahlburg,
and McCall (2002) and Singell (2004), or at a subset of institutions, as in recent studies based on state-wide data, including Bettinger
(2004) and Goldrick-Rab et al. (2012).
    6
      One of the programs that provides loans for university students also provides loans for students at vocational colleges, with
eligibility based on either a minimum PSU score or a minimum high school GPA.



                                                                   3
tional colleges. Among rst-year students who are initially ineligible for loans, retake the PSU, and narrowly

miss the 475 point cuto , about one-quarter transfer to a vocational college in their second year. Scoring

just above the threshold cuts this rate in half, accounting for about two-thirds of the overall reduction in

dropout rates from university between the rst and second years. In the longer term, we nd that marginally

eligible retakers are less likely to attain a vocational degree or certi cate than marginally ineligible retakers,

but more likely to obtain some form of post-secondary degree.

    A third nding is that once students have access to loans, a switch to grant-based aid has little or no addi-

tional impact on persistence. We study the marginal impact of the "Beca Bicentenario" (Bicentennial Bursary,

[BB hereafter]), which is available to students in the bottom two quintiles of family income who score above

550 points on the PSU test and are enrolled at one of the 25 publicly funded "Universidades Tradicionales"

(Traditional Universities) in Chile.7 The BB provides a sum equal to the maximum loan amount, allowing

students to replace their loans with the BB grant.8 We nd no evidence of a shift in re-enrollment at the 550

point threshold for students at Traditional Universities who retook the PSU exam after their rst year, nor

do we nd any longer-run impact on degree completion. We interpret this as evidence that the causal e ect

of loan eligibility works through alleviation of credit constraints, and that once these constraints are eased,

re-enrollment rates are insensitive to the "price" of college.

    Although our research design provides credible evidence on the impacts of loan programs for the persis-

tence of PSU retakers, the fraction of students who enroll in their rst year without access to aid and then

retake the PSU is small. Moreover, we show that retakers are di erent from the overall student population:

they have lower high school grades and PSU scores, and many have experienced negative family income

shocks during their rst year. To probe the potential impact of these di erences, we examine heterogeneity

in the e ects of loan eligibility by family income quintile as of second year. We nd that the e ects of loan

eligibility are relatively large and stable over time for those with below-median family incomes. In contrast,

for higher-income groups, enrollment impacts fade over time and become insigni cant by the third year af-

ter matriculation. Given the modest sample sizes available, we cautiously conclude that the impacts of loan

eligibility are concentrated among students with low current family incomes, consistent with the presence
    7
      These are universities that existed prior to the educational reforms of 1981. During our sample period, they accounted for about
40% of total university enrollment.
    8
      Both the loan amount and the BB are credited directly to the university where the student is enrolled, and they are subject to
the same cap, so students cannot accept the BB and continue to take out a loan.




                                                                  4
of credit constraints.

       Our research contributes to the growing literature that studies the impacts of student nancial aid on

persistence in college enrollment. As noted, most existing studies ­ including all those covered in the recent

meta-analysis by Nguyen, Kramer, and Evans (2019) ­ address the impacts of grants.9 The recent study most

similar to ours, by Denning (2019), looks at the e ect of a combination of grants and loans available to college

seniors (with a mix of +$1,000 in grants and +$500 in loans). We ll an important gap by focusing on the

extensive margin e ect of a relatively large loan amount (covering about 85% of tuition) available from the

second year of studies onward.

       Most previous studies nd modest positive impacts of grants on re-enrollment rates (or negative impacts

on dropout/stopout) though Nguyen, Kramer, and Evans (2019) point out that the magnitudes of the e ects

from more and less generous grant programs have to be interpreted carefully. A few studies, however, nd

negative impacts of grant programs that divert more able students towards colleges with bigger aid packa-

ges but lower graduation rates (e.g., Cohodes and Goodman (2014) and Angrist, Autor, Hudson, and Pallais

(2016)).10 Relative to the existing U.S.-based literature, which nds average impacts on year-to-year per-

sistence and degree completion on the order of 1 percentage point per $1000 in aid, the impacts of the loan

program in Chile appear to be relatively large, even adjusting the loan amount for relative income di erences

between the two countries.

       Our second contribution is to the literature on the role of credit constraints in schooling choices (see

Lochner and Monge-Naranjo (2012) and Lochner and Monge-Naranjo (2016) for an overview).11 We inter-

pret the large response to loan eligibility but the small marginal e ect of a switch from loans to grants as

evidence of credit constraints among university matriculants in Chile. This complements the ndings of
   9
      Two recent studies focus on programs that indirectly a ect the amount of loans taken out by students. Barr, Bird, and Castleman
(2019) randomly assign students to loan counselors and nd that the intervention lowers the amount of loans taken by the treatment
group, but also lowers their persistence rate and increases their loan default rate. Marx and Turner (2018) show that marginal
eligibility for Pell Grant aid crowds out loans by more than $1 per dollar of aid among CUNY students and, if anything, leads to
worse educational outcomes.
   10
      Other papers study the e ects of nancial incentives that are conditional on student performance on post-enrollment outcomes.
Randomized aid schemes provide mixed evidence. Brock and Richburg-Hayes (2006) nd positive e ects, while Angrist, Lang, and
Oreopoulos (2009) nd positive e ects only for women. Similarly, Garibaldi, Giavazzi, Ichino, and Rettore (2011) study how an
increase in tuition after the nominal graduation time leads to a higher probability of on-time graduation for students at Bocconi
University in Italy. Similar substitutions patterns are found between public schools and for-pro t colleges when aid for students at
for-pro t colleges is restricted (Cellini (2009) and Cellini, Darolia, and Turner (2020)).
   11
      Some previous studies have argued that such constraints are largely absent ­ e.g., Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner (2008) ­ but
in their review, Lochner and Monge-Naranjo (2012) argue that recent evidence points toward a possible role for credit constraints
in college enrollment.




                                                                 5
Solís (2017) on the impacts of loan eligibility on initial enrollment in Chilean universities, and of Gurgand,

Lorenceau, and Melonio (2011) on the e ect of discontinuities in loan eligibility for enrollment outcomes in

South Africa. Relatedly, we also contribute to the small literature on debt aversion and college enrollment

decisions. Rothstein and Rouse (2011) and Field (2009) show that holding debt induces students to change

educational and labor market decisions. In contrast, our nding that eligibility for the Bicentennial Bursary

program has little or no impact on re-enrollment suggests that the behavioral impacts of debt in our setting

are relatively modest in size.



2      Context, Loan Programs, and Data

2.1     Higher Education in Chile

The Chilean higher education sector consists of two broad sets of institutions: universities (which grant

bachelor's and graduate degrees); and Technical Education Centers (Centros de Formación Técnica) and

Professional Institutes (Institutos Profesionales), which grant technical degrees and professional certi cates.

For simplicity, we refer to the latter as "vocational colleges." Most bachelor's programs are designed to last

 ve years, while vocational programs typically last 2-3 years. Courses can sometimes be transferred between

institutions, particularly for students transferring from universities to vocational colleges.

      Among universities, there are 25 Traditional Universities that predated the educational reforms of the

early 1980s. These include public universities (such as the University of Chile) as well as private non-pro t

universities (such as the Catholic University of Chile). Though these schools vary in prestige, all 25 receive

direct funding from the government and share a centralized admission system organized through a council of

chancellors (CRUCH, Consejo de Rectores de Universidades Chilenas). Students attending these universities

are eligible for loans through the "Crédito Solidario para Universidades Tradicionales" (Traditional University

Loan) program (explained below). They are also eligible for the Bicentennial Bursary and various nancial

aid programs operated by the institutions themselves.

      A second group of 30 universities is not funded directly by the government and relies mainly on tuition

revenues. These "private universities" were founded after the reforms of the early 1980s and today account

for about 60% of university enrollment in Chile. As explained below, students at these universities are eligible

for a parallel loan program ­ the "Crédito con Aval del Estado" (State Guaranteed Loan) program, introduced


                                                       6
in 2006.

      Students typically graduate from high school in November and write the university admission test (PSU)

in December. Students who intend to apply for government-administered loans or grants also submit a

socioeconomic veri cation form (Formulario Único de Acreditación Socioeconómica, [FUAS]) that gathers

information on household structure and is used (in combination with tax records) to determine the appli-

cant's (equivalized) family income quintile. After receiving their PSU scores in January, students then apply

though the centralized admission system to the Traditional Universities or directly to the other institutions.

Admission decisions are based exclusively on the PSU test and high school grades, and classes begin in March.


2.2     Student Loan Programs in Chile

Tuition rates at universities in Chile average about one-half of median family income per year. Given this high

level, most students rely on a combination of family resources, grants, and loans to nance their education.

As noted, there are two key loan programs for university students: the Traditional University Loan [TUL]

program, available to students at the Traditional Universities; and the State Guaranteed Loan [SGL] program,

available to students at other accredited universities and vocational colleges. While there are some di erences

between the two programs (explained below), university students from the four lowest income quintiles (i.e.,

with family incomes below the 80th percentile) are eligible for either loan program, depending on where

they are enrolled, if they score at least 475 points on the PSU. Students attending vocational colleges are also

eligible for the SGL loan program if they have a PSU above 475 or a high school GPA above 5.3 (on a scale of

4 to 7). Together, the two loan programs serve about 18% of all students taking the PSU test each year, and

about 50% of those who have submitted a FUAS form and are classi ed in the bottom four quintiles of family

income.

      Both the TUL and SGL programs provide a maximum loan up to a "reference tuition" level (Arancel de

referencia) determined by the Ministry of Education and based on the institution and program of study. On

average, this amount covers about 85% of actual tuition. Apart from subsidies for very poor students (covering

lunch and transportation costs) and scholarships such as the Bicentennial Bursary, few other forms of aid are

available, and so most students depend on family support to nance all other costs associated with obtaining

a university degree.

      In addition to providing loans for students at di erent sets of institutions, the TUL and SGL programs


                                                       7
di er in terms of administration and loan terms. TULs are low-interest (2% per year) income-contingent loans

managed directly by the Traditional Universities using resources provided by the government. In contrast,

SGLs are 15-20 year installment loans written by commercial banks, with a default guarantee by the state

and the educational institution.12 For the earlier cohorts we study, SGLs had average interest rates close to

6% ­ similar to rates on other loans of equivalent duration ­ though, in 2011, the rate was lowered to 2% in

response to ongoing student protests.

       Enrolled university students can also become eligible for the SGL program if they successfully complete

at least 70% of their required program courses in the previous two semesters (and meet other requirements

imposed by their school). Most programs o er ve courses per semester, so this criterion implies failing

at most one course per semester. Unfortunately, we do not observe student course enrollments or grades,

so we cannot determine eligibility through this mechanism. Based on limited data for a couple of cohorts

of students, we believe that it a ects a very small fraction of students who would otherwise be ineligible

for loans (less than 5%). Importantly, students who remain enrolled (or take a gap year) do not lose their

eligibility for the duration of their studies (up to the nominal duration of the program plus 2 or 3 years), so

this pathway only adds eligible students in later years of study.

       As an alternative to the TUL and SGL loans, students (and their families) can potentially apply for regu-

lar loans from commercial banks or other nancial institutions. Given the high levels of university tuition

relative to average incomes and the fact that about 30% of Chileans work in the informal sector, we believe

that this option is largely irrelevant for families in all but the top quintile of family income.


2.3      Other grants

Other grants and scholarships for Chilean students are also linked to family income and PSU test scores.

Fortunately, all of these programs use higher cuto s than the 475 point threshold for the TUL and SGL loans,

and therefore do not confound our regression discontinuity (RD) design. The largest grant program is the

Bicentennial Bursary [BB], which provides an amount equal to the reference tuition level (the same amount

as the loans) for students from the lowest two income quintiles who score at least 550 points on the PSU test

and are enrolled at a Traditional University. About 5% of all students taking the PSU each year, and 55% of
  12
    See World Bank (2011) for a detailed report on the SGL program, including information on average loan amounts per student
and many details of the program rules.




                                                             8
those in the lowest four family income quintiles, receive a BB.

      Given the higher score threshold for the BB than the loan programs, students who are marginally ine-

ligible for the BB (with scores between 475 and 549 points) are all eligible for loans. Those who meet the

550 point threshold receive the BB, but the grant fully o sets the amount they can receive as loans, so their

total "aid package" is constant. Thus, a comparison of enrollment and graduation rates for students who

score just above the 550 BB threshold, versus those who score just below, reveals the impact of a switch from

loan-based to grant-based nancial aid, holding constant the maximum amount of aid. In our analysis below,

we therefore conduct a second set of analyses around the 550 threshold to identify the marginal e ect of

moving from loan to grant aid.


2.4     D

We construct a panel of administrative records for students who participated in the Chilean university ad-

mission system in the post-2006 period, merging registries from four sources using personal identi cation

numbers.

      The rst source is the registry of PSU-takers. This data set contains information on PSU scores (at each

attempt), high school GPA and year of graduation, and a comprehensive set of socioeconomic characteristics,

including parental education, type of high school attended,13 and whether the family is covered by public

or private health insurance. The second data source is a registry from the Ministry of Education containing

information on all students who are enrolled in higher education institutions (universities and vocational

colleges) in years up to and including 2014. For most of our analysis, we focus on students who were en-

rolled in their rst year of university between 2007 and 2013 (without being eligible for a loan) and retook

the PSU test prior to their second year of studies. Our enrollment data allow us to follow these students for

between 1 and 7 years after their rst year of enrollment. The third data source is a le of FUAS applications,

supplemented with the family income quintile assigned by the Tax Authority and an indicator for eligibility

for loans and grants from the Ministry of Education. Finally, we use information of all graduates from in-

stitutions of higher education in the country until 2018, allowing us to study BA attainment in a window of
  13
     There are three types of schools in Chile: traditional public schools; privately operated "voucher schools" that are funded by a
capitation fee per student paid by the government; and private schools that receive no direct government funding. See Hsieh and
Urquiola (2006) for an overview.




                                                                 9
between 5 and 11 years after their rst year of university.14


2.5      Sample

Test Retakers

Simple comparisons between students with di erent levels of nancial aid eligibility determined before en-

rollment cannot be used to identify the impacts of aid on college persistence because these aid di erences

a ect the population at risk of dropping out. This fact has been recognized in the literature and addressed by

previous researchers (e.g., DesJardins, Ahlburg, and McCall (2002) and Singell (2004)) using sample selection

correction methods. We take a di erent approach and focus on students who initially enrolled in university

without being loan-eligible, then retook the PSU test during their rst year. This design avoids selection

bias because students do not know their precise score on the second attempt. Under mild assumptions (Lee,

2008), those who end up scoring just above or just below the threshold will be very similar on observed and

unobserved characteristics. However, those who score above the threshold gain access to loans, providing

an "as good as random" design for evaluating the e ect of loans on persistence rates.

       There are at least three groups of students who were ineligible for loans in their rst year and have an

incentive to retake the PSU and (re)submit a FUAS application. The rst is students who were nancially

quali ed for aid in their rst year but scored less than 475 on their rst attempt at the test. A second group

comprises students from families whose income was above the 80th percentile when they applied to uni-

versity, but has subsequently fallen below the 80th percentile. A third group is students from lower-income

families who failed to submit the FUAS form in time. To be evaluated for loan eligibility for their later years

of university, all three groups have to retake the PSU test and (re)submit their FUAS application.


Sample Derivation and Description

The derivation of our sample of retakers is shown graphically in Figure 1. We begin with the population of

university enrollees who are observed in their rst year of studies. We focus on seven cohorts who enrolled

in university for the rst time in 2007 through 2013. Characteristics of this sample of just under 600,000

students are shown in columns 1 and 2 of Table 1. Next, we narrow our focus to the subset of rst-year
  14
    Similar data are used by Santelices et al. (2015) studying persistence using matching methods, Solis (2013) studying the e ect of
university enrollment in political participation, and Barrios Fernández (2019) studying peer e ects in university completion.



                                                                 10
enrollees who were initially ineligible for a loan (around 245,000 students). Of these, 17,626 retook the PSU

at the end of their rst year in university: their characteristics are shown in columns 3-4 of Table 1. Finally,

we de ne our analysis sample as the subset of initially ineligible retakers who submitted a new FUAS and

were nancially eligible for a loan (i.e., had family incomes as of their rst year of university that were in

the rst 4 quintiles of the national distribution). These 3,627 students, whose characteristics are shown in

columns 5 and 6 of Table 1, comprise about 0.6% of rst-year enrollees.

   Comparisons across the columns of Table 1 suggest that nancially-eligible retakers have lower PSU sco-

res and high school GPA's than typical rst-year university students, but come from a similar distribution

of high schools and have similar age and gender distributions. Their parents' education levels are also simi-

lar to those of average rst-year university students, as are their parents' formal sector employment rates.

Interestingly, their average family income quintile from their initial FUAS application is 3.34 (on a scale of

1-5) versus an average across all students of 2.61. Thus, based on circumstances at the time of their rst

PSU attempt, they appear to have had higher-than-average family incomes. By the time of their second PSU

attempt, however, their average family income quintile has dropped to 2.45 ­ roughly a fall of one quintile.

Thus, as expected, a signi cant fraction of retakers have experienced negative family income shocks.

   We emphasize that the sample of nancially-eligible retakers is relatively small and has somewhat di e-

rent characteristics than other rst-year university students in Chile. Most importantly, these students have

lower test scores and high school GPA's than other students. This is not necessarily a problem, since (as we

show below) the issue of college persistence is most relevant for academically weaker students who are at

risk of dropping out before completing a degree. However, it means that the magnitude of the e ects we esti-

mate for this sample cannot be generalized to academically stronger students. In addition, nancially-eligible

retakers tend to have experienced recent negative shocks to their family income. In the analysis below, we

explore di erences across family income quintiles in the e ects of loan eligibility and document that these

e ects appear to be larger for students from families with lower current incomes. Again, this heterogeneity

means that we need to be cautious in extrapolating the estimated impacts in our sample to other student

groups.




                                                      11
3         Estimation Strategy

We use a conventional regression discontinuity (RD) approach to estimate the e ect of loan eligibility on

the second year enrollment choices of nancially-eligible retakers. Speci cally, we estimate local linear RD

models of the form:



                           Ni2 = 0 + 1 · 1[Ti2           c] + 2 · di + 3 · 1[Ti2          c] · di +   i2                       (1)

where Ni2 is an indicator for whether student i is not enrolled in university two years after nishing high

school, 1[Ti2         c] is an indicator for whether the student's PSU score on her second test attempt, Ti2 , is

greater than or equal to the cuto , c (475 for loan eligibility and 550 for BB eligibility), di = (Ti2 - c) is the

distance to the cuto point (the running variable), which controls for the in uence of the test score on the

probability of non-enrollment, and               is an error term capturing all other in uences.           15   We estimate this
                                            i2

model for students with second-attempt scores in a relatively narrow range around the 475 point threshold

for loan eligibility. (Robustness of our results to this choice of "bandwidth" are discussed below). Equation

(1) assumes that the relationship between non-enrollment and test scores is piece-wise linear, with a slope

of 2 for scores below the threshold and 2 + 3 for scores above the threshold. The constant 0 represents

the mean non-enrollment rate for students who score just slightly less than 475 points; while the coe cient

1 represents the change in mean non-enrollment associated with just passing the 475 point threshold.

         Given the de nition of our sample of retakers, loan eligibility in the second year after high school shifts

from some rate B2 (for students who score less than 475) to 100% (for students who score 475 points or more),

where B2 is the fraction of students with scores just under 475 who could qualify for an SGL loan in year 2

based on successful completion of their rst-year courses. Equation (1) is, therefore, the reduced form for a

"fuzzy" RD model (see Lee and Lemieux (2010)) with a share B2 of always-takers and no never-takers. The

local average treatment e ect of loan eligibility in year 2 is 1 /(1 - B2 ): thus, the reduced form estimate 1

provides a conservative (lower bound) estimate of the treatment e ect. Based on loan participation data for

a few cohorts we believe that B2 is small (under 5%) implying that the bound is relatively tight.
    15
     Non-enrollment is equivalent to what many analysts call "status dropouts." We prefer the term non-enrollment to avoid con-
fusion with "event dropout," which is conditional on being enrolled in the previous year. In our analysis, non-enrollment (= status
dropout) in second year and event dropout in second year are the same because all students in our sample were enrolled in the rst
year. For later years, however, non-enrollment and event dropout di er.




                                                                12
    In later years, students who become eligible for a loan in their second year retain their eligibility (pro-

vided that they remain enrolled or take an approved gap year). Students who failed to reach the 475 point

threshold in their second PSU attempt, however, can write the test again or gain eligibility through successful

completion of their courses. As a result, the fraction of always takers in the determination of loan eligibility

for years t > 2 will be larger than B2 , and the e ect of scoring 475+ points in the second attempt score on

eligibility in year t will be smaller than (1 - B2 )

    There are two possible approaches to address the changing impact of the second attempt test score on

loan eligibility in later years. Our preferred approach, given that passing the 475 threshold ensures eligibility

in the future, focuses on the e ects per student whose loan eligibility in year 2 was a ected by their test

score. In that case, we simply estimate a variant of equation (1) with later outcomes. An alternative is to use

information on third and later PSU attempts to form an estimate of the fraction of students who are eligible

for loans in year t, Eligibleit , and estimate a rst-stage model for this fraction:



                    Eligibleit = 0 + 1 · 1[Ti2         c] + 2 · di + 3 · 1[Ti2   c] · di + it                 (2)

The ratio of the reduced form coe cient 1 to the rst stage coe cient 1 gives the causal e ect on the

non-enrollment rate in year t, scaled by the additional share of students who are estimated to be eligible in t

as a result of their second-attempt PSU (as in a standard LATE interpretation of IV). We caution that, given

the dynamic nature of the enrollment decision, it is likely that enrollment in later years depends on loan

availability in all prior years (and not just the current year), so scaling the reduced form e ect for outcomes

in period t by the rst stage e ect in eligibility in the current year is likely to overstate the causal e ect of

eligibility on current period enrollment.

    A nal issue in estimating the rst stage model is that we only observe FUAS data and veri ed family

income quintiles up to 2014. For the e ects on graduation, we assume that an individual's nancial eligibility

status is the same as it was in 2014. This mainly a ects the later cohorts in our sample who were only partway

through their university programs by 2014.




                                                         13
3.1     Decomposing Non-Enrollment Outcomes

Equation (1) provides a simple framework for analyzing the e ects of loan eligibility on the probability of

non-enrollment in a given year t after rst enrollment. One simple extension is to classify non-enrollees by

whether they are currently attending a vocational college or out of higher education altogether. Speci cally,

let Vit be an indicator that individual i is enrolled in a vocational college in year t and let Mit be an indicator

that individual i is not enrolled in any form of tertiary education. We can t variants of equation (1) that

model the e ects of loan eligibility on the probability of vocational college enrollment and the probability

of not being enrolled in any form of higher education. Since Nit = Vit + Mit , the estimated e ect of loan

eligibility on university non-enrollment is equal to the sum of the e ects on vocational enrollment and non-

enrollment in any tertiary education.

      Another useful extension is to classify current non-enrollees by the pathway leading to their current

state. For example, we can partition all the students who are not enrolled in year t = 3 into two groups:

those who dropped out in their second year and have remained unenrolled since then; and those who were

enrolled in their second year but dropped out in their third. Formally:



                         P (Ni3 = 1) = P (Ni2 = 1, Ni3 = 1) + P (Ni2 = 0, Ni3 = 1)                              (3)

Again, the estimated e ect of loan eligibility on university non-enrollment in year 3 is equal the sum of the

e ects on the probabilities of each of two pathways, allowing us to decompose the e ect of loan eligibility

into an immediate impact on dropout after year 1 and a delayed impact on dropout after year 2. A similar

decomposition is easily developed for non-enrollment in years t > 3 (see below).

      It is also possible to combine information on prior enrollment choices and the alternative activities of

each student. For example, we can decompose non-enrollment in year 5 into pathways de ned by enrollment

status in year 2 and the student's activity in year 5:


                      P (Ni5 = 1) = P (Ni2 = 1, Vi5 = 1) + P (Ni2 = 1, Mi5 = 1)                                 (4)

                                         +P (Ni2 = 0, Vi5 = 1) + P (Ni2 = 0, Mi5 = 1).


We present a decomposition based on this equation below.



                                                         14
4       Results

4.1     Validity of the RD

Following the recommendations of Imbens and Lemieux (2008), we begin our empirical analysis by imple-

menting a set of checks for the validity of our RD design. First, we check that PSU scores have a smooth

histogram in the neighborhood of the 475 point threshold. Then we check that the conditional means of

retakers' predetermined characteristics smoothly through the threshold.

      The PSU test consists of a battery of multiple-choice questions graded by a photo-optical device and

reported in 1/2 point intervals. Given this, it seems very unlikely that scores can be manipulated. Consis-

tent with this observation, Figure 2 shows that the histogram of second-attempt PSU scores is continuous

at both the 475 point threshold for loan eligibility and also at the 550 point threshold for eligibility for a

BB. More formally, following the procedure suggested by McCrary (2008), we estimate piece-wise fourth-

order polynomials for the frequency distribution of PSU scores in the intervals [300, 474.5],[475, 549.5], and

[550, 800]. The tted polynomials are plotted in the gure, along with their associated con dence intervals,

and the actual means for 5-point bins of scores, each of which contains an average of 60 students for bins in

a neighborhood of the 475 threshold. The estimated polynomials show no evidence of jumps or "spikes" in

the frequency distributions of scores.

      Next, in columns 1-3 of Table 2, we show a series of estimated local linear RD models based on equation

(1) that take as their dependent variables the characteristics of second-attempt test takers listed in the row

headings. Column (1) presents the estimate of 0 , which corresponds to the mean of the characteristic for

test-takers with scores just under 475 points. Column (2) presents the estimate of 1 , which represents the

jump in the conditional mean of the characteristic at 475 points. Column 3 presents the estimated standard

error of 1 . Columns (4) to (6) present parallel estimates for RD models around the 550 point threshold for

the Bicentennial Bursary, t to the characteristics of students who were enrolled at a Traditional University

in their rst year without holding a BB grant, but where nancially-eligible for a BB grant in their second

year.

      All the speci cations in this table and following tables in the paper are estimated using a 75 PSU-point

window around the discontinuity threshold (so the models for the 475 point threshold use observations with

scores from 400 to 549.5 points, while the models around the 550 threshold use observations with scores from


                                                      15
475 to 624.5 points). This 75-point bandwidth is approximately equal to the Calonico et al. (2014) optimal

bandwidth for the reduced form model of our main outcome variable, non-enrollment in the second year

after high school. We evaluate the sensitivity of our results to the size of the bandwidth in the Appendix and

show that they are robust to alternative choices.16

      Among the 21 predetermined variables tested in Table 2, only the student's score on her rst attempt

at the PSU shows evidence of a discontinuity at the 475 point threshold. The point estimate (-8.17, t=2.69,

p-value=0.007) suggests that students who scored just above the 475 point threshold in their second attempt

have lower average scores on their rst attempt than those who scored just below. In Appendix Figure A.1

we show graphs of the relationships between the second attempt test score (the running variable di in our

RD models) and the means of several predetermined characteristics, including the rst-attempt PSU score. A

visual examination of the graph for rst-attempt scores suggests that the reason for the apparent downward

jump in rst attempt scores at the 475 point threshold for the second-attempt score is that the true conditional

expectation function exhibits some convexity that is not well captured by the local linear approximating

function.17 As would be expected if the relationship between rst-attempt scores and second-attempt scores

is convex to the right of the 475 point threshold, we also see that estimated local linear approximation over-

estimates the conditional mean just to the left of the 550 point threshold ­ a problem that is con rmed by

the estimated negative jump in rst-attempt test scores at this threshold from the model in columns 4-6.18

Given the visual evidence, however, and the absence of discontinuities for any of the other 20 predetermined

characteristics, we believe that the data are consistent with a valid research design.


4.2     Main results

Next, we turn to our main analysis of the e ect of achieving loan eligibility on the basis of the second-

attempt PSU on non-enrollment rates in subsequent years. We start by describing the results in graphical

form. Figure 3 graphs the fraction of students who fail to re-enroll at university in their second year (t = 2)
   16
      As a placebo test, we also estimated RD models for re-enrollment in the second through the fth years after initial enrollment
for retakers that did not apply for aid (either loans or BB), and therefore should not be a ected by the cuto s. We nd insigni cant
e ects.
   17
      We are using a 75-point bandwidth and a uniform kernel for all the characteristics in Table 2, but the use of a triangular kernel,
which puts more weight on data closer to the threshold, leads to insigni cant estimates of the jumps in rst-attempt scores at 475
and 550 points.
   18
      We note that the sample for A.1 is our main analysis sample, whereas the sample for the models in columns 4-6 of 2 consists
of enrollees at Traditional Universities who were initially ineligible for the BB, retook the PSU, and were nancially eligible for the
BB, so the results are not strictly comparable.


                                                                  16
against their second-attempt PSU score. As in Figure 2, each dot in the gure represents the mean outcome

for students in a 5-point bin of PSU scores. The solid lines represent the tted local linear regression models,

using bandwidths of 75 points around the 475-point threshold for loan eligibility and the 550 point threshold

for BB eligibility. We also show the estimated 95% con dence intervals around the local linear models.

       The gure shows that the second year non-enrollment rate decreases steadily with the second-attempt

PSU score, starting at close to 80% for students with PSUs in the 300's and ending at essentially 0 for students

with scores above 700. There is also a very clear discontinuous jump of about -20 percentage points in non-

enrollment at the 475 point threshold for loan eligibility. Figure 4 presents similar graphs of non-enrollment

in the third through fth years after matriculation. In constructing each gure, we limit attention to the set

of cohorts that are potentially observed in that year. (For example, when studying enrollment in the fth

year, we limit the sample to cohorts who enrolled for the rst time between 2007 and 2010, and thus would

reach their fth year of enrollment by 2014). All three of these graphs show the same general pattern as the

graph for re-enrollment in the second year of university. In particular, all three exhibit clear discontinuous

jumps at the 475 point threshold for loan eligibility.

       Table 3 presents estimation results for a series of local linear RD models over time horizons from two to

 ve years after rst enrollment. The rst column reports estimates of the rst stage model (2) for (estimated)

loan eligibility in the year of interest; while columns 2-7 present reduced form estimates of the e ect of having

a second-attempt PSU score above 475 points (i.e., equation (1)) for university non-enrollment, vocational

college enrollment, and no post-secondary enrollment, with and without the addition of cohort dummies

and the list of control variables described in Table 2. In all cases, we report the estimate of the constant

representing the expected value of the outcome of interest for students who score just under 475 points (i.e.,

the estimate of 0 , as well as the estimated jump in the outcome at the 475 point threshold (i.e., the estimate

of 1 ).19

       We begin in Panel A with outcomes in the second year after initial entry to university. Since our estimate

of eligibility in year 2 is 100% for those with scores  475, and 0 for those with scores < 475, the rst stage

model for loan eligibility in year 2 is degenerate, with a constant of 0 and intercept of 1 (and no sampling

variability). Consistent with Figure 3, the estimated reduced form e ect on non-enrollment is -0.21 and is
  19
    In estimating the model with controls, we deviate all the control variables from their sample means, so that the constant of the
regression has the interpretation of the mean non-enrollment rate for students who score just below the 475 point threshold.




                                                                17
highly signi cant (t = 5.2). Columns 4 and 6 show that the 21 percentage-point (ppt.) gain in university

enrollment in the second year for those who are marginally eligible for loans arises from a 14-ppt. decline

in vocational college enrollment and a 7.1-ppt. decline in the fraction of retakers who leave post-secondary

education altogether. Thus, 2/3 of the e ect on university enrollment arises because loan-eligible students

stay in university, rather than shift to vocational colleges, which have lower tuition and a di erent threshold

for loan eligibility based only on high-school GPA.

       Columns 3, 5, and 7 of the table present models that include cohort dummies and the predetermined

covariates listed in Table 2.20 Reassuringly, we nd that their addition has little or no e ect on any of the

point estimates.

       Looking at models for the third through fth years since initial enrollment (Panels B, C, and D), we see that

the reduced form impact of loan eligibility fades by about 40% in the third year, to about -12 ppt. Interestingly,

the constants in the reduced form model (representing the mean non-enrollment rates for students who score

just under 475 points) are nearly the same in second and third years, so this "fade out" arises because about

40% of the marginally eligible students who re-enroll in the second year end up dropping out in the third

year.

       By year 5 the reduced form e ect of marginally passing the 475 threshold is still about the same as it was

in year 3, suggesting that most of the fade out of the loan eligibility e ect occurs in year 3. As shown by the

estimated constant for the rst stage model reported in Panel D, by year 5, about 16 percent of the students

who just barely missed the 475 threshold on their second attempt at the PSU are eligible for loans. Thus,

the rst-stage impact on loan eligibility in year 5 is 0.86. Scaling the reduced form by this number yields an

IV estimate of -0.14 on non-enrollment in year 5. As noted, however, this scaling assumes that the impact

on the fth year non-enrollment is attributable to loan eligibility status in that year, whereas the pattern

of non-enrollment over years 2-5 suggests that most of the non-enrollees in year 5 actually dropped out in

year 2 or 3. Thus, we prefer to focus on the reduced form estimates, which give the impacts in years 2-5 per

student who became loan-eligible in year 2.

       The temporal pattern of the reduced form impacts over the years 2-5 is summarized in Figure 5. The

left panel shows the estimated mean non-enrollment rates for students who are marginally ineligible and
  20
    There are a small number of observations with missing values for high-school GPA. To keep them in the analysis, we use
missing-indicator method, where we imputed the mean of the variable and included a dummy for missing GPA.




                                                           18
marginally eligible for loans at each time horizon, while the right panel shows the di erence between these

two, which is the implied impact of loan eligibility.

       We have experimented extensively with the choice of bandwidth for the local linear models, and with

the choice of a triangular kernel versus a uniform kernel.21 In Appendix Figure A.2, we show the estimated

reduced-form e ects of marginally passing the 475-PSU threshold on non-enrollment rates in years 2-5 using

bandwidths from 40 to 200 points. In all cases, the magnitudes of the estimated e ects are relatively stable.

In Appendix Table A.1, we report a parallel version of Table 3 in which we use a triangular kernel and a

di erent bandwidth for each time horizon, choosing the bandwidth selected by the Calonico et al. (2014)

(CCT14) procedure for the reduced form model at that horizon. Again, these estimates are quite similar to

those reported in Table 3.


4.3      Long-term E ect on Degree Completion

The results in Table 3 suggest that loan eligibility had an e ect on the enrollment behavior of test retakers

extending at least to their fth year after initial enrollment. In this section, we con rm this long-run e ect

using data on degree completion. As discussed above, our graduation data extend to 2018, four years later

than our enrollment data, so we are able to track degree completion over a relatively long time horizon ­ at

least 10 years after initial enrollment for the earliest cohorts in our study sample.

       Panel A of Table 4 presents a series of reduced-form models for degree completion by 2018. We show

models for completion of a bachelor's degree (columns 1-2), completion of a vocational degree (columns 3-4),

and completion of any type of post-secondary degree (columns 5-6). We present models without covariates in

the odd-numbered columns, and models that control for cohort dummies and the predetermined covariates

in the even-numbered columns.

       The models in columns 1-2 suggest that loan eligibility in year 2 increased the university graduation rate

by about 12 ppt. - very similar to the e ect on year 5 university enrollment. Given that most bachelor's

programs last 5 years, we might have expected the two e ects to be about the same, and reassuringly they

are. Consistent with the decomposition of non-enrollment patterns in Table 3, the estimates in columns

3-4 suggest that about one half of the increase in bachelor degree attainment is o set by a reduction in
  21
     As noted, for our main analysis, we use a uniform kernel, which is equivalent to running unweighted OLS regression models
for the rst stage and reduced-form models, using only observations for students with scores between 400 and 549.5.




                                                             19
graduation from vocational colleges. However, given the sampling errors, we cannot be too certain of the

exact share. The remainder is due to a reduction in the share of retakers who have no higher education

degree or certi cate (see columns 5-6).



5      Mechanisms

In this section, we present three additional sets of analyses that shed light on the mechanisms underlying

the positive e ects of loan-eligibility on enrollment and degree attainment. We begin with an analysis of

the e ect of eligibility for the Bicentennial Bursary, which is available to students attending Traditional

Universities who have family incomes below the 40th percentile of the national distribution and score at

least 550 points on the PSU. We compare the e ects of BB eligibility and loan eligibility to gain some insights

into the question of how much of the e ect of the loan program arises through an opening up of credit

versus a reduction in the cost of university education. Next, we use the framework developed in Section 3.1 to

decompose the e ect of loan eligibility on non-enrollment status in year 5 into e ects on alternative pathways

characterized by earlier enrollment choices and activities in year 5. Finally, we examine heterogeneity in the

response to loan eligibility across family income quintiles.


5.1     Loans Vs. Grants

A critical question for the design of student aid programs is whether children from lower-income families

are less likely to attend university because they lack access to credit, or because they perceive the costs as too

high relative to the returns (see, e.g., Lochner and Monge-Naranjo (2012)). Under the rst explanation, the

TUL and SGL loan programs a ect students' choices because they open up access to credit that is otherwise

unavailable to lower-income families. Under the second, they a ect choices because they partly subsidize

the cost of university thought below-market interest rates (particularly in the case of the TUL program and

in the post-2011 period for the SGL program).

      Some evidence on the importance of the cost channel comes from a comparison of second-attempt test

takers with family incomes under the 40th percentile who enrolled in their rst year without a Bicentennial

Bursary and scored just below or just above the 550 point threshold for BB eligibility in the second PSU

attempt. Students on both sides of the threshold continue to be eligible for a loan, but those who score 550


                                                       20
points or more can replace their loan with a bursary, completely eliminating about 85% of their tuition costs.

       As a point of departure, we note that Figure 3 shows no evidence of a jump in non-enrollment rates

of students around the 550 point threshold for BB eligibility. Nevertheless, the sample used in this gure

includes students with family incomes between the 40th and 80th percentiles (who are eligible for a loan but

ineligible for a BB), and those in private universities (who are not eligible for the BB unless they transfer to

a Traditional University). As a result, any e ect of BB eligibility may be di cult to discern.

       Table 5 presents a series of RD models t to PSU retakers who were enrolled in their rst year at a

Traditional University without being eligible for a BB and had family incomes (based on the FUAS they

submitted at the end of their rst year) below the 40th percentile. In this sample, those who score above 550

points on their second attempt PSU are automatically quali ed for a BB. The format of the table is the same

as Table 3, with a rst stage model in column 1 and reduced-form models for various enrollment outcomes

in columns 2-5.22 We estimate models for non-enrollment at Traditional Universities (column 2), enrollment

at a Private University (column 3), enrollment in a vocational college (column 4), and withdrawal from any

form of post-secondary education (column 5).

       Panel A presents a series of models for outcomes in the second year after high school graduation. Note

that the 550 point threshold is a sharp RD design for BB eligibility in year 2: thus (as in Table 3), the rst

stage model in column 1 is degenerate, with an intercept of 0, a slope coe cient of 1, and no sampling error.

Passing the 550 point threshold is associated with relatively small and statistically insigni cant changes in

all the outcomes in columns 2-5, including most importantly, the probability of dropping out of a Traditional

University. In contrast to the e ect of loan eligibility, it appears BB eligibility has little or no e ect on second-

year outcomes.

       Looking in later years (panels B, C, and D), we continue to see little evidence that reaching the 550-point

BB threshold has an e ect on remaining in a Traditional University, or of enrolling in a private university

or vocational college, or of leaving post-secondary schooling altogether. This is con rmed by the models in

panel B of Table 4, which examine e ects on degree attainment. We see no evidence in these models that

attaining eligibility for a BB a ects the probability of attaining a bachelor's degree at a Traditional University

(columns 1-2), at a Private University (columns 3-4), or at vocational college (columns 5-6).
  22
     Students can retake the PSU a third or fourth or even fth time, and some eventually reach the 550 point threshold, so in later
years, the design for BB eligibility is a fuzzy RD with a fraction of always takers that represent the set of students who later pass
the 550 threshold.



                                                                 21
      We conclude from this analysis that the availability of a BB grant that fully replaces any loans ­ and

thereby reduces the out of pocket costs of university by around 85% ­ has little or no e ect on enrollment

choices or degree attainment. While potentially surprising, this is consistent with the ndings in Solís (2017)

on the e ects of BB eligibility on rst-year enrollment. Using an RD design similar to the one we adopt here,

Solís (2017) nds no evidence that students who score just above 550 points on their                   rst-a empt PSU

­ and can, therefore, attend a Traditional university for only about 15% of the regular tuition cost faced by

other students ­ have higher overall university entry rates than those who score just below 550 points ­ and

therefore have to rely on loans to nance their rst year of university.


5.2     Decomposing the dynamic dropout process

Next, we present two simple decompositions of the e ect of loan eligibility in year 2 on the probability of non-

enrollment in year 5. The rst looks at how loan eligibility a ects the likelihood of alternative enrollment

pathways that end with non-enrollment in year 5. Extending the logic of equation (3), we write


                     P (Ei5 = 0) =                                   P (Ei2 , Ei3 , Ei4 , E5i = 0),
                                     Ei2 {0,1} Ei3 {0,1} Ei4 {0,1}


where Eit (= 1 - Nit ) is an indicator for enrollment at university in year t. Starting with year 2 there are

23 = 8 possible sequences that end with non-enrollment in year 5. In panel A of Table 5, we show reduced

form models (analogous to equation 1) for all 8 sequences. The primary impact of loan eligibility is to reduce

the probability of dropping out immediately after the rst year and remaining unenrolled thereafter (the

pathway in column 1). The e ects on all the other pathways are small and statistically indistinguishable

from 0.

      Our second set of decompositions ­ presented in Panel B ­ look at the e ects of loan eligibility on se-

quences of enrollment choices characterized by the combination of university enrollment status in year 2

and outcomes in year 5. We begin in column 1, showing the impact of loan eligibility on the probability of

non-enrollment in year 5: this is -0.12 (as in Panel D of Table 3). Next, in columns 2 and 3 we show the

decomposition into pathways characterized only by enrollment status in year 2:


                         P (Ei5 = 0) = P (Ei2 = 1, Ei5 = 0) + P (Ei2 = 0, Ei5 = 0).


                                                        22
Here we see that loan eligibility leads to a small (+3.9%) increase in the probability that students enroll in year

2 but have dropped out of university by year 5, and a large (-16%) reduction in the probability of dropping

out immediately in year 2 and remaining unenrolled in university by year 5. The increase in the prevalence

of enrolling in year 2 but ultimately dropping out by year 5 contributes to the "fade out" e ect documented

in Table 3.

      Finally, in columns 4-7, we follow equation (4) and decompose non-enrollment in year 5 into 4 pathways:

two that start with university enrollment in year 2 but end with either enrollment in vocation college

(i.e., Vi5 = 1) (column 4) or non-participation in higher education (i.e., Mi5 = 1) (column 5); and two

that start with university non-enrollment in year 2 and end with either Vi5 = 1 (column 6) or Mi5 = 1

(column 7). As expected, given the ndings in Panel A, loan eligibility primarily a ects the likelihood of

dropping out immediately in year 2 and still being out of university in year 5. Moreover, the impacts on

moving to vocational college versus being out of tertiary education altogether are about the same in year 5

as they are in year 2 (see Table 3). We conclude that retakers who fail to achieve loan eligibility drop out

of university immediately and either switch to vocational college or leave education altogether. Then, they

persist with those choices over the next three years.


5.3     E ects by Family Income

Finally, we turn to the analysis of the e ects of loan eligibility on students from di erent income groups.

Given the modest size of our test retaker sample, we form two groups: students with incomes below the

40th percentile, and those with incomes from the 40th to 80th percentiles (recall that students with family

incomes in the top quintile of family income are ineligible for loans). Table 7 presents estimates of the e ect

of loan eligibility for these two groups in years 2-5, following the same format at Table 3, with results for

lower-income students in the odd-numbered columns (labeled q1,2 ) and results for richer students in the

even-numbered columns (labeled q3,4 ). The bottom rows of the table also show p-values for tests that the

intercept terms and slope coe cients (i.e., the estimates of 0 and 1 ) are the same for the two groups at

each time horizon.

      Although the estimates for the two subgroups are somewhat imprecise, they point to two interesting

patterns. First, for the lower-income subgroup, the e ect on loan eligibility on non-enrollment in years 2-5 is

relatively stable at about -20 percentage points. In contrast, for the higher-income subgroup, the e ect at year


                                                        23
2 is relatively large (-26 ppt.), but then fades almost immediately, with no impact (or even a wrong-signed

impact) in years 4 and 5 . Taken together, these patterns suggest that responses of students from higher-

income families drive the partial fade-out in the impact of loan eligibility on the pooled sample (shown by

the estimates in Table 3)

    Table 8 presents estimated models for degree attainment for the two subgroups, similar to the models

presented in Panel A of Table 4. These show that loan eligibility is associated with an estimated 16-ppt. rise

in the probability of attaining a BA degree by lower-income students (standard error = 4.7 ppt.), accompanied

by a 6.8-ppt. decline the probability of obtaining a vocational degree (standard error = 4.3 ppt.) and a 9.0-ppt.

increase in the probability of obtaining any post-secondary degree (standard error = 5.3 ppt.). The magnitude

of the BA e ect is only slightly smaller than the magnitude of the e ect on 5th-year enrollment, giving us

some con dence that loan eligibility has a relatively large e ect on students from poorer families. And, as

we have seen in earlier tables, a sizable share of the BA attainment e ect (about 40%) is o set by a reduction

in the probability of receiving a degree from a vocational college. In contrast, the estimated e ects on degree

completion for students from richer families are all small and statistically insigni cant (e.g., +3.8-ppt. e ect

on BA degree attainment, with a standard error of 7.1 ppt.). Again, these results are consistent with the

absence of any large e ect of loan eligibility for the 5th-year enrollment rate of students from these families.

    Overall, we conclude that our main ndings on loan eligibility are mainly driven by responses of students

from lower-income families. This is similar to ndings on the e ects of loan eligibility for initial university

enrollment reported by Solís (2017). Nevertheless, we caution that the sample sizes for the higher-income

group in our analysis of test retakers are small, and we cannot rule out that higher-income students exhibit

some responsiveness to loan eligibility.

    We have also examined the heterogeneity of responses by student gender. The results ­ presented in

Appendix Table B.1 ­ show no signi cant di erences between the responses of male and female students

to loan eligibility. If anything, however, the results suggest that the impacts on 5th-year enrollment and BA

degree attainment are slightly larger for males.




                                                       24
6    Conclusion

The test-based eligibility rules for student loans in Chile set the stage for credible regression discontinuity-

based designs that can help identify the causal e ects of loan eligibility on student decisions to enroll, persist,

and graduate from higher education. In this paper, we focus on the persistence dimension, using an RD design

to measure the e ects on re-enrollment and graduation for students who retook the national entrance exam

after their rst year of study. We show that access to loans increases the fraction of students with scores

around the cuto who re-enroll for a second year by about 20 percentage points. This e ect fades to around

12 percentage points by the fth year of studies, but remains highly signi cant and translates into a similar-

sized e ect on the probability of bachelor degree recipiency. Relative to the average e ect in the U.S.-based

studies summarized by Nguyen et al. (2019) ­ around a 1 percentage point impact on year-to-year persistence

per $1,000 - this impact is relatively large. Assuming maximum loan amounts of around $4,000 per year, the

gain is on the order of 3 percentage points of degree completion per $1,000, or 1.2 points per $400 (which is

roughly the equivalent of $1000 in relative income in Chile).

    We nd that about two-thirds of the reduction of dropout from university arises from a decrease in trans-

fers to vocational colleges, which have lower tuition costs and loan eligibility based on either the PSU cuto

or a minimum high school GPA threshold. The other third comes from students who stop post-secondary

schooling altogether. Examining the pathways to ultimately leaving university, we nd that the long-term

e ect of loan eligibility is driven by an immediate reduction in the fraction of students who drop out after

their rst year.

    Importantly, we also nd that once students have access to loans, the availability of grants has little or

no additional impact on persistence. We study a second sharp discontinuity in nancial aid arising from the

Bicentennial Bursary, a grant that fully o sets government-administered loans, and is available to students

enrolled at any of the Traditional Universities in Chile who score above a higher threshold than the one for

loan eligibility. The absence of any large or signi cant e ect of grant eligibility suggests that access to credit,

rather than changes in the cost of university education, is the main driver of the large impact of the loan

program. It also points to an absence of debt aversion, in contrast to some earlier studies in other settings.

    We note that there are at least two important limitations to our analysis. First, the test retakers in our

analysis have below-average high school GPA's and relatively low entrance exam scores. They also come



                                                        25
from families that have experienced recent negative income shocks. Thus, we interpret our results as most

relevant for students whose academic preparation and/or nancial position put them at relatively high risk of

dropout. A second limitation is that a large share of the enrollment response to loan eligibility in our analysis

arises because students who fail to meet the test score threshold for loan eligibility transfer to vocational

colleges, where loans can be obtained based on high school GPA. We would not necessarily expect to see

such a large university-to-vocational college substitution e ect in the absence of this feature of the loan

programs in Chile.



References

A         , J., D. A         , S. H          ,   A. P         (2016): "Evaluating Post-Secondary Aid: Enrollment, Per-

    sistence, and Projected Completion E ects," Working Paper 23015, National Bureau of Economic Research.

A         , J., D. L     ,            P. O              (2009): "Incentives and Services for College Achievement: Evi-

    dence from a Randomized Trial," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 1, 136­163.

B     , A. (2019): "Fighting for Education: Financial Aid and Degree Attainment," Journal of Labor Economics,

    37, 509­544, publisher: The University of Chicago Press.

B     , A. C., K. A. B       ,        B. L. C            (2019): "The E ect of Reduced Student Loan Borrowing on Aca-

    demic Performance and Default: Evidence from a Loan Counseling Experiment," Ph.D. thesis, Annenberg

    Institute at Brown University, publication Title: EdWorkingPapers.com.

B         F              , A. (2019): "Should I Stay or Should I Go? Neighbors' E ects on University Enrollment,"

    SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 3278251, Social Science Research Network, Rochester, NY.

B             , E. (2004): "How Financial Aid A ects Persistence," Working Paper 10242, National Bureau of

    Economic Research.

------ (2015): "Need-Based Aid and College Persistence: The E ects of the Ohio College Opportunity Grant,"

    Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 37, 102S­119S, publisher: American Educational Research As-

    sociation.




                                                                26
B       , T.         L. R                      H             (2006): Paying for Persistence. Early Results of a Louisiana Scholarship

    Program for Low-Income Parents Attending Community College, MDRC, 16 East 34th Street, 19th Floor,

    New York, NY 10016-4326.

B         , A., D. C                   ,               P. M              (2018): "Labor Market Returns to Student Loans," SSRN Scholarly

    Paper ID 3173823, Social Science Research Network, Rochester, NY.

C              , S., M. D. C                       ,              R. T          (2014): "Robust Nonparametric Con dence Intervals for

    Regression-Discontinuity Designs," Econometrica, 82, 2295­2326.

C               , B. L.        B. T. L                      (2016): "Looking beyond Enrollment: The Causal E ect of Need-Based

    Grants on College Access, Persistence, and Graduation," Journal of Labor Economics, 34, 1023­1073.

C        , S. R. (2009): "Crowded Colleges and College Crowd-Out: The Impact of Public Subsidies on the

    Two-Year College Market," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 1, 1­30.

C        , S. R., R. D             ,               L. J. T                (2020): "Where Do Students Go When For-Pro t Colleges Lose

    Federal Aid?" American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 12, 46­83.

C          , S. R.          J. S. G                           (2014): "Merit Aid, College Quality, and College Completion: Massa-

    chusetts' Adams Scholarship as an In-Kind Subsidy," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 6,

    251­285.

C              , C., D. M              ,                   D. S            (2006): "The Enrollment E ects of Merit-Based Financial Aid:

    Evidence from Georgia's HOPE Program," Journal of Labor Economics, 24, 761­786.

D          , J. T. (2019): "Born Under a Lucky Star: Financial Aid, College Completion, Labor Supply, and

    Credit Constraints," Journal of Human Resources, 54, 760­784.

D          , J. T., B. M. M                ,                L. J. T           (2019): "ProPelled: The E ects of Grants on Graduation,

    Earnings, and Welfare," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 11, 193­224.

D J             , S. L., D. A. A                       ,          B. P. M C      (2002): "Simulating the Longitudinal E ects of Changes

    in Financial Aid on Student Departure from College," The Journal of Human Resources, 37, 653­679.




                                                                                 27
D           , S.             J. S      C                (2013): "Financial Aid Policy: Lessons from Research," Working Paper

    18710, National Bureau of Economic Research.

D           , S. M. (2003): "Does Aid Matter? Measuring the E ect of Student Aid on College Attendance and

    Completion," The American Economic Review, 93, 279­288.

------ (2015): "An Economist's Perspective on Student Loans in the United States," SSRN Scholarly Paper ID

    2694441, Social Science Research Network, Rochester, NY.

F      , E. (2009): "Educational Debt Burden and Career Choice: Evidence from a Financial Aid Experiment at

    NYU Law School," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 1, 1­21.

G               , P., F. G           , A. I         ,       E. R           (2011): "College Cost and Time to Complete a Degree:

    Evidence from Tuition Discontinuities," The Review of Economics and Statistics, 94, 699­711.

G               R    , S., D. H            , R. K            ,      J. B        (2012): "Need-Based Financial Aid and College

    Persistence Experimental Evidence from Wisconsin," SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 1887826, Social Science

    Research Network, Rochester, NY.

G           , M., A. L                   ,       T. M              (2011): "Student loans: Liquidity constraint and higher edu-

    cation in South Africa," PSE Working Paper, HAL.

H     , J. C.          R. J. L                (1996): "The E ect of Sample Selection and Initial Conditions in Duration

    Models: Evidence from Experimental Data on Training," Econometrica, 64, 175­205, publisher: [Wiley,

    Econometric Society].

H      , C. T.          M. U                  (2006): "The e ects of generalized school choice on achievement and strati-

     cation: Evidence from Chile's voucher program," Journal of Public Economics, 90, 1477­1503.

I        , G. W.              T. L            (2008): "Regression discontinuity designs: A guide to practice," Journal of

    Econometrics, 142, 615­635.

L , D. S. (2008): "Randomized experiments from non-random selection in U.S. House elections," Journal of

    Econometrics, 142, 675­697.




                                                                       28
L , D. S.             T. L         (2010): "Regression Discontinuity Designs in Economics," Journal of Economic

    Literature, 48, 281­355.

L          , L.        A. M            N            (2012): "Credit Constraints in Education," Annual Review of Economics,

    4, 225­256.

------ (2016): "Chapter 8 - Student Loans and Repayment: Theory, Evidence, and Policy," in Handbook of the

    Economics of Education, ed. by E. A. Hanushek, S. Machin, and L. Woessmann, Elsevier, vol. 5, 397­478.

M      , B. M.          L. J. T            (2018): "Borrowing Trouble? Human Capital Investment with Opt-In Costs

    and Implications for the E ectiveness of Grant Aid," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 10,

    163­201.

M C         , J. (2008): "Manipulation of the running variable in the regression discontinuity design: A density

    test," Journal of Econometrics, 142, 698­714.

M           , A. M., C. N          ,         A. S        (2018): "The Returns to College Choice: Loans, Scholarships and

    Labor Outcomes," Tech. Rep. 2018:12, Uppsala University, Department of Economics.

N         , T. D., J. W. K             ,       B. J. E       (2019): "The E ects of Grant Aid on Student Persistence and

    Degree Attainment: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of the Causal Evidence," Review of Educatio-

    nal Research, 89, 831­874, publisher: American Educational Research Association.

R              , J.      C. E. R           (2011): "Constrained after college: Student loans and early-career occupatio-

    nal choices," Journal of Public Economics, 95, 149­163.

S              , M. V., X. C               , D. K        ,     C. H     (2015): "Determinants of persistence and the role

    of nancial aid: lessons from Chile," Higher Education, 1­20.

S        , J ., L. D. (2004): "Come and stay a while: does nancial aid e ect retention conditioned on enroll-

    ment at a large public university?" Economics of Education Review, 23, 459­471.

S      , A. (2013): "Does higher education cause political participation? Evidence from a regression discon-

    tinuity design," Tech. Rep. 2013:13, Working Paper, Department of Economics, Uppsala University.

S      , A. (2017): "Credit Access and College Enrollment," Journal of Political Economy, 125, 562­622.

                                                                  29
S                  , R.       T. S                    (2008): "The E ect of Credit Constraints on the College Drop-Out

    Decision: A Direct Approach Using a New Panel Study," The American Economic Review, 98, 2163­2184.

W         B       (2011): "Chile's State-Guaranteed Student Loan Program (CAE)," Tech. Rep. 70209, The World

    Bank.




7     Tables and Figures

7.1    Figures


                                                Figure 1: Derivation of Sample.




    Note: Column [1] shows the number of students enrolled in universities in the semester after their rst PSU attempt. Column [2]
divides this population into students who are ineligible or eligible for loans based on their nancial eligibility status as of year 1 and
  rst attempt PSU score. Column (3) splits the subgroup who were ineligible for loans in their rst year into those who retook the
PSU at the end of their rst year (just prior to the start of their second year), and those who did not. Column (4) splits the retakers
from column 3 into those who are nancially eligible for loans in year 2 ("pre-quali ed") and those who were not.




                                                                   30
              Figure 2: Test for Smooth Histogram of Second-attempt PSU Scores (McCrary Test).




                              100
                              80
                    Number of students
                      40      20
                              0 60




                                         300    400        500           600                700             800
                                                             PSU score in t=2
                                         bw=5


    Note: Vertical lines at 475 and 550 correspond to the score thresholds for eligibility for loans and the Bicentennial Bursary (BB),
respectively. Each dot represents the number of students in a 5-point bin of PSU scores. Solid lines represent the tted values from a
fourth-order polynomial model of the histogram t separately to each of the three intervals. Dashed lines represent 95% con dence
intervals.




                                                                  31
                                  Figure 3: Non-enrollment in Year Two (t=2) and Second-attempt PSU Score.


                           1
                           .9
                .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8
               Non-enrollment in t=2
                           .2
                           .1
                           0




                                       300       400           500           600                700                800
                                                                 PSU score in t=2
                                       bw=5


     Note: Vertical lines at 475 and 550 correspond to the score thresholds for eligibility for loans and the Bicentennial Bursary (BB),
respectively. Each dot represents the average non-enrollment rate for students in a 5-point bin of PSU scores. Solid lines represent
  tted local linear regressions, t separately to observations with scores in the intervals [425,474.5], [475,549.5], and [550,625]. Dashed
lines represent 95% con dence intervals. The sample includes all cohorts whose second-year eligibility status is observed.




                                                                     32
                           Figure 4: Non-enrollment in Third through Fifth Years (t=3,4,5) and Second-attempt PSU Score.
                                Panel [A]: Non-enrollment at t=3                        Panel [B]: Non-enrollment at t=4
               1




                                                                                                                                1
               .9




                                                                                                                                .9
    .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8




                                                                                                                     .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8
   Non-enrollment in t=3




                                                                                                                    Non-enrollment in t=4
               .2




                                                                                                                                .2
               .1




                                                                                                                                .1
               0




                                                                                                                                0
                           300     400      500           600                          700         800                                      300          400         500           600    700   800
                                              PSU score in t=2                                                                                                         PSU score in t=2
                           bw=5                                                                                                             bw=5



                                                                                      Panel [C]: Non-enrollment at t=5
                                                                   1
                                                                   .9
                                                        .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8
                                                       Non-enrollment in t=5
                                                                   .2
                                                                   .1
                                                                   0




                                                                               300           400         500           600                         700         800
                                                                                                           PSU score in t=2
                                                                               bw=5



     Note: See notes to Figure 3. Sample for panel [A] includes all cohorts whose third-year eligibility status is observed. Sample
for panel [B] includes all cohorts whose fourth-year eligibility status is observed. Sample for panel [C] includes all cohorts whose
 fth-year eligibility status is observed.




                                                                                                          33
Figure 5: Estimated Non-enrollment Rates for Students with Scores Just Above/Below Eligibility Threshold
and Implied Causal E ects in Years 2-5.
               .6




                                                                                                 0
                                        Below 475          Above 475                                                        Difference at 475
                       .5
    Non-enrolment rate




                                                                                       Non-enrolment rate
                                                                                                     -.1
            .4




                                                                                       -.2
  .3           .2




                                                                                                 -.3
                                    2                3                   4    5                                         2                    3                   4    5
                                                    Years after high school                                                                 Years after high school
                            Level                                                                           Effect at the cutoff



Note: The gure on the left shows the estimated non-enrollment rates in years 2-5 for students with scores just below and just above
the 475-point threshold for loan eligibility. The gure on the right shows the implied causal e ects of achieving loan eligibility on
non-enrollment rates in years 2-5.




                                                                                  34
7.2    Tables


                                                 Table 1: Descriptive Statistics

                                       Enrolled in t=1                    Retakers in t=2                    Analysis Sample

                                    Mean              S. D.            Mean              S. D.            Mean               S. D.
Variable                             (1)               (2)              (3)               (4)              (5)                (6)
PSU (1st attempt)                   566.5            (87.3)            600.0             (91.1)           529.7              (93.9)
1st PSU>=475                        0.88             (0.33)             0.86             (0.35)            0.60              (0.49)
Fin. quali ed t=1                   0.65             (0.48)             0.09             (0.29)            0.33              (0.47)
Retake PSU in t=2                   0.06             (0.24)             1.00                -              1.00                 -
PSU (2nd attempt)                   600.5            (78.1)            606.0             (89.7)           543.2              (92.8)
Change in PSU                       4.55            (33.95)             5.95            (36.43)           13.58             (38.78)
High school GPA                     5.83             (0.49)             5.92             (0.49)            5.71              (0.49)
Public high school                  0.29             (0.45)             0.13             (0.34)            0.31              (0.46)
Voucher high school                 0.49              (0.5)             0.33             (0.47)            0.52               (0.5)
Private high school                 0.21             (0.41)             0.53              (0.5)            0.16              (0.36)
Age in t=0                          19.37            (2.27)            19.09              (1.6)           19.38              (2.23)
Female                              0.52              (0.5)             0.47              (0.5)            0.52               (0.5)
Quintile in t=1                     2.61             (1.39)             4.21             (1.42)            3.34              (1.71)
Quintile in t=2                     2.53             (1.37)             3.33             (1.54)            2.45              (1.16)
Household size                      4.35             (1.85)             4.39             (2.07)            4.35              (1.85)
Father in formal job                0.60             (0.49)             0.73             (0.45)            0.57              (0.49)
Mother in formal job                0.39             (0.49)             0.47              (0.5)            0.40              (0.49)
Mother College                      0.22             (0.41)             0.49              (0.5)            0.22              (0.42)
Father College                      0.18             (0.39)             0.40             (0.49)            0.20               (0.4)
Father dropout                      0.30             (0.46)             0.18             (0.39)            0.29              (0.45)
Mother dropout                      0.28             (0.45)             0.18             (0.38)            0.27              (0.44)
Observations                                596,611                            17,626                               3,627
    Note: The rst two columns describe students who were enrolled in university in the term after their rst PSU attempt. Columns
(3) and (4) describe the subset of rst-year enrollees who retook the PSU in the interval between their rst and second years of
university. Columns (5) and (6) describe the analysis sample. This is the subset of retakers who were ineligible for loans in their rst
year, but were nancially eligible (i.e., pre-quali ed) for loans in their second year. High school GPA ranges from 4 to 7 in intervals
of 0.1. Quintiles are means of family income quintiles, ranging from 1 (poorest) to 5 (richest). See text for further information.




                                                                  35
Table 2: Tests for Continuity of Means of Predetermined Characteristics at Cuto s for Loan and Bursary
Eligibility

                                             Models at 475-Point Cuto                         Models at 550-Point Cuto

                                            (1)            (2)             (3)                (4)            (5)             (6)
Covariate                               Intercept         Jump         (Std. Err.)        Intercept         Jump         (Std. Err.)

First attempt PSU                         457.08          -8.17           (3.03)           535.00           -6.20          (1.74)
Income quintile = 1                        0.44           -0.04           (0.04)            0.57             0.02          (0.03)
Income quintile = 2                        0.26           0.04            (0.04)            0.43            -0.02          (0.03)
Income quintile = 3                        0.17           0.02            (0.03)              -                -              -
Income quintile = 4                        0.13           -0.02           (0.03)              -                -              -
Average income quintile                    1.99            0.01           (0.09)            1.43            -0.02          (0.03)
Female                                     0.60            0.00           (0.04)            0.55            -0.01          (0.03)
Age                                       19.59           -0.18           (0.23)            19.10            0.05          (0.11)
High school GPA                            5.50           -0.01           (0.04)            5.90            -0.03          (0.03)
Household size                             4.79           -0.20           (0.17)            4.41             0.14          (0.11)
Private high school                        0.03            0.02           (0.02)            0.02             0.00          (0.01)
Voucher high school                        0.54            0.00           (0.04)            0.50            -0.01          (0.03)
Public high school                         0.41           -0.02           (0.04)            0.48             0.01          (0.03)
In public health system                    0.69            0.03           (0.04)            0.64             0.00          (0.03)
Mother has no high school                  0.34            0.02           (0.04)            0.38            -0.02          (0.03)
Father has no high school                  0.40            0.05           (0.04)            0.40             0.02          (0.03)
Mother has univ. degree                    0.10            0.02           (0.03)            0.00             0.02          (0.02)
Father has univ. degree                    0.07            0.05           (0.03)            0.08             0.00          (0.02)
Mother in formal work                      0.35           -0.01           (0.04)            0.29             0.03          (0.03)
Father in formal work                      0.53           -0.04           (0.04)            0.45             0.01          (0.03)
Mother is housewife                        0.41            0.04           (0.04)            0.48             0.00          (0.03)
Observations                                              1,826                                             3,141
    Note: Table shows estimation results for equation 1 using the predetermined characteristic in the row heading as the dependent
variable. Columns 1-3 present results for model estimated around 475-point threshold for loan eligibility. Columns 4-6 present
results for model estimated around 550-point threshold for Bicentennial Bursary eligibility. Sample for models at 475 point cuto
includes university students with second-attempt PSU scores between 400 and 549.5 who were nancially quali ed for loans (i.e.,
with family incomes in quintiles 1-4). Sample for models at 550 point cuto includes students enrolled at Traditional Universities in
their rst year with second-attempt PSU scores between 475 and 625 who were ineligible for a Bicentennial Bursary (BB) in their
  rst year but were nancially quali ed for a BB (i.e., with family incomes in quintiles 1-2) in their second year. Intercepts (reported
in columns 1 and 4) represent the estimated means of the dependent variable for students with scores just below the cuto . Jumps
(reported in columns 2 and 5) represent the estimated discontinuities in the means of the dependent variable at the cuto . Robust
standard errors for estimated jumps are reported in columns 3 and 6.




                                                                  36
             Table 3: Estimated E ects of Loan Eligibility on University Non-enrollment in Years 2-5.

                             First Stage                                  Reduced Form Models

                                                                               Vocational             No Post-Secondary
                            Loan Eligible          Not Enrolled
                                                                               Enrollment                Enrollment
                              in Year t             in Year t
                                                                                in Year t                 in Year t

                                  (1)             (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)          (6)           (7)
    A. Second Year:
 1(P SU2       475)              1.00          -0.21         -0.20        -0.14         -0.14        -0.071        -0.066
                                  (.)           (0.040)       (0.040)      (0.034)       (0.034)      (0.032)       (0.031)
 Intercept                       0.00          0.44          0.43          0.26         0.26          0.18          0.17
                                  (.)          (0.031)       (0.031)       (0.029)      (0.029)       (0.025)       (0.025)
 Observations                   1,826            1,826        1,826         1,826        1,826         1,826         1,826
   B. Third Year:
 1(P SU2       475)            0.90            -0.12         -0.11        -0.16         -0.16          0.035         0.042
                               (0.015)          (0.044)       (0.044)      (0.039)       (0.039)      (0.033)       (0.032)
 Intercept                     0.097           0.43          0.42          0.32         0.32          0.11         0.097
                                (0.011)        (0.034)       (0.035)       (0.032)      (0.033)       (0.024)       (0.024)
 Observations                   1,603            1,603        1,603         1,603        1,603         1,603         1,603
   C. Fourth Year:
 1(P SU2       475)            0.90            -0.093        -0.090       -0.086        -0.088        -0.0075       -0.0027
                               (0.017)         (0.048)       (0.048)       (0.043)       (0.043)      (0.038)       (0.038)
 Intercept                     0.097           0.47          0.46          0.29         0.31          0.18          0.15
                                (0.013)        (0.037)       (0.038)       (0.034)      (0.035)       (0.029)       (0.030)
 Observations                   1,390            1,390        1,390         1,390        1,390         1,390         1,390
   D. Fifth Year:
 1(P SU2       475)            0.86             -0.12        -0.13        -0.092        -0.100        -0.031        -0.027
                               (0.021)          (0.053)      (0.053)       (0.044)       (0.044)      (0.047)       (0.047)
 Intercept                     0.14            0.52          0.51          0.26         0.29          0.26          0.22
                               (0.015)         (0.040)       (0.042)       (0.035)      (0.037)       (0.037)       (0.039)
 Observations                   1,157            1,157        1,157         1,157        1,157         1,157         1,157
 Covariates                                                     x                          x                           x
 Cohort Fixed E ects                                            x                          x                           x
     Note: Column 1 shows estimated rst-stage model for e ect of passing 475-point threshold at second attempt of PSU on loan
eligibility at di erent time horizons. Columns 2-7 show estimated reduced-form models for university non-enrollment (columns
2-3) vocational college enrollment (columns 4-5) and no post-secondary enrollment (columns 6-7). Samples include students with
second-attempt PSU scores between 400 and 549.5 (75-point bandwidth) whose eligibility status is observed at the speci c time
horizon. Robust standard errors in parentheses. *: p-value< .1; **: p-value< .05; ***: p-value< .01.




                                                             37
              Table 4: Estimated Regression Discontinuity Models for Degree Attainment.
   [A]. Reduced-Form Models for E ects of Achieving Loan Eligibility in Second Attempt PSU (475-point
cuto ).

                                                                                    Vocational                        Any Higher
                                             University
                                                                                     College                         Educ. Degree
                                       (1)                (2)                 (3)                (4)                (5)            (6)
 1(P SU2        475)               0.12                 0.11                -0.048          -0.050                 0.071          0.059
                                   (0.039)              (0.038)             (0.035)         (0.035)               (0.043)        (0.042)
 Intercept                         0.25                 0.26                0.23            0.24                  0.48           0.50
                                   (0.027)              (0.026)             (0.027)         (0.028)               (0.032)        (0.031)
 Observations                       1,826               1,826                1,826              1,826              1,826          1,826
 Covariates                                               x                                       x                                 x
 Cohort Fixed E ects                                      x                                       x                                 x
   [B]. Reduced-Form Models for E ects of Achieving Bursary Eligibility in Second Attempt PSU (550-point
cuto ).

                                  Traditional                     Private                  Vocational                     Any Higher
                                  University                     University                 College                       Educ. degree
                                 (1)            (2)             (3)          (4)          (5)             (6)             (7)      (8)
 1(P SU2        550)           0.028           0.032       0.014            0.012       -0.014          -0.014         0.027      0.030
                              (0.031)         (0.029)     (0.022)          (0.022)      (0.019)         (0.019)       (0.033)    (0.030)
 Intercept                    0.32            0.28        0.12             0.12        0.093            0.090        0.54        0.49
                              (0.020)         (0.019)     (0.014)          (0.014)      (0.014)          (0.014)     (0.022)     (0.021)
 Observations                  3,141           3,141       3,141           3,141         3,141           3,141        3,141       3,141
 Covariates                                      x                           x                             x
 Cohort Fixed E ects                             x                           x                             x
      Note: Table presents estimated reduced-form models for attainment of degrees from university, vocational college, or any
form of higher education. Models in panel [A] show reduced-form e ect of achieving loan eligibility in second PSU attempt (i.e.,
scoring 475 or above). Models in panel [B] show reduced-form e ect of achieving eligibility for Bicentennial Bursary in second PSU
attempt (i.e., scoring 550 or above). Sample in panel [A] includes university students with second-attempt PSU scores between 400
and 549.5 who were nancially quali ed for loans (i.e., with family incomes in quintiles 1-4). Sample in panel [B] includes students
enrolled at Traditional Universities in their rst year with second-attempt PSU scores between 475 and 625 who were ineligible for
a Bicentennial Bursary (BB) in their rst year but were nancially quali ed for a BB (i.e., with family incomes in quintiles 1-2) in
their second year. Robust standard errors in parentheses. *: p < 10%, **: p < 5%, ***: p < 1%.




                                                                      38
Table 5: Estimated E ects of Eligibility for Bicentennial Bursary on Non-enrollment at Traditional Universi-
ties in Years 2-5.

                            First Stage                                       Reduced Form Models

                                                 Not enrolled          Private Univ.       Vocational          No Post-Secondary
                           Loan Eligible
                                                at Trad. Univ.          Enrollment         Enrollment             Enrollment
                             in year t
                                                   in year t             in Year t          in Year t              in Year t
                                 (1)                  (2)                   (3)                 (4)                     (5)
     A. Second Year:
 1(P SU2       550)             1.00                 0.023                 0.041              -0.024                  0.0053
                                 (.)                (0.030)               (0.026)             (0.015)                 (0.017)
 Intercept                      0.00                0.30                  0.17               0.061                   0.069
                                 (.)                (0.021)               (0.017)             (0.012)                 (0.012)
 Observations                  3,141                 3,141                 3,141               3,141                   3,141
   B. Third Year:
 1(P SU2       550)           0.96                  0.0023                0.046              -0.045                   0.0010
                              (0.0091)              (0.033)               (0.027)             (0.018)                 (0.019)
 Intercept                   0.045                  0.36                  0.19                0.10                   0.072
                             (0.0091)               (0.023)               (0.018)             (0.015)                 (0.014)
 Observations                  2,812                 2,812                 2,812               2,812                   2,812
   C. Fourth Year:
 1(P SU2       550)           0.93                   0.016                0.0094              -0.019                   0.025
                              (0.012)               (0.036)               (0.029)             (0.021)                 (0.023)
 Intercept                   0.074                  0.40                  0.21                0.10                   0.086
                              (0.012)               (0.024)               (0.020)             (0.016)                 (0.015)
 Observations                  2,504                 2,504                 2,504               2,504                   2,504
   D. Fifth Year:
 1(P SU2       550)           0.91                  -0.045                0.0051              -0.021                  -0.029
                              (0.014)               (0.039)               (0.031)             (0.024)                 (0.027)
 Intercept                   0.094                  0.47                  0.21                0.11                    0.15
                              (0.014)               (0.027)               (0.021)             (0.018)                 (0.020)
 Observations                  2,176                 2,176                 2,176               2,176                   2,176

    Note: Column 1 shows estimated rst-stage model for e ect of passing 550-point threshold at second attempt of PSU on Bicen-
tennial Bursary (BB) eligibility at di erent time horizons. Columns 2-7 show estimated reduced-form models for non-enrollment at a
Traditional University (column 2), enrollment at a Private University (column 3), enrollment at a vocational college (columns 4) and
no post-secondary enrollment (column 5). Samples include students enrolled at Traditional Universities in their rst year who were
ineligible for BB in the rst year, with second-attempt PSU scores between 475 and 625 (75-point bandwidth) and family incomes as
of year 2 in quintiles 1-2, whose eligibility status is observed at the speci c time horizon. Robust standard errors in parentheses. *:
p-value< .1; **: p-value< .05; ***: p-value< .01.




                                                                  39
    Table 6: Decomposition of the E ect of Loan Eligibility on Pathways to Non-enrollment in Year 5.
Panel [A]: Temporal Decomposition:

                      P(E5 = 0,     P(E5 = 0,         P(E5 = 0,         P(E5 = 0,        P(E5 = 0,        P(E5 = 0,       P(E5 = 0,   P(E5 = 0,
                       E4 = 0,       E4 = 1,           E4 = 0,           E4 = 0,          E4 = 1,          E4 = 1,         E4 = 0 ,    E4 = 1 ,
                       E3 = 0,       E3 = 0,           E3 = 1,           E3 = 0,          E3 = 1,          E3 = 0,         E3 = 1 ,    E3 = 1 ,
                       E2 = 0)       E2 = 0)           E2 = 0)           E2 = 1)          E2 = 0)          E2 = 1)         E2 = 1)     E2 = 1)
                          (1)           (2)              (3)                 (4)                (5)              (6)         (7)          (8)
 1(P SU2      475)     -0.13
                                     -0.0061            -0.014             0.016             -0.0075        -0.0034        0.0038        0.023
                        (0.046)      (0.0061)          (0.0092)           (0.025)            (0.0091)       (0.0022)       (0.024)      (0.030)
 Intercept             0.30           0.0055            0.015             0.050               0.012          0.000         0.061       0.075
                       (0.038)       (0.0054)          (0.0091)            (0.016)           (0.0074)       (0.000)         (0.017)     (0.022)
 Observations            1,157         1,157            1,157              1,157               1,157            1,157       1,157       1,157
Panel [B]: Alternative Activity Decomposition:

                                        P(E5 = 0,          P(E5 = 0,               P(V5 = 1,           P(M5 = 1,        P(V5 = 1,     P(M5 = 1,
                        P(E5 = 0)
                                         E2 = 1)            E2 = 0)                 E2 = 1)             E2 = 1)          E2 = 0)       E2 = 0)
                            (1)                (2)                (3)                  (4)                (5)              (6)           (7)
 1(P SU2      475)        -0.12            0.039               -0.16                 0.0036              0.035          -0.096         -0.067
                          (0.053)         (0.043)               (0.047)              (0.028)            (0.035)          (0.037)       (0.037)
 Intecept                0.52             0.19                 0.33                0.078                0.11             0.18          0.15
                         (0.040)          (0.030)              (0.039)              (0.019)             (0.025)          (0.032)       (0.032)
 Observations              1,157              1,157             1,157                1,157               1,157            1,157         1,157

     Note: Table shows reduced-form estimates of the e ects of passing 475-point threshold at second attempt of PSU on various
pathways to non-enrollment in year 5. In panel [A], there are 8 pathways, each described by university enrollment status in years 2-4,
which all end with non-enrollment in year 5. For example, the pathway in column 1 is the sequence of enrollments (E2 = 0, E3 =
0, E4 = 0), representing students who leave university in year 2 and never return in years 3-5. Panel [B] presents decompositions
based on the student's activities in years 2 and 5. For reference, column 1 shows the reduced-form e ect of loan eligibility on
non-enrollment in year 5. Columns 2-3 present a decomposition based on enrollment status in year 2 (either E2 = 1 or E2 = 0).
Columns 4-7 present a decomposition based on enrollment status in year 2 (either E2 = 1 or E2 = 0) and the student's alternative
activity in year 5 (either enrolled in vocational college, V5 = 1, or not enrolled in any higher education M5 = 1). Samples include
students with second-attempt PSU scores between 400 and 549.5 (75-point bandwidth) whose eligibility status in year 5 is observed.
Robust standard errors in parentheses. *: p-value< .1; **: p-value< .05; ***: p-value< .01.




                                                                        40
Table 7: Estimated E ects of Loan Eligibility on University Non-enrollment in Years 2-5 by Income Quintile.

                               First Stage                                    Reduced Form Models

                                                                                    Vocational             No Post-Secondary
                             Loan Eligible              Not Enrolled
                                                                                    Enrollment                Enrollment
                               in Year t                 in Year t
                                                                                     in Year t                 in Year t
                           q1,2          q3,4         q1,2           q3,4        q1,2          q3,4         q1,2          q3,4

                             (1)         (2)          (3)            (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)           (8)
     A. Second Year:
 1(P SU2     475)          1.00          1.00      -0.19         -0.26         -0.15         -0.12        -0.039        -0.14
                            (.)           (.)       (0.049)       (0.069)       (0.042)      (0.059)      (0.039)       (0.055)
 Intercept                0.00           0.00       0.45          0.43          0.28         0.23         0.17          0.20
                            (.)           (.)       (0.038)       (0.057)       (0.035)      (0.050)      (0.030)       (0.049)
 Observations             1,198          628         1,198          628          1,198         628         1,198          628
   B. Third Year:
 1(P SU2 475)            0.91          0.89        -0.16          -0.041       -0.21         -0.048        0.046        0.0065
                         (0.023)       (0.035)      (0.055)       (0.075)       (0.048)      (0.065)      (0.041)       (0.054)
 Intercept              0.089          0.11         0.48          0.32          0.37         0.21         0.11          0.11
                         (0.023)       (0.035)      (0.042)       (0.058)       (0.040)      (0.053)      (0.029)       (0.041)
 Observations             1,051          552         1,051          552          1,051         552         1,051          552
   C. Fourth Year:
 1(P SU2 475)            0.92          0.88        -0.17           0.063        -0.11        -0.042       -0.061          0.10
                         (0.025)       (0.043)      (0.058)       (0.084)       (0.053)      (0.071)      (0.047)       (0.065)
 Intercept              0.085          0.12         0.55          0.31          0.33         0.20         0.22          0.11
                         (0.025)       (0.043)      (0.044)       (0.063)       (0.042)      (0.057)      (0.036)       (0.046)
 Observations              929           461          929           461           929          461          929           461
   D. Fifth Year:
 1(P SU2 475)            0.86          0.86        -0.20           0.043        -0.11        -0.052       -0.087         0.095
                         (0.031)       (0.049)      (0.064)       (0.096)       (0.052)      (0.082)      (0.059)       (0.079)
 Intercept               0.14          0.14         0.58          0.38          0.27         0.24         0.31          0.14
                         (0.031)       (0.049)      (0.047)       (0.073)       (0.042)      (0.065)      (0.046)       (0.060)
 Observations              783           374          783           374           783          374          783           374
    E. P-values for test of homogeneity in intercept (0 ) and jump (1 ) coe cients
                         0             1             0               1            0             1             0              1
 Second Year             -              -           0.398         0.209         0.224          0.361         0.303         0.093
 Third Year            0.304          0.304         0.034         0.121         0.030          0.048         0.456         0.290
 Fourth Year           0.259          0.259         0.011         0.032         0.057          0.241         0.058         0.042
 Fifth Year            0.486          0.486         0.029         0.040         0.345          0.274         0.032         0.057
    Note: Columns 1-2 show estimated rst-stage model for e ect of passing 475-point threshold at second attempt of PSU on loan
eligibility at di erent time horizons for students with family incomes in quintiles 1-2 (column 1) or quintiles 3-4 (column 2). Re-
maining columns show estimated reduced-form models for university non-enrollment (columns 3-4), vocational college enrollment
(columns 5-6), and no post-secondary enrollment (columns 7-8) for the two income groups. Samples include students with second-
attempt PSU scores between 400 and 549.5 (75-point bandwidth) whose eligibility status is observed at the speci c time horizon.
Panel E shows the p-values for test of equality of the estimated intercept and jump coe cients of the models for students in the
lower and higher-income groups. Robust standard errors in parentheses. *: p-value< .1; **: p-value< .05; ***: p-value< .01.



                                                                41
             Table 8: Estimated Reduced-Form Models for Degree Attainment by Income Quintile.

                                Graduation from                       Graduation from                     Graduation from
                                    College                         Vocational Education                  Higher education
                               q1,2             q3,4             q1,2                q3,4               q1,2              q3,4
                               (1)              (2)               (3)                (4)                 (5)              (6)
 1(P SU2      475)           0.16              0.038            -0.068             -0.0077             0.090             0.030
                             (0.047)          (0.071)           (0.043)            (0.062)             (0.053)          (0.077)
 Intercept                   0.22             0.31             0.24                0.22               0.47              0.53
                             (0.031)          (0.051)          (0.034)             (0.047)            (0.038)           (0.058)
 Observations                 1,198             628             1,198                628                1,198             628
 p-value 1                                     0.104                                0.225                                0.274
 p-value 0                                     0.096                                0.322                                0.210
     Note: Table presents estimated reduced-form models for e ect of passing 475-point threshold at second attempt of PSU on
attainment of degrees from university, vocational college, or any form of higher education for students with family incomes in
quintiles 1-2 (columns 1,3,5) or quintiles 3-4 (columns 2,4,6). Sample includes university students with second-attempt PSU scores
between 400 and 549.5 who were nancially quali ed for loans with family incomes in indicated quintile group. Robust standard
errors in parentheses. *: p-value< .1; **: p-value< .05; ***: p-value< .01.




                                                               42
Appendix

A                                 Additional Results on Validity of Design and Robustness of Estimates

A.1                                Balance of covariates

                                                                Figure A.1: Balance of Covariates. Graphical form in t = 2.


                                                                                            800
               7




                                                                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                            700




                                                                                                                                                                           .8
                 6.5
 High School GPA




                                                                              PSU score in t=1
                                                                                         600




                                                                                                                                                         Female Ratio
                                                                                                                                                                  .6
         6




                                                                               500




                                                                                                                                                          .4
               5.5




                                                                                            400




                                                                                                                                                                           .2
                                                                                            300
               5




                                                                                                                                                                           0
                            300      400   500           600      700   800                                300    400   500           600    700   800                                  300    400   500           600    700   800
                                             PSU score in t=2                                                             PSU score in t=2                                                             PSU score in t=2
                            bw=5                                                                           bw=5                                                                         bw=5
               22




                                                                                            1




                                                                                                                                                                           1       .8
                                                                                                      .8
               21




                                                                                                                                                           Mother college graduate
                                                                              Father college graduate




                                                                                                                                                                           .6
                                                                                              .6
 Age
  20




                                                                                                                                                                  .4
                                                                                    .4
               19




                                                                                                                                                         .2
                                                                                            .2




                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                            0
               18




                            300      400   500           600      700   800                                300    400   500           600    700   800                                  300    400   500           600    700   800
                                             PSU score in t=2                                                             PSU score in t=2                                                             PSU score in t=2
                            bw=5                                                                           bw=5                                                                         bw=5
               20




                                                                                            18




                                                                                                                                                                           4
                                                                                                    16
                                                                              Mother Education (Years)
 Father Education (Years)
                    15




                                                                                                                                                                           3
                                                                                                                                                         Quintile in t=2
                                                                                         14
    10




                                                                                                                                                                           2
                                                                               12           10
               5




                                                                                                                                                                           1




                            300      400   500           600      700   800                                300    400   500           600    700   800                                  300    400   500           600    700   800
                                             PSU score in t=2                                                             PSU score in t=2                                                             PSU score in t=2
                            bw=5                                                                           bw=5                                                                         bw=5
               7




                                                                                            1




                                                                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                           .8
                                                                                            .8
               6




                                                                                                                                                         Voucher high school
                                                                              Public high school
 Household Size




                                                                                                                                                                       .6
                                                                                           .6
           5




                                                                                                                                                              .4
                                                                                 .4
  4




                                                                                                                                                                           .2
                                                                                            .2
               3




                                                                                                                                                                           0
               2




                                                                                            0




                            300      400   500           600      700   800                                300    400   500           600    700   800                                  300    400   500           600    700   800
                                             PSU score in t=2                                                             PSU score in t=2                                                             PSU score in t=2
                            bw=5                                                                           bw=5                                                                         bw=5




     Note: Vertical lines at 475 and 550 correspond to the score thresholds for eligibility for loans and the Bicentennial Bursary (BB),
respectively. Each dot represents the average value of each variable for students in a 5-point bin of PSU scores. Solid lines represent
  tted local polynomials, t separately to observations with scores in the intervals [320,474.5], [475,549.5], and [550,820]. Dashed
lines represent 95% con dence intervals. The sample includes all cohorts whose second-year eligibility status is observed.


                                                                                                                            43
A.2                         Sensitivity to Bandwidth


             Figure A.2: Sensitivity for Non-Enrollment Rate. Jump for di erent bandwidths
 Panel [A]: Non-Enrollment t=2                          Panel [B]: Non-Enrollment t=3
                0




                                                                                                0
                      -.1




                                                                                                  -.1
   Jump at the Cutoff




                                                                                   Jump at the Cutoff
          -.2




                                                                                       -.2
                -.3




                                                                                                -.3
                -.4




                                                                                                -.4
                                 50                 100               150   200                                  50                 100               150   200
                                                          bandwidth                                                                       bandwidth
                            Non-enrollment in t=2                                                           Non-enrollment in t=3



 Panel [C]: Non-Enrollment t=4                                                    Panel [D]: Non-Enrollment t=5
                                                                                                0
                0




                                                                                                      -.1
                  -.1
   Jump at the Cutoff




                                                                                   Jump at the Cutoff
                                                                                          -.2
       -.2




                                                                                                -.3
                -.3
                -.4




                                                                                                -.4




                                 50                 100               150   200                                  50                 100               150   200
                                                          bandwidth                                                                       bandwidth
                            Non-enrollment in t=4                                                           Non-enrollment in t=5



    Note: Each gure shows a series of RD models estimated using di erent bandwidths (bw). Models are estimated including
students with second-attempt PSU scores between -bw and bw and a rectangular kernel. The vertical line indicates the bandwidth
used throughout the paper (75). Short- and long-dashed lines represent 90% and 95% con dence intervals.




                                                                             44
A.3     Sensitivity of Estimates to Bandwidth and Choice of Kernel


Table A.1: Reduced-Form Models of E ect of Loan Eligibility on Non-enrollment Using CCT Optimal Band-
width and Triangular Kernel

                                    Local Linear uniform kernel                       CCT Bandwidth/triangular kernel
                           Basic                            +covariates                                              +covariates
                                          +covariates                          Basic Spec.        +covariates
                           Spec.                             +Year F.E.                                               +Year F.E.

                             (1)              (2)                (3)                (4)                (5)                (6)
      A. Second Year Year:
 1(P SU2       475)       -0.21            -0.21              -0.20              -0.18              -0.14              -0.18
                           (0.040)          (0.040)            (0.040)            (0.056)           (0.058)             (0.056)

 bw beta                     75.0            75.0               75.0               73.7               81.7               73.7
 bw bias                                                                           46.2               49.2               46.2
   B. Third Year:
 1(P SU2       475)       -0.12            -0.11              -0.11               -0.081             -0.062             -0.066
                           (0.044)          (0.044)            (0.044)            (0.055)            (0.067)            (0.067)

 bw beta                     75.0            75.0               75.0               99.8               80.4               79.8
 bw bias                                                                           57.8               48.6               48.1
   C. Fourth Year:
 1(P SU2       475)       -0.093            -0.093             -0.090             -0.084             -0.087             -0.082
                          (0.048)           (0.048)            (0.048)            (0.060)            (0.066)            (0.063)

 bw beta                     75.0            75.0               75.0               88.8               91.4               103.2
 bw bias                                                                           56.1               57.1               61.6
   D. Fifth Year:
 1(P SU2       475)       -0.12             -0.13              -0.13              -0.17             -0.19               -0.19
                          (0.053)           (0.053)            (0.053)            (0.076)           (0.083)             (0.083)

 bw beta                     75.0            75.0               75.0               66.2               63.7               64.8
 bw bias                                                                           43.9               42.5               43.4
Note: Table shows estimated reduced-form models for the e ect of passing the 475-point threshold at the second PSU attempt on
university non-enrollment at di erent time horizons (Panels A-D). Models in columns 1-3 are estimated using a 75-point bandwidth
and a rectangular kernel. Models in columns 4-6 are estimated using a bandwidth selected by the RDrobust procedure (Calonico et
al., 2014) and a triangular kernel. Columns 1 and 4 present baseline models with no added covariates. Models in columns 2 and 5
include the covariates listed in Table 2. Models in columns 3 and 6 include the covariates listed in Table 2 and xed e ects for each
cohort. Robust standard errors in parentheses. *: p-value< .1; **: p-value< .05; ***: p-value< .01.




                                                                45
B     Heterogeneity by Gender


               Figure B.1: Non-enrollment in Year Two and Second-attempt PSU Score by Gender
                       Panel [A]: Female

                                        1
                                        .9
                             .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8
                            Non-enrollment in t=2
                                        .2
                                        .1
                                        0




                                                    300                400   500            600    700    800
                                                                              PSU score in t=2
                                                    Female = 1; bw=5



                         Panel [B]: Male
                                        1
                                        .9
                             .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8
                            Non-enrollment in t=2
                                        .2
                                        .1
                                        0




                                                    300            400       500           600    700    800
                                                                               PSU score in t=2
                                                    Female = 0; bw=5


    Note: RD estimates of the non-enrollment rate in the second year by gender. Vertical lines at 475 and 550 correspond to the score
thresholds for eligibility for loans and the Bicentennial Bursary (BB), respectively. Each dot represents the average non-enrollment
rate for students in a 5-point bin of PSU scores. Solid lines represent tted local linear regressions, t separately to observations with
scores in the intervals [425,474.5], [475,549.5], and [550,625]. Dashed lines represent 95% con dence intervals. The sample includes
all cohorts whose second-year eligibility status is observed.




                                                                                  46
     Table B.1: Estimated Reduced-Form Models for Non-enrollment and Degree Attainment by Gender.

                             First Stage                                             Reduced Form

                                                                                      Vocational                No Post-Secondary
                            Loan Eligible                    Not Enrolled
                                                                                      Enrollment                   Enrollment
                              in Year t                       in Year t
                                                                                       in Year t                    in Year t
                         Female           Male         Female            Male      Female       Male           Female       Male

                           (1)             (2)              (3)          (4)         (5)             (6)         (7)        (8)
     A. Second Year:
 1(P SU2       475)        1.00           1.00        -0.20          -0.21        -0.16            -0.090      -0.036     -0.12
                            (.)            (.)         (0.052)        (0.063)      (0.046)         (0.051)     (0.039)    (0.053)
 Intercept                 0.00           0.00         0.45          0.43          0.31            0.18        0.14       0.25
                            (.)            (.)         (0.040)       (0.051)       (0.038)         (0.044)     (0.031)    (0.044)
 Observations             1,067           759              1,067         759        1,067           759         1,067       759
   B. Fifth Year:
 1(P SU2       475)      0.84            0.90          -0.091        -0.14         -0.054          -0.14       -0.037     -0.0028
                         (0.034)         (0.041)       (0.069)       (0.083)       (0.056)         (0.071)     (0.062)    (0.073)
 Intercept               0.16            0.099         0.53          0.49          0.24            0.29        0.29       0.21
                         (0.034)         (0.041)       (0.051)       (0.064)       (0.043)         (0.059)     (0.048)    (0.058)
 Observations              658             499              658        499           658             499         658        499
 p-value 12nd
                                            -                         0.441                         0.161                  0.116
 p-value 02nd
                                            -                         0.353                         0.032                  0.046
 p-value 15th
                                          0.187                       0.338                         0.202                  0.368
 p-value 05th
                                          0.187                       0.325                         0.278                  0.151

                                  Graduation from                          Graduation from                     Graduation from
                                      College                            Vocational Education                  Higher education
                             Female                 Male            Female                 Male              Female         Male
                                  (1)                (2)              (3)                   (4)                (5)           (6)
     C. Degree Attainment:
 1(P SU2       475)          0.096                 0.14             -0.068             -0.0076                0.028         0.13
                             (0.052)               (0.058)          (0.047)            (0.052)               (0.056)       (0.067)
 Intercept                   0.27                  0.22             0.28               0.16                  0.55          0.39
                             (0.036)               (0.039)          (0.036)            (0.042)               (0.040)       (0.050)
 Num. Obs.                       1,067               759             1,067                  759               1,067          759
 p-value 1                                          0.304                                  0.211                            0.143
 p-value 0                                          0.220                                  0.042                            0.025
    Note: In Panel A and B show the e ects on no-enrollment in second and fth year by gender. Columns 1-2 shows estimated rst-
stage models for e ect of passing 475-point threshold at second attempt of PSU on loan eligibility at di erent time horizons. Models
in columns 3-8 show estimated reduced-form models for university non-enrollment (columns 3-4), vocational college enrollment
(columns 5-6), and no post-secondary enrollment (columns 7-8). Panel C shows reduced-form models for e ect of passing 475-point
threshold at second attempt of PSU on degree attainment from university (columns 1-2), vocational college (columns 3-4), or any
form of higher education (columns 5-6). Samples include students with second-attempt PSU scores between 400 and 549.5 (75-point
bandwidth) whose eligibility status is observed at the speci c time horizon. Robust standard errors in parentheses. *: p-value< .1;
**: p-value< .05; ***: p-value< .01.

                                                                    47
