                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  SIMPLIFIED ELECTRICITY MARKET MODELS WITH
                SIGNIFICANT INTERMITTENT RENEWABLE CAPACITY:
                              EVIDENCE FROM ITALY

                                        Christoph Graf
                                       Federico Quaglia
                                       Frank A. Wolak

                                     Working Paper 27262
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27262


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2020




We are indebted to Severin Borenstein, Jim Bushnell, Franz Wirl, as well as the participants of
the POWER conference at UC Berkeley for their valuable comments. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Christoph Graf, Federico Quaglia, and Frank A. Wolak. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Simplified Electricity Market Models with Significant Intermittent Renewable Capacity: Evidence
from Italy
Christoph Graf, Federico Quaglia, and Frank A. Wolak
NBER Working Paper No. 27262
May 2020
JEL No. Q4,Q41

                                          ABSTRACT

Using hourly offer curves from the Italian day-ahead market and the real-time re-dispatch market
for the period January 1, 2017 to December 31, 2018, we show how thermal generation unit
owners are able to profit from differences between a simplified day-ahead market design that
ignores system security constraints as well as generation unit operating constraints, and real-time
system operation where these constraints must be respected. We find that thermal generation unit
owners increase or decrease their day-ahead offer prices depending on the probability that their
final output will be increased or decreased relative to their day-ahead schedules because of real-
time operating constraints. First, we estimate generation unit-level models of the probability of
each of these outcomes conditional on forecast demand and renewable production in Italy and
neighboring countries. Our most conservative estimate of the impact of a change in the probability
a unit owner will have its day-ahead schedule increased in the real-time re-dispatch market implies
a day-ahead offer price increase of 5 EUR/MWh if this probability changes by 0.1. If the
probability of a day-ahead schedule decrease rises by 0.1 the unit owner's offer price is predicted
to be 6 EUR/MWh less. Over our sample period, we find that the economic re-dispatch cost
averaged approximately 15% of the total cost of energy consumption valued at the day-ahead
price.

Christoph Graf                                  Frank A. Wolak
Department of Economics                         Department of Economics
Stanford University                             Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305                              Stanford, CA 94305-6072
cgraf@stanford.edu                              and NBER
                                                wolak@zia.stanford.edu
Federico Quaglia
Terna S.p.A.
Viale Egidio Galbani, 70
Rome 00156
Italy
federico.quaglia@terna.it
1     Introduction

An increasing number of regions have ambitious renewable energy goals that have primarily
been met by investments in wind and solar generation capacity. The growing share of
energy produced from these intermittent renewable sources has significantly increased the
challenges faced by system operators in maintaining demand and supply balance in real-
time while respecting grid security constraints. Although wind and solar generation units
produce energy at zero marginal cost, this energy is only produced when the underlying
resource is available. The difference between system demand and intermittent renewable
energy production must be supplied by dispatchable generation resources typically powered
by fossil fuels.
    There are two major reasons why a significant amount of intermittent renewable genera-
tion capacity creates challenges for system operators. First, renewable energy production can
both appear and disappear very quickly. For example, in a region with a significant amount
of solar photovoltaic capacity, typically there is a rapid increase in energy production in the
morning when the sun rises and a rapid decline in energy production when the sun sets in
the evening. This means that dispatchable generation capacity must ramp down rapidly
early in the day and ramp up quickly at the end of the day, which implies a number of
these generation units may need to start-up and shutdown each day. Second, high shares of
intermittent renewable generation capacity can necessitate operating a substantial amount
of dispatchable generation capacity at their minimum operating level during a portion of the
day to ensure that there is adequate dispatchable generation capacity on-line to respond to
expected or unexpected reductions in renewable energy production during the day.
    Figure 1 demonstrates the tremendous increase in the range of realized hourly output
levels for dispatchable generation each hour of day in Germany between 2007 to 2018, when
the annual share of wind and solar energy production went from approximately 7% to 25%.
Each colored box in the figure gives the 25th , 50th and 75th percentile of values of the difference
between the system demand and renewable energy production for an hour of the day, across

                                                 1
all days in the year. The lower end of each arrow is the 1th percentile and the upper end of
the arrow is the 99th percentile of the daily distribution of net demand (system demand less
renewable energy production) for that hour of the day. In 2007, the difference between the
99th and 1th percentiles was less than 30,000 MWh, whereas by 2018 this range was more
than 60,000 MWh for a number of hours of the day. Both the wide range of realized values
of the net demand during each hour of the day and the substantially lower 1th percentile in
2018 relative to 2007 imply that there will be many more grid reliability constraints on how
dispatchable generation units can operate in 2018 relative to 2007.
    The wider range of realized hourly net demand levels is not just a German phenomenon.
We also find it for Italy. In Figure 2, Panel (a), we show that the net demand uncertainty
has increased especially during the night. Furthermore, the hourly distribution of realized
net demand values during each hour of the day has shifted down. The picture gets even
more drastic when we focus only on the region south of Tuscany (including the large islands
of Sardinia and Sicily). Figure 2, Panel (b), demonstrates that the difference between the
99th and 1th percentiles was about 4,000 MWh, during the night hours in 2007, whereas by
2018 this range was about 8,000 MWh. The major reason for this development is that most
of the wind capacity has been installed in this part of the country.
    Meeting substantially more volatile hourly net demands throughout the day but also very
low levels of net demands in a least cost manner requires a wholesale market design that
accounts for the significantly larger number of operating constraints on generation units and
the transmission network necessitated by the large share of intermittent renewable generation
capacity. Electricity-markets in the United States (US) are designed to deal with many of
these challenges as a result of changes made over the last two decades. The multi-settlement
locational marginal pricing (LMP) market designs (Bohn et al., 1984) adopted in all formal
wholesale markets in the United States account for these operating constraints in determining
dispatch levels and the prices paid to generation units.1 In contrast, Europe currently has a
   1
     Additional system security constraints are likely to be necessary to account for even in US LMP markets
as the share of intermittent renewable energy increases.


                                                     2
zonal day-ahead market for electricity, where with a few exceptions, each country is a single
pricing zone.
   The European day-ahead market does not model the transmission network within most
countries and uses a simplified network model in the remaining countries with more than
one pricing zone. In addition, this market ignores many of the operating constraints on
generation units such as start-up and no-load costs and ramping constraints in operating the
day-ahead market. Therefore, after day-ahead generation schedules and market prices are de-
termined and before real-time network operation, the system operator operates a re-dispatch
market which it uses to produce final schedules that are feasible given the configuration of
the transmission network and meet the system security constraints for reliable real-time op-
eration of the grid. This process requires some units to produce less than their day-ahead
schedule and others to produce more during each hour of the day. This may also require
that some generation schedules to be set to zero and other generation units to start up.
   In the early zonal markets in the US, this two-step process of selling energy in a simplified
day-ahead market followed by pay-as-offered re-dispatch market designed to make generation
schedules feasible creates opportunities for generation unit owners to take advantage of their
location in the transmission network or their ability to resolve some operating constraint to
increase the revenues they earn. If a market participant was confident one of its generation
units was likely to have its day-ahead schedule reduced, what is typically called "constrained-
down," the unit would be offered into the day-ahead market at an extremely low price to
ensure that it would sell energy at the market-clearing price in the day-ahead market. Then
in the re-dispatch market the unit owner would agree to buy this energy back from the
system operator at an extremely low price and earn the difference between the day-ahead
market price and this low price times the amount of energy sold back to the system operator.
   Similarly, if a market participant was confident that additional energy was needed from
a generation unit in order to operate the transmission network reliably, what is typically
called "constrained-up," the unit owner would offer a sufficiently high price (or not offer any


                                               3
capacity at all) into the day-ahead market to ensure that the unit was not taken. Then in
the re-dispatch market the unit owner would agree to sell the necessary energy at this high
offer price. In both cases, these actions are profitable for the market participant because
the simplified day-ahead market allows generation schedules that are physically infeasible
to be accepted in the day-ahead market and there is insufficient competition among market
participants to supply the local energy reduction or local energy increase necessary to obtain
feasible schedules.
   In the US, this approach to exercising local market power in a zonal market with a
pay-as-offered re-dispatch market is called the "INC/DEC Game" because selling additional
energy in the re-dispatch market was called selling incremental (INC) energy and buying back
energy in the re-dispatch market was called selling decremental (DEC) energy. Although the
ability of market participants to exercise local market power through the "INC/DEC Game"
was a major motivation for the transition to LMP markets throughout the US, there has not
been a systematic evaluation of the frequency or cost of these activities in any US wholesale
market.
   Europe has operated zonal market designs similar to the initial US zonal market designs
for many years without incurring significant re-dispatch costs from making generation sched-
ules that emerge from the day-ahead market feasible. Because of more extensive transmission
networks in European countries relative to the US as well as more available generation ca-
pacity, many of the system operating constraints in these countries were hardly ever binding
and it was difficult to predict the conditions under which these constraints would be binding.
However, in the last decade the European electricity supply industry has drastically changed
as a result of substantial intermittent renewable generation investments. As a consequence
many more operating constraints have become relevant and when they are binding has also
become more predictable, which provides opportunities for market participants to employ
the offer strategies described above.
   Re-dispatch quantities and cost have been increasing throughout Europe over the last


                                              4
decade.2 The most extreme example is Germany which faced an increase in re-dispatch
quantities from about 1 TWh in 2010 to more than 15 TWh in 2017 which is about 2.5%
of the country's annual electricity consumption (Hirth and Schlecht, 2019). The trajectory
of the re-dispatch quantities correlates with the progress of the German Energiewende, i.e.,
the transformation from a primarily fossil-fuel and nuclear power-based to a intermittent
renewables-dominated electricity supply industry. Progressive policies have lead to an in-
crease in solar photovoltaic capacity from about 4 GW to 45 GW between 2007 and 2018.
Wind capacity--including off-shore wind installations--has increased from about 22 GW to
about 60 GW.3 Although, Germany relies on a scheme where re-dispatched energy is bought
and sold at generation unit-specific cost-based prices set by the energy regulator, the to-
tal cost of the re-dispatch was about 1.5 billion Euros in 2018 (Hirth and Schlecht, 2019).4
Nevertheless, market-based re-dispatch mechanisms have been proposed in the latest Euro-
pean Union Regulation and this change could significantly increase the ability of suppliers
to exercise unilateral market power in the re-dispatch process.5
    This paper focuses on the Italian wholesale electricity market which currently employs a
market-based mechanism for its balancing and re-dispatch model. The design of the Italian
day-ahead market is much closer to that of the US LMP markets than the single-pricing
zone markets that exist throughout Europe because it accounts for transmission constraints
between six domestic zones and four limited production zones.6 Consequently, the magnitude
of the INC/DEC game problem in the Italian market is likely to be a lower bound on the
magnitude of this problem for European countries that do not respect any transmission
   2
       See   https://docstore.entsoe.eu/Documents/Events/2018/BZ_report/20181015_BZ_TR_FINAL.
pdf.
   3
      See https://www.erneuerbare-energien.de.
   4
      A regulated cost-based approach to re-dispatch has the advantage that it limits the ability of suppliers
to exercise unilateral market power in the re-dispatch market, it does not completely eliminate the incentive
suppliers have to increase their revenues from exploiting differences between the network model and operating
constraints respected in the day-ahead market and the corresponding constraints respected in the re-dispatch
market.
    5
      See https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A32019R0943, Article 13.
    6
      The bidding zone configuration has been simplified at the beginning of 2019.




                                                      5
network constraints or all generation unit operating constraints in the day-ahead market.7
    The purpose of this paper is to use the experience of the Italian market to study the
extent to which market participants have been able to profit from differences between the
zonal market model used in the day-ahead market and the real-time operating constraints
that must be respected in the re-dispatch market run after the close of the day-ahead market.
Specifically, we first investigate whether market participants are able to predict when their
generation units will be constrained-down or constrained-up. We then demonstrate that a
higher probability of being constrained down is associated with the unit owner submitting a
lower offer price into the day-ahead market and a higher probability of being constrained up
is associated with the unit owner submitting a higher offer price into the day-ahead market.
    Our most conservative estimate of how the average day-ahead offer price markup set by
thermal plants will change when the predicted probability of getting INCed in the re-dispatch
market increases by 0.1 is about 5 EUR/MWh. If the predicted probability of getting DECed
increases from by 0.1, the markup set by the average unit is about 6 EUR/MWh less. Our
results are robust with respect to a wide range of different model specifications and estimation
strategies.
    We find a U-shaped relationship between the hourly re-dispatch cost and hourly demand
net of intermittent renewables production. The right side of the "U" can be explained
by market power in the conventional sense. Higher net demand means that there is less
competition for a marginal increase of supply because most available generation capacity
is required to meet this demand. The left part of the "U" implies a higher re-dispatch
cost for lower levels of net demand. This illustrates a different form of market power that
can happen when only a few units are required to be on-line. These units may prefer to
submit offer curves into the simplified day-ahead market that are incompatible with a secure
grid operation and subsequently have their day-ahead schedules increased in the re-dispatch
market and receive a large incremental energy payment while others have their schedules
   7
     Italy currently experiences situations where too few conventional units at critical locations would like
to remain online to ensure stable voltage levels. Consequently a local market power situation arises.


                                                     6
decreased in the re-dispatch market and receive a large decremental energy payment. These
large re-dispatch costs on low net demand days challenge the prevailing notion that additional
intermittent zero-cost renewable capacity will lead to lower average electricity prices. The
thermal generation unit-level offer strategies we document during these low net demand days
raises average wholesale energy costs because of the resulting INC and DEC re-dispatch
payments. On a system-wide basis, we quantify the relative cost of the re-dispatch process
as 15% of real-time energy demand valued at the day-ahead price for the years 2017 and
2018.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. We start with a description of
the Italian electricity market in Section 2 followed by an in-depth description of INC/DEC
strategies in Section 3. In Section 4, we describe the data and how we predict the probability
that a generation unit will have its day-ahead schedule increased or decreased in the re-
dispatch market. In Section 5, we present our empirical results showing that higher offer-price
markups over marginal cost are submitted to the day-ahead market when the probability that
the unit has its output increased in the re-dispatch market increases. These empirical results
also demonstrate that lower offer-price markups are submitted to the day-ahead market when
the probability that the unit has its output reduced in the re-dispatch market increases. We
complement our results with an extensive set of robustness checks in Section 6. In Section 7,
we document the U-shaped relationship between hourly re-dispatch costs and hourly net
demand and compute the aggregate re-dispatch costs as a percentage of the annual cost of
wholesale electricity over our two-year sample period. Finally, in Section 8, we conclude and
discuss the implications of our results for wholesale market design.



2       The Operation of the Italian Wholesale Market

The Italian wholesale market of electricity consists of the European day-ahead market fol-
lowed by a series of domestic intra-day market sessions, and finally the re-dispatch market.



                                              7
The day-ahead market does not procure ancillary services, only energy. The demand side
of the day-ahead market in Italy pays a uniform purchase price, that is a demand-share
weighted average of the day-ahead zonal prices in Italy. In the intra-day market sessions,
market participants have the option to update their positions resulting from the day-ahead
market-clearing or the previous intra-day market session.8 The day-ahead market as well as
the intra-day markets are locational (zonal) marginal pricing markets.
    The day-ahead market-clearing, gives a schedule for each unit as well as the zonal price
for every hour of the next day. Shortly after clearing the day-ahead market, two out of
the seven intra-day market sessions are run, still a day ahead of actual system operation.
After the clearing of the second intra-day market, the first session of the re-dispatch market
takes place. In the re-dispatch market, the objective is to transform the schedules resulting
from the energy market-clearing into schedules that allow a secure grid operation at least
cost. The mathematical program that is solved in the re-dispatch market is called a security
constrained unit commitment (SCUC) problem.9
    From a technical perspective the most important differences between the day-ahead
(intra-day) market-clearing engine and the re-dispatch market-clearing engine are the fol-
lowing: (i) the zonal representation of the network is replaced by a nodal transmission grid
model reflecting the physical capacity of the 220 kilovolt (kV) and 380 kV network elements,
(ii) upward and downward reserve requirements for eligible thermal and hydro (storage)
units are respected, (iii) thermal units' operational constraints are respected, (iv) voltage
   8
      Unlike in the day-ahead market the intra-day market clears using zonal prices. However, a non-arbitrage
fee due only for demand side transactions aims to eliminate incentives to arbitrage between these markets
because of the different pricing rules. The fee is calculated based on the realized uniform purchase price in
the day-ahead market and the cleared zonal prices in the intra-day markets.
    9
      Between the market-clearing of the second intra-day market and real-time several re-dispatch market
sessions are run. The re-dispatch market is composed of a planning session and a real-time balancing session.
In the planning sessions, congestion is resolved, reserves are procured, and the system is balanced while in the
real-time balancing market mainly balancing of the system and congestion management are done. Note that
most fossil-fuel plants are not able to instantly increase or decrease their schedules and therefore the real-
time balancing session is accompanied by a planning session that ensures that potential real-time changes
are technically feasible. Note further that although each market participant is responsible for providing
technically feasible schedules, i.e., the market participant bears the imbalance cost for schedule deviations
at the unit level, the supplied schedules may violate other relevant grid constraints which may require a
re-dispatch action.


                                                       8
constraints are respected,10 and (v) contingencies, i.e., the failure or loss of grid elements are
considered. To summarize, the optimization model that ensures a secure operation of the
grid is very different from the simplified energy-only market-clearing algorithm. Finally, un-
like the day-ahead and intra-day markets, the re-dispatch markets pay as offered for energy
and start-ups.
    These facts emphasize that the secure operation of an electric grid is more complex than
just equating aggregate supply and demand. The supply of energy must be equal to the
demand for energy minus net imports at every point of injection and withdrawal from the
network during every instance in time. This implies that if a generation resource at a partic-
ular location is required to operate to achieve this outcome, output from resources at other
locations must be decreased in order to make room for the required resource. The configura-
tion of the transmission network or other system security constraints can significantly limit
the set of units able to have their output reduced.
    The real-time operation of all generation units must respect all of these operating con-
straints, whether or not these constraints are respected in the day-ahead or the intra-day
markets. Differences between the constraints on generation unit behavior that must be re-
spected in the day-ahead and intra-day markets and constraints respected in the real-time
operation of the transmission network are what create the opportunities for suppliers to play
the "INC/DEC Game."
   10
     Operating a power system securely also requires maintaining voltage as well as power flows within
operational security limits even after the occurrence of a contingency such as a transmission line or generation
unit forced outage. Voltage regulation is a key element for ensuring the security of a power system: too high
voltage levels can damage system devices and machinery, while too low voltage levels can lead to voltage
collapse causing local or system-wide blackouts. In both cases, voltages out of the range lead to a degradation
of the service quality parameters. Low voltage levels are typically experienced during peak hours when a
significant amount of reactive power is absorbed by electrical loads and/or when flows on the network are
high. Note that when the flow on a line is higher than a given threshold it acts as a reactance, requiring
reactive power from the system. High voltages are experienced during low load hours when less reactive
power is absorbed by electrical loads and/or when flows on the network are low when the flow on a line is
lower than a given threshold it acts as a capacitor, creating an excess of reactive power in the system.




                                                       9
3     The INC/DEC Game

We start with a simple characterization of the INC/DEC strategy. Assume, there are two
sequential markets, called the day-ahead market and the re-dispatch market. Let us further
assume that the re-dispatch market-clearing engine is a richer model compared to the day-
ahead market-clearing engine as the former accounts for the constraints described in the
previous section. The purpose of the re-dispatch market is not only to match supply and
demand, but also to ensure secure real-time operation of the power grid. Assume further
that market participants are able to predict with some degree of confidence what reliability
constraints must be satisfied in real-time. For example, a thermal unit at a particular location
may be able to use the past history of system conditions to predict those conditions that
make it likely to be indispensable to reliable operation of the grid. The reason that it must
operate at a specific level of output or must not operate could be because of transmission
congestion, a grid stability issue, or some other system security constraint. From the market
participant's perspective, the reason does not matter, only that the unit owner can predict
that more or less energy is needed from this generation unit or if a system security constraint
is violated.
    If the unit owner knows that this unit is necessary in real-time and it can earn a higher
price in the re-dispatch market, then the supplier will opt to withhold the unit's capacity
from the day-ahead market by submitting a high offer price in the day-ahead market. Under
a market-based re-dispatch process, the unit owner will receive their offer price in the re-
dispatch market for the incremental energy sold.
    A system security constraint can also make the real-time demand for energy from a
particular generation unit zero. Under certain system conditions, even if a unit is offered
into the day-ahead market at its marginal cost and receives a positive energy schedule there
are system security reasons why this unit cannot operate in real-time. If such events are
predictable, a generation unit will find it profitable to offer such a unit to the day-ahead
market and benefit from the fact that its day-ahead schedules will be decreased in the re-

                                              10
dispatch market. The owner may even offer into the day-ahead market below the unit's
marginal cost because the unit owner knows that the unit will not actually operate in real-
time. Under a market-based re-dispatch market, the unit owner can sell back the energy at
its offer price and earn the difference between the day-ahead market clearing price and its
offer price times the amount of energy purchased in the re-dispatch market.
   The energy balance constraint that equates supply and demand at every instance of time
for all locations in the grid is the reason why INC/DEC activity has to be examined jointly.
If a generation unit at a particular location is required to operate in real-time, but did not
sell any output in the day-ahead market, output from some other eligible supply resources
has to be DECed in order to make room for the required energy from that unit.
   For bid-based day-ahead and re-dispatch markets, the realized variable profit of genera-
tion unit i for a particular hour is:


       i (bDA   DA     RD RD
           i , gi ), (bi , gi )
                                                                                                            (1)
            =   pDA qi
                     DA
                          +   bINC
                               i     max 0, (qi -    DA
                                                    qi  )   -   bDEC
                                                                 i     max        DA
                                                                             0, (qi    - qi ) - Ci (qi ).


   The unit's realized profit i is a function of the supplier's day-ahead (DA) market offer
curve (bDA   DA                                                                  RD RD
        i , gi ) as well as the supplier's re-dispatch (RD) market offer curve (bi , gi ),

where bJ                                    J
       i is the vector of offer prices and gi the corresponding vector of increment offer

quantities for market J = {DA, RD}. Note that the unit's offer curves for the re-dispatch
                                                                                    DA
market consist of an INC and a DEC part. The unit's day-ahead schedule is equal to qi
and day-ahead market-clearing price is pDA . The unit's real-time output is qi and Ci (qi ) the
variable cost of producing this output.
   The realized profit function of a unit is the sum of four terms. The revenue from
the day-ahead market, pDA qi
                           DA
                              . The revenue from INCing the day-ahead market sched-
         
ule, bINC
      i
                        DA
          max 0, (qi - qi  ) . Because the re-dispatch market is pay-as-offered, the price
paid is equal to the offer price associated with the unit's level of production. The third term
is the payment for DECing the unit's day-ahead schedule. Again, because the re-dispatch


                                                      11
                                  
market is pay-as-offered, bDEC
                           i   is the offer price at the unit's final output level. The fourth
term is the unit's cost of producing the final output. This equation illustrates the substantial
profit opportunities available to generation unit owners that are able to predict when their
units will be INCed or DECed in a market-based re-dispatch market.
   It is important to emphasize that virtually all fixed-price forward contracts between
retailers and generation unit owners in Europe clear against the day-ahead prices using
day-ahead energy schedules. Consequently, the fact that generation unit owners have fixed-
price forward contract obligations does not eliminate their ability or incentive to play the
INC/DEC Game. For example, a generation unit owner could schedule their fixed-price
forward contract quantity in the day-ahead market, and then sell either incremental energy
or sell decremental energy in the re-dispatch market at their offer price.
   We will show that the likelihood of getting INCed or DECed in real-time is predictable at
the unit level using only exogenous factors known before suppliers submit their offers to the
day-ahead market. These factors include forecasted load levels and forecasted production
from intermittent renewable sources. In a second stage, we show that the markup--the
difference between a unit's offer price and its marginal cost of producing energy--a generation
unit owner submits to the day-ahead market can be explained by the predicted probability
of getting INCed or DECed in the re-dispatch market. Specifically, a higher probability of
being INCed predicts a higher markup and a higher probability of being DECed predicts a
lower markup.
   To summarize, withholding capacity from the day-ahead market or overselling capacity in
the day-ahead market only makes sense if the likelihood of what will happen in the re-dispatch
market is predictable, and that the INC [DEC] price in the real-time market is significantly
higher [lower] than the day-ahead market price. In Figure 3, we show the spreads between the
average hourly day-ahead market price and the average hourly median paid as-offered prices
for INCs and DECs in 2018.11 Panel (a) of Figure 3 shows the situation in the Northern
   11
      The average hourly median paid as-offered price is computed as follows. For each day and hour during
the sample period find the median accepted offer price and then compute the mean of these median accepted


                                                   12
bidding zone. Incremental energy sold in the re-dispatch market receives on average about
double the price than energy sold in the day-ahead market. Market participants receive on
average about half less than the day-ahead price for decremental energy.12 The situation is
even more extreme in the Center-South bidding zone, especially in the early morning hours,
where the average price paid for incremental energy is about five times more than the average
day-ahead price and average prices for decremental energy are about a fifth of the average
day-ahead price.
   The large spreads between the average prices paid for INCs and the day-ahead price and
the day-ahead price and the price received for DECs imply a strong incentive to withhold
capacity from the day-ahead market and supply to the real-time market or to sell in the
day-ahead market and to buy back in real-time. Because of the difference in the operating
constraints imposed in the two markets, the day-ahead market is effectively only about
matching zonal supply and demand, and the re-dispatch market is about finding the least
cost way to operate the grid in real-time given the energy schedules that emerged from
the day-ahead market. Competition to supply these incremental and decremental real-time
energy needs depends on the capacity and flexibility of the grid, the location and operating
level of the generation mix, and the location and temporal net demand pattern. Meeting
these transmission network node-level real-time energy needs is subject to significantly less
competition than selling energy in the day-ahead market. This fact implies that firms may
find it profitable to offer their units in the day-ahead market in such a way that the expected
re-dispatch cost is maximized rather than minimized.
   Figure 4, Panel (a), shows a day-ahead market offer curve as well as a re-dispatch market
offer curve for hour three of April 15, 2018 of a unit that is INCed frequently.13 The unit's
capacity is offered to the day-ahead market and also to the re-dispatch market at an offer
price that is about three times higher than its short-run marginal cost (MC). In Panel (b),
offer prices across all days in the sample.
   12
      The re-dispatch market pays as offered and we compared the median values with the load weighted
average day-ahead market price.
   13
      For confidentiality reasons, we do not reveal the names of the units in this paper.


                                                 13
we show the day-ahead schedule for that day as well as the final schedule. Given the high
markup, the unit is not scheduled in the day-ahead market, but it is selected to be INCed
in the re-dispatch market.
     Figure 5, Panel (a), shows the offer curves of a unit that is frequently DECed for the
same day and hour. In the day-ahead market a substantial portion of the unit's capacity is
offered at a zero price and the remaining capacity at an offer price below MC. The capacity
offered at zero is not a self-schedule but a market offer. In the re-dispatch market, the unit
offers to increase its schedule applying a markup of about 80% of its MC. The unit offered
also to decrease its schedule paying back only 0.01 EUR/MWh.14 The figure in Panel (b)
shows the resulting schedules after each market clearing. During the night, the final schedule
will be DECed and the unit earns a profit on the spread between the day-ahead market price
and the one euro cent it has offered to pay back for decreasing its schedule.
     The day-ahead market price effect of INC/DEC strategies depend on whether the units
are infra-marginal or extra-marginal. In the example discussed above, the DEC part of the
game is likely to affect the day-ahead market price. At first sight this may be beneficial to
the final consumer as day-ahead prices may be lower than MC of the marginal unit but the
down-side is that the cost of the re-dispatch will still ultimately show up on the electricity
bill of consumers. We discuss this point more thoroughly in Section 7.



4        Sample Selection and Data Preparation

This section first describes the set of generation units that can potentially participate in the
re-dispatch market. Although the day-ahead market or intra-day markets are open to all
generation units, only a subset of the generation units are eligible to provide INC or DEC
re-dispatch energy to ensure secure real-time system operation. These units must satisfy
certain technical requirements related to how rapidly they can turn on or off and how fast
    14
     Note that the zero point for the re-dispatch offer curve is the unit's schedule as of the start of the
re-dispatch process



                                                    14
they can increase or decrease their output.15 From the set of eligible units, we exclude units
that have a cost-of-service contract with the transmission system operator in Italy because
they have been shown to have a significant ability to exercise unilateral market power. Units
with such contracts have regulatory restrictions on how they can offer their capacity in the
day-ahead market. Therefore it does not make sense to include these units in a study of the
strategic interaction between the day-ahead market and the re-dispatch market. We also
exclude open cycle gas turbines (OCGTs) because they are hardly ever scheduled after the
day-ahead market-clearing under the current market environment. The fact that OCGTs
are very flexible thermal units with the highest variable cost but low start-up cost compared
to other thermal units, makes them suitable candidates for real-time balancing. In absolute
terms, OCGTs capacity amounts only to less than 4% of the total eligible capacity for
real-time re-dispatching.
   The vast majority of the remaining units are combined cycle gas turbines (CCGTs) and
only a handful are coal power plants. The latter are much more "lumpy" compared to the
former and therefore we also exclude these units as their lumpiness limits their room for
maneuver in real-time. From the remaining units, we select the units that cumulatively pro-
vide about 90% of the total volume of incremental and decremental energy in the scheduling
phase of the re-dispatch market. This ensures that only units with a significant share in
providing INC or DEC action are analyzed. In total, we selected 40 combined cycle gas
turbines (CCGTs) for INC and 32 CCGTs for DEC. These were the main units providing a
significant share of INC and DEC energy in the re-dispatch market in 2017 and 2018. Many
units are active in both categories and the total number of units in our sample is 61 with a
total installed capacity of about 30 GW. Given that the hourly average national demand in
Italy was about 35 GWh in the years 2017 and 2018 this is a sizeable amount of capacity.
   Recall that the main reason a generation unit may opt to under-schedule or over-schedule
in the day-ahead market is that a predictable but relevant real-time constraint is not ac-
  15
     European transmission system operators are currently working to relax the requirements for participa-
tion in an effort reduce the rate of increase in re-dispatch costs.


                                                   15
counted for in the day-ahead market clearing engine. Consider, for example, the existence
of an important transmission constraint that is ignored in the day-ahead market design but
happens to be binding frequently in real-time. Such a situation may incentivize market par-
ticipants that are affected by this constraint to either over-schedule or under-schedule the
output of a unit in the day-ahead market to force the system operator to re-dispatch. Con-
sider for example a stylized system with two nodes and a transmission line that is frequently
congested from the North to the South. If the day-ahead market ignores the transmission
constraint, units located in the North would have an incentive to over-schedule and units in
the South to under-schedule. In real-time, the transmission operator would have to INC the
units in the South and to DEC the units in the North to resolve the congestion. This explains
why different units can be either INCed or DECed. However, the relevance of transmission
network constraints or any other binding security constraints may depend on the season of
the year or the hour of the day which explains the overlap in the categories. To summarize,
not all units have the same likelihood of being accepted in the re-dispatch market. Their
location as well as other attributes such as their ability to ramp-up or down and the state of
the system will determine whether a unit is likely to be INCed or DECed. However, in order
to demonstrate that we have not selected the generation units for our analysis to produce
the desired outcome, we also provide the results of the analysis using all CCGT units that
are eligible to provide energy in the re-dispatch market (see Section A).
   We focus on the interaction between the day-ahead market and the scheduling phase
of the re-dispatch market. In Figure 6, we see that, on average, more than half of the
INC action and about half of the DEC action is already selected in the scheduling phase
of the re-dispatch market. The reason why we focus on the scheduling phase is that the
sizeable re-dispatch actions typically take place in the scheduling phase and not in the real-
time balance market sessions. However, we provide the results where we also include the
real-time balancing market outcomes as a robustness check in Section 6.
   In order to simplify the analysis, we ignore transactions in the intra-day markets as


                                             16
unlike in Ito and Reguant (2016), we do not observe large price spreads between day-ahead
market and intra-day markets on average. Furthermore, trading volume is very low in the
intra-day markets.16 In principle, trading possibilities in the intra-day markets may even
aggravate the INC/DEC gaming problem as market-participants have several opportunities
to schedule their capacity and may use the resulting price and schedules of their own units in
the previous market sessions as signal to learn about the state of the system. In that sense
our results will be a lower bound on how the expected probability of being re-dispatched will
affect the day-ahead market offer markup.
    Our final data-set combines hourly unit-level offer data from the day-ahead market as well
as the re-dispatch market. The day-ahead offer data is condensed into unit-level day-ahead
market offer price markups described in more detail below.17


4.1     Predicting the likelihood of getting INCed or DECed

We now describe the statistical model used to predict the probability that a generation unit is
INCed or DECed in the re-dispatch market. We are interested in the interaction between the
day-ahead market and the re-dispatch market and how the expected probability of getting
INCed or DECed in this market affects day-ahead market offer-price markups. Our model
must predict the likelihood of getting INCed or DECed in the re-dispatch market using
information available to generation unit owners before they submit their offers to supply
energy in the day-ahead market.
    We use the following exogenous variables that are all known before suppliers submit
their offers to the day-ahead market: national zonal day-ahead forecasts for load, wind,
and solar energy. Forecasts for the same set of variables for the neighboring countries, i.e.,
  16
       For the year 2018, the average price in the northern bidding zone--the largest zone in Italy--was
60.7 EUR/MWh in the day-ahead market and 60.3 EUR/MWh in the first intra-day market session. The
first intra-day market session is also the most important one in terms of transactions relative to the other
intra-day market sessions. Average hourly national purchases amounted to 1.3 GWh in the first session of
the intra-day market compared to 34 GWh in the day-ahead market.
    17
       We omit observations for hours where a unit's available capacity is below 20% of its installed capacity.
For such low levels of available capacity our short-run marginal cost estimate is likely to be off. However,
our results are not sensitive to this small modification of the original data.

                                                      17
Austria, France, Greece, Slovenia, and Switzerland. We also include these same variables for
Germany because Europe has a common zonal day-ahead market of electricity and Germany
with its large share of intermittent renewables, plays an important role. We also include
the day-ahead market cross-border transmission limits with all adjacent countries and the
national zonal transmission limits for Italy.18 Finally, we use month-of-year, hour-of-day,
and workday indicator variables.19 The values of these exogenous variables are collected to
form the regressor matrix X .
    We code the dependent variable y to be equal to one if a unit's schedule is INCed [DECed]
and zero otherwise. We separately estimate the parameter vector  for each unit and for
each re-dispatch market product, i.e., for INC and DEC energy separately, imposing a model
of the form
                                          P[y = 1|X ] = F (X ).                                             (2)

    The function F (t) in (2) can be replaced by the logistic cumulative distribution function
and the model then becomes the standard binary logit model. We apply a logit model
to estimate the probability of getting INCed or DECed. We also use a machine-learning
technique to estimate these probabilities. In particular, we apply a cross-validated random
forest classification model.20 A serious concern in all machine-learning algorithms is over-
   18
       Data on hourly day-ahead load forecasts as well as hourly day-ahead forecasts for solar and wind at the
bidding zone level is publicly available from https://transparency.entsoe.eu/. "According to Regulation
Article 6.1.b and 6.2.b, a day-ahead forecast of the total load per market time unit; ... shall be published no
later than two hours before the gate closure of the day-ahead market in the bidding zone and be updated
when significant changes occur;" Day-ahead forecasts for wind and solar shall be published no later than
6 pm Brussels time one day before actual delivery takes place. The day-ahead market session closes at noon
and therefore the wind and solar day-ahead forecast is provided a few hours after the closure of the day-
ahead market. However, forecast data for wind and solar is a standard product that can easily be procured
by market-participants. Furthermore, it can be expected that the solar and wind day-ahead forecast at
noon should be highly correlated with the day-ahead forecast published by the transmission operator a few
hours later. Nevertheless, we replicate the analysis using a simplified forecast model where we exclude the
day-ahead forecasts of wind and solar. The results are presented in Table 11. The qualitative interpretation
of the results is unchanged. Data on zonal transmission limits is provided to Italian market-participants by
the transmission system operator before the day-ahead market closes.
    19
       Workdays are all non-holidays and non-weekend days.
    20
       Put simply, a random forest model consists of a large number of individual decision trees that operate as
an ensemble. Each decision tree model in the forest produces a class prediction and the mode of all the classes,
i.e., the most frequent outcome, becomes the model's prediction. We use a standard parameter setting for the
random forest classification model and did not optimize hyper-parameters. We also experimented with other


                                                      18
fitting. For this reason, we apply a cross-validation strategy using 20% of the sample as
test data and the remainder as training data. We use five stratified randomized splits that
preserve the same percentage for each target class as in the complete set.
    In Table 1, we benchmark the outcome of the two prediction models and summarize their
accuracy, precision, and recall values. To compute these model performance magnitudes, we
                                  ^, is equal to one it the predicted P[y = 1|X ] > 0.5 and zero
assume the predicted value of y , y
otherwise. The "Accuracy" metric measures how often the classifier is correct, i.e., summing
up the true positives and the true negatives and dividing by the sample size. The "Precision"
metric is how often the positive predicted values are correct, i.e., the number of true positives
divided by the sum of the number of true positives and the number of false positives. The
"Recall" or "Sensitivity" metric is the true positive rate, that is the number of correctly
identified positives divided by the total number of actual positives. We calculate each metric
at the unit level, and the table displays the mean and standard deviation across all units.
Columns (1)­(2) summarizes the accuracy metrics for the models that predict the probability
of getting INCed while Columns (3)­(4) summarizes accuracy of the DEC prediction models.
Columns (1) and (3) correspond to the logit model, Columns (2) and (4) correspond to the
cross-validated random forest model. The random forest model outperforms the logit model
across all measures for INC as well as for DEC, that is why we select it as our preferred
model for the probability a generation unit is INCed or DECed.


4.2     Calculating day-ahead offer markups

This section describes how generation unit level markups, defined as the difference between
the day-ahead market offer price and the short-run marginal cost for a generation unit, move
with probability a generation unit is INCed or DECed. Each unit can be offered into the
day-ahead market with a weakly increasing step function offer curve with four price steps.
machine-learning algorithms, e.g., a cross-validated logistic regression model with l2 -norm regularization.
However, the cross-validated random forest classification model outperformed all other models based on the
criteria given in Table 1.



                                                    19
                           Table 1: Summary of Prediction Models

                                             INC                 DEC
                                       (1)         (2)     (3)         (4)
                         Accuracy      0.89   0.94         0.82      0.89
                                     (0.06) (0.03)       (0.07)    (0.03)
                         Precision     0.68   0.98         0.66      0.93
                                     (0.08) (0.03)       (0.07)    (0.07)
                         Recall        0.29   0.50         0.38      0.53
                                     (0.18) (0.17)       (0.23)    (0.25)
                           Notes : Table displays mean and standard
                           deviation (in parentheses) of unit-level pre-
                           dictions to be INCed or DECed across all
                           units. Results in Columns (1) and (3) cor-
                           respond to a logit model and Columns (2)
                           and (4) correspond to a cross-validated ran-
                           dom forest model.

We calculate an offer-quantity-weighed average offer price for each hour and unit. Reducing
the offer curve to a single number makes it easy to compare it to the short-run marginal
cost. We calculate the short-run marginal cost for each unit and day based on heat-rate
estimates, daily market quotations of fuel costs, variable operation and maintenance costs,
and monthly average emissions prices (see Graf et al., 2020, for more details). Subtracting
the marginal cost from the quantity weighed average offer price results in the markup. We
use all day-ahead market price offers (including self-schedules).
   For the case that capacity from a generation unit was not offered in the day-ahead market
we assign an offer price of 300 EUR/MWh to the available capacity. Participation in the day-
ahead market is not compulsory and therefore market participants may opt to withhold (part
of) their capacity by either not offering it at all or offering it at a very large offer price. The
maximum observed price for the demand side in the day-ahead market was 170 EUR/MWh
over the years 2017 and 2018. Hence, setting the offer price as high as 300 EUR/MWh has
the same effect as a physical capacity withholding. In Section 6, we provide the results of
a robustness check that does not depend on the assumption of employing a fictitious offer
price for physically withheld capacity.


                                                   20
5     Empirical Results

In this section, we show that there is a precisely estimated increasing relationship between
the predicted probability of getting INCed in the re-dispatch market and the markup set
in the day-ahead market and decreasing relationship between the predicted probability of
getting DECed in the re-dispatch market and the markup set in the day-ahead market.
    Before we estimate the predicted probability of getting INCed or DECed in the re-
dispatch market and the markup set in the day-ahead market using all the units in our
sample and different sets of controls, we present a graphical analysis using the binscatter
developed in Cattaneo et al. (2019). We control for generation unit-level, hour-of-day, day-
of-week, and month-of-year fixed effects and choose the number of selected bins to minimize
the (asymptotic) integrated-mean-squared error as recommended in Cattaneo et al. (2019).
Figure 7, Panel a, shows an approximate upward sloping linear relationship between the pre-
dicted probability of getting INCed and the markup set in the day-ahead market. In Panel b,
we find the opposite relationship, i.e., an approximate downward sloping linear relationship
between the predicted probability of getting DECed and the markup set in the day-ahead
market.
    In estimating the relationship between the predicted probability of getting INCed or
DECed in the re-dispatch market and the markup set in the day-ahead market we include
generation unit level fixed effects that account for the fact that different generation units set
different baseline markups. We summarize these results in Table 2. Columns (1), (2), (3),
and (4) show the regression results for the units that supply most of the incremental energy
and Columns (5), (6), (7), and (8) for the units providing most of the decremental energy.
In Columns (1) and (5), we use a very basic panel data regression specification accounting
only for unit fixed effects. In the model specification displayed in Columns (2) and (6), we
account also for hour of the day fixed effects as well as month of the sample fixed effects.
    The results of a more flexible model formulation accounting also for the interaction effects
between unit and month of the sample is presented in Columns (3) and (7). Finally, in

                                               21
Columns (4) and (8), we include cubic polynomials of the forecast net load that is the day-
ahead load forecast net of the forecast supply from wind and solar, hour-of-day, day-of-week,
and month-of-year fixed effects.
   The coefficient of interest in all these regressions is on the predicted probability of getting
INCed or DECed. The interpretation of this coefficient is that if the predicted probability
of getting INCed [DECed] increases from zero to one the markup increases [decreases] by
x EUR/MWh. In Panel A--the specification where we include all observations, the coefficient
of the predicted probability of getting INCed [DECed] ranges between 79 and 103 EUR/MWh
[-161 and -149 EUR/MWh]. The standard errors are clustered at the unit level to allow
for arbitrary forms of autocorrelation and heteroscedasticity in the errors across generation
units. Even with these standard errors the parameter estimates are very precisely estimated,
confirming that when the predicted probability of getting INCed is high a large markup is
set in the day-ahead market. In the DEC case, we observe the opposite effect; when the
predicted probability of getting DECed increases the markup on the day-ahead market offer
price decreases. As mentioned previously, even a negative markup may be a profitable
strategy in case of a high probability of getting DECed in the re-dispatch market and given
a spread between the day-ahead market price and the DEC price that is positive.
   A potential concern with our analysis may be that we also include market bids that
have only a slim chance of being dispatched at all and hence underestimate the effect of the
predicted probability of being INCed or DECed on the markup put on the day-ahead market
offers. Italy has a substantial amount of CCGT capacity that operates with low capacity
factors.21 Consequently, in some hours there is only very little demand left to be served by
these CCGT units. In cases where a unit has a small chance of being dispatched at all or only
for a few hours it may be rational to bid a steep offer curve into the day-ahead market. This
behavior is enforced by the different market-clearing models. If a unit will be dispatched
  21
     Reasons for that are: (i) cheap imports from neighboring countries (nuclear in France and hydro in
Switzerland and Austria), (ii) cheap domestic production from hydro (Italian alps) and renewables (wind,
solar, and geothermal).



                                                  22
in the re-dispatch market it will also be compensated for its energy as well as its offered
start-up cost. This makes offering capacity in the day-ahead market riskier than selling into
the re-dispatch market, because the day-ahead market provides the unit with no guarantee
that it will recover its start-up costs. To show that this concern has a tangible impact of our
empirical results, we exclude all offers that are not dispatched in the day-ahead market or
in the re-dispatch market. The results of this exercise are summarized in Table 2, Panel B.
For the INC side we find that of the 612,939 total observations only 331,563 remain, when
applying our criteria. Comparing the estimates of the intercept for the base-line model using
all observations (Panel A, Columns 1 and 5) with the estimates of the reduced sample (Panel
B, Columns 1 and 5), we find that the estimated intercept becomes effectively zero.22 That
means, the predicted markup of the average unit is zero when the predicted probability of
getting INCed or DECed is zero. Put differently, the average unit is offered competitively
to the day-ahead market in case there is no predictable outside option when we restrict the
sample to only market-relevant transactions. As a consequence, we find that the coefficient
of interest increases by approximately factor two on the INC side. Accounting also for
the change in the intercept, the average predicted markup if the predicted probability of
getting INCed equals one, is about 222 EUR/MWh compared to 164 EUR/MWh when we
do not restrict the sample. This shows that for bids that are market-relevant the average
markup moves even more strongly with an increase in the expected probability of getting
INCed. On the DEC side, the coefficients on the predicted probability of getting DECed is
approximately halved. The qualitative interpretation of our results is unchanged as a result
of this sample selection procedure. A high predicted probability of getting INCed predicts
an higher markup in the day-ahead market and a higher predicted probability of getting
DECed predicts a lower markup.
   In order to demonstrate that these results can also be derived by using conventional pre-
  22
     The intercept is calculated in line with the logic of how it is implemented in Stata and therefore
represents the average value of the fixed effects, see https://www.stata.com/support/faqs/statistics/
intercept-in-fixed-effects-model/ for more details.



                                                  23
diction models such as a logit model or a linear probability model to estimate the probability
of getting INCed or DECed at the unit level, we re-run the analysis described above with
the only difference that a different prediction model is used. The results are summarized
in Table 3 and besides having slightly smaller in absolute value coefficients of interest, our
qualitative results are unchanged.
   The previous model uses the estimated probability of being INCed or DECed to explain
the day-ahead market offer markup. A different modeling approach would be to make the
assumptiong that generation unit owners have rational expectations about when their units
will be INCed or DECed and these expectations on variables we use to estimate the proba-
bility of being INCed or DECed. This assumption replaces the probability of the unit being
INCed or DECed with the indicator variable of whether a unit was INCed or DECed and
uses the predicted probability as an instrument for this endogenous indicator variable. In
Table 4, we present the results separately for all three models to derive the unit-level pre-
dictions of getting INCed or DECed. The coefficients are slightly lower for the INC side and
slightly larger for the DEC side than in the specifications where we directly use the predicted
probability and all of the coefficient estimates are precisely estimated.


5.1    Double/Debiased Machine Learning Estimate

In the previous section we accounted for a fairly limited set of controls in estimating our
markup models. We replace the set of controls we used with a rich set variables, including
zonal residual demands (national and neighbouring countries and Germany), squared terms
and interaction terms thereof; transmission limits; gas prices, gas prices squared; unit, hour-
of-day, workday, and month-of-year fixed effects. Given the large number of regressors, OLS
estimation of this model may lead to over-fitting. A na¨
                                                       ive approach would be to simply
estimate the model using a LASSO regression. The advantage of LASSO is that it will pick
the most important regressors from the large set of regrossors potentially including many
irrelevant regressors (sparsity assumption). However, in any case the resulting estimates


                                              24
will be biased due to the regularization term introduced in LASSO. Therefore, we apply
the double/debiased machine learning for treatment effects parameters introduced by Cher-
nozhukov et al. (2018).23 We present the results using this approach in Table 5. The point
estimates, are almost identical to the estimates when only controlling flexibly for the net
load as presented in Table 2, Panel A, (Column 4 for INC and Column 8 for DEC).



6        Robustness Analyses

In our main specification for predicting whether a unit will be INCed or DECed in the re-
dispatch market, we ignore portfolio effects between generation units owned by the same
market participant. Our main argument for this prediction model is that generation units
have unique characteristics such as location or technology that makes them an essential
resource for balancing the market and ensuring a secure operation of the grid. However,
there may still be portfolio effects in the sense that the likelihood of a unit being taken
in the re-dispatch market may also depend on how the firm has offered its portfolio of
generation unit into the day-ahead market. As emphasized by Graf and Wolak (2020), the
spatial distribution of firm level offer curves can impact the prices paid all generation units
owned by the firm.
     The first modification of our prediction model is therefore to include the zonal quantity
the unit owner has offered to the day-ahead market at "competitive offer prices." More
precisely, we calculate the aggregate zonal quantity for each firm that has been offered into
the day-ahead market at a price lower or equal to its short-run marginal cost. We only
account for thermal units that are eligible to be operated in the re-dispatch market. For
each of the INC and DEC units under consideration, we then add only the quantity values
of the same firm, say firm X owns unit j that is a relevant INC unit; then we add only the
capacity offered competitively by firm X as explanatory variable. Adding this feature to the
    23
    We use Stata's implementation, that is, the cross-fit partialing-out lasso linear regression (xporegress ).
We use the standard parametrization, most importantly, ten folds for cross-fitting.



                                                      25
probability of an INC or DEC in the re-dispatch market model improves our forecast metrics
(see Table 6, Panel A). Regressing the day-ahead markup using the alternative prediction
of an INC or DEC in the re-dispatch market only slightly changes the relevant coefficients
though (see Table 7, Columns 1 and 4).
   The second robustness check we consider is that instead of using only data from the
scheduling phase of the re-dispatch market as our measure of the unit-level re-dispatch INC
and DEC demand, we replace it by the total re-dispatch demand for INCs and DECs from
the unit. That is the sum of the INC and DEC demand for each unit from the scheduling
phase of the re-dispatch market and the real-time balancing market. Only sizeable INCs and
DECs, with at least 10% of the unit's available capacity are counted as INCs and DECs for
this analysis. The reason for this definition of INCs and DECs is that in practice a unit may
be INCed and DECed several times between the day-ahead market-clearing and real-time
depending on the several updates of the state of the system. For example a unit may be
INCed by 20% of its available capacity in the scheduling phase of the re-dispatch market
and the same unit may be DECed by 1% of its capacity to balance the system in real-time.
Strictly speaking this unit would not only be INCed in the real-time re-dispatch market
but would also be DECed. In order to better filter out the dominant part of the unit-level
real-time demand for INC and DEC we apply the 10% criterion. The prediction metrics for
this definition of generation unit-level INCs and DECs are presented in Table 6, Panel B,
and the regression of the markups on predicted probabilities of an INC and DEC are given
in Table 7, Columns (2) and (5). Our qualitative results are not impacted by this modified
definition of INCs and DECs.
   In Table 6, Panel C, and Table 7, Columns (3) and (6), we present the INC and DEC
prediction metrics as well as the markup regression results combining both alternative spec-
ifications described above. Specifically, we use the 10% of capacity criteria for INCs and
DECs described above and then we account for the portfolio effects described in the sec-
ond paragraph of this section in the INC and DEC prediction model. Once again, we find


                                             26
that our empirical results for the impact of an increase in the probability of being INCed
or DECed on offer price markups in the day-ahead market are qualitatively similar to the
results in the previous section.
   Another concern may be that we are using the markup set in the day-ahead market.
Market participants are allowed to submit non-decreasing step functions with four steps
for each unit into the day-ahead market, hence the unit-level markup is a function of the
offered quantity. We by-pass this challenge by calculating a capacity-weighted average offer
price where we have associated a 300 EUR/MWh offer price to available capacity that is not
offered in the day-ahead market. In order to show that our results are independent of both
assumptions, we construct an alternative metric, that is the competitivly offered capacity
share. This share is calculated as the quantity offered to the day-ahead market at an offer
price lower or equal than the unit's short-run marginal cost relative to its available capacity.
If the firm offers all its capacity at short-run marginal cost or below this metric takes the
number one. If all the capacity is withhold from the day-ahead market or offered above the
unit's short-run marginal cost this metric takes the number zero. For piece-wise constant
offer functions that intersect with the short-run marginal cost of the unit, the metric takes
a number between zero and one.
   The regression results are presented in Table (8). Note that the signs of the coefficients
are reversed now, which is due to the construction of the metric. For example a negative
share of competitively offers capacity x for the INC re-dispatch product means that if the
probability of getting INCed increases from zero to one, the unit's owner offered x percent
less of its available capacity than when the probability of getting INCed is zero. In other
words, as the probability of getting INCed increases less capacity will be offered competitively
into the day-ahead market. We find the reverse effect for the DEC re-dispatch product. To
summarize, the results using the competitive offer share at the unit-level instead of the
markup yields effectively the same quantitative results as our markup results.




                                              27
7        Total Cost to Serve Load and Re-dispatch Cost

This section explores the market efficiency consequences of INC/DEC activity documented
in the previous section. A fully fletched competitive benchmark, where a security constrained
unit commitment optimization problem using each unit's short-run marginal cost and com-
petitive start-up cost is run, is presented in a companion paper (see Graf et al., 2020). A
first glimpse at this cost can be inferred from Figure 3 which shows a large distance between
median awarded INC and DEC prices in the re-dispatch market and average day-ahead
market prices. In this section, we provide further evidence on how the net demand, the sys-
tem demand less intermittent renewables production, affects day-ahead market prices and
re-dispatch costs.
     The actual hourly real-time re-dispatch cost are


                                            pINC
                                             j
                                                  INC
                                                 qj   - pDEC
                                                         j
                                                              DEC
                                                             qj   ,                                    (3)
                                        j


     where pINC
            j
                                                   INC
                is the INC price paid to unit j , qj   is the INC quantity sold by unit j , pDEC
                                                                                             j

                                     DEC
is the DEC price paid by unit j and qj   is the DEC quantity purchased by unit j . This
is the actual cost of the re-dispatch the transmission system operator passes through to the
final consumer in form of the grid fee. We compute total re-dispatch costs and the cost
of real-time demand at the hourly day-ahead price for all hours of two-year sample period.
Total re-dispatch costs are 9% of this measure of the total cost of real-time demand over our
two-year sample period.24
     However, the re-dispatch cost calculated above does not include the economic value of
energy sold in the day-ahead market that is useless in real-time. More precisely, the total
DEC quantity that is bought back by the market participants was first sold at the day-ahead
    24
      The annual total demand (net of pumping and grid losses) reached 303 TWh in 2018 and 302 TWh in
2017. The average day-ahead market price relevant for the demand side was 61.3 EUR/MWh in 2018 and
54.0 EUR/MWh in 2017. Re-dispatch cost that includes the procurement of reserves as well as real-time
balancing was about 1.5 billion Euros per year in 2017 and 2018 (these figures do not include payments for
start-up costs and thus represent a lower bound of the actual re-dispatch cost). Thus, re-dispatch cost are
      2·1.5·1e9
(303·61.3+302·54)1e6  9% of the total cost of real-time demand over our two-year sample period.



                                                    28
market price. The following modification accounts for this aspect


                                  (pDA - pDEC
                                          j
                                                DEC
                                              )qj   + pINC
                                                       j
                                                            INC
                                                           qj   ,                         (4)
                              j


where pDA is the day-ahead price. Using the metric above, we find the total economic cost
of the re-dispatch to be 15% relative to real-time demand valued at the day-ahead market
price over our two-year sample period.
   Figure 8, Panel (a), shows the daily re-dispatch cost defined in (3) as a function of daily
net demand. In the re-dispatch market, intertemporal constraints on thermal resources are
accounted for and the optimization horizon of the first session of the re-dispatch market
is 24 hours. That is why we focus on daily re-dispatch costs as they also include the cost
paid to thermal units for start ups. Surprisingly, the figure reveals a U-shaped relationship
between the re-dispatch cost and the net demand. While the right part of the "U" can be
explained by traditional market power logic, that a higher demand means that there is less
competition for a marginal increase of supply.
   The left part of the "U" requires more explanation. On low-demand days such as week-
end days, holidays, or days with typical levels of renewable production, one would expect
low re-dispatch costs because of substantial competition between thermal plants that have
spare capacity. However, on days with low net demand, the transmission grid may be more
vulnerable because little controllable capacity is committed and therefore voltage issues may
arise. As a consequence, the transmission system operator usually requires a small number
of units to be online at different locations to ensure secure operation of the grid. However,
if these unit owners are able to predict when these units are needed, they may decide to
schedule different units in the day-ahead market and wait to get paid as-offered to increase
the output from these necessary units. As shown in Section 3, the units scheduled in the
day-ahead market that cannot meet these locational energy requirements will sell back decre-
mental energy at a lower price than the day-ahead market price. Consequently, a supplier
that owns multiple generation units could earn revenues from both INCing and DECing in

                                              29
the re-dispatch market during the same hour of the day.
   In Table 9, we regress the re-dispatch cost on the net demand (Column 1), use the
squared net demand (Column 2), and also include the intradaily standard deviation of the
net demand (Column 3). We include month-of-sample fixed effects in all regressions to
account for monthly variation in hydro production but also in output from renewable sources
(primarily solar photovoltaics). We show the average marginal effects evaluated at different
net demand levels for the last two regression specifications in Figure 8, Panel (b). The
average marginal effects confirm the fitted U-shaped functional form in Figure 8, Panel (a).
Put differently, an increase in net demand in low net demand days predicts a reduction of
the re-dispatch cost while an increase in high net demand days predicts an increase of the
re-dispatch cost.
   There is a vast amount of literature showing that an increase of close-to-zero marginal
cost renewables leads to lower day-ahead market prices (see e.g., the literature review in
Wozabal et al., 2016). All these papers assume a static merit order stack of conventional
power plants and an increase in output of infra-marginal renewables acts as if the demand
were decreased and therefore makes a cheaper unit marginal. We find this effect in the
Italian day-ahead market (see Figure 9, orange line). The relationship appears to be inverse
S-shaped which is in line with what Wozabal et al. (2016) found. We then calculate the total
cost to serve load that we define as


                            pDA QRT +       pINC
                                             j
                                                  INC
                                                 qj   - pDEC
                                                         j
                                                              DEC
                                                             qj   ,
                                        j


where QRT is the actual demand in real-time. The second fitted line in this figure represents
this total cost per MWh demand and surprisingly we find that the average total cost seem
to be diverging from the day-ahead market price on days with low net demand. The U-
shaped re-dispatch cost makes the average cost of serving load significantly more expensive
on low net demand days. Note that the INC/DEC activity has exactly this effect because
capacity is offered to the day-ahead market at offer prices below short-run marginal cost

                                              30
which depresses the day-ahead market price and through INC activity firms earn profits in
the re-dispatch market.



8     Discussion and Conclusion

We find that the conditional probability of being INCed or DECed in the re-dispatch market
will change the day-ahead offer markup set by market participants for their thermal power
plants. In other words, the re-dispatch market provides a lucrative outside option to sell
energy because the day-ahead market does not include all the constraints that appear to
be relevant for secure real-time operation of the electricity grid. These results from the
Italian electricity market are a cautionary tale for the European Commission, which has rec-
ommended market-based re-dispatch processes. Unlike in continental European day-ahead
market-clearing engines, Italy accounts for within-country transmission constraints through
bidding zones. Consequently, re-dispatch costs as a fraction of total wholesale energy costs
in Italy are likely to be lower than in the single-zone markets that exist in other European
countries.
    Without any knowledge of real-time electricity system operation it may be tempting
to look at the day-ahead market and the re-dispatch market as sequential markets. In
financial economics such markets are seen as connected systems with trade-flows between
these markets. To make this point clear, assume two liquid markets that clear shortly after
each other with no change in expectation what will happen in real-time that is the point
in time were delivery will take place. In such a case one would expect that there would
be trade-flows to equalize the market-clearing prices. If the price in one market would be
structurally higher than the one in the other market, some player would arbitrage the price
difference away. This logic is flawed in simplified electricity markets as the final operating
levels of all generation units will also be constrained by the laws of physics, rather than the
results of the day-ahead market. In simplified day-ahead market designs that do not account



                                              31
for physical constraints, the re-dispatch market operates on a fundamentally different basis
than the day-ahead market. Hence, the day-ahead market may be used by strategic players
to schedule their capacity to increase their profits through re-dispatch actions.
    Independent of whether the re-dispatch market is market-based or cost-regulated, there
are a number of additional potential market inefficiencies that appear to be a direct result
of the divergence between market operation day-ahead and real-time. In the short-term,
efficiency losses due to an sub-optimal level of net-imports in an interconnected European
market can be expected. Currently the European day-ahead market-clearing endogenously
determines the level of imports.25 However, if the day-ahead market result diverges struc-
turally from the real-time market result, the level of net-imports cleared in the day-ahead
market is sub-optimal. To make this point clearer, consider the case in which transmission
constraints are not accounted for in the day-ahead market. Consequently, prices may be
structurally higher in an area with most of the cheap generation capacity, typically renew-
able capacity, than they would be the case in an locational marginal pricing (LMP) market.
In a coupled market, this area will tend to import more capacity from neighboring bid-
ding zones/countries, than the level of imports expected in case of greater locational pricing
granularity. The sub-optimal amount of net-imports could potentially further increase the
need for re-dispatch actions. European transmission system operators address this problem
by implementing advanced capacity calculation methodologies for properly computing trade
capacity between European bidding zones using flow-based methodologies. These method-
ologies attempt to mimic the nodal behaviour of the grid, but they also include sufficient
  25
     In 2018, the project is being operated by seven Power Exchanges: EPEX SPOT, GME, Nord Pool,
OMIE, OPCOM, OTE, and TGE; PCR is used to couple the following countries: Austria, Belgium, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Hungary, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, and the United
Kingdom. See, e.g., https://www.epexspot.com/en/marketcoupling#price-coupling-of-regions-pcr.
This makes it the largest day-ahead market for electricity in the world with about 2.9 TWh of consumption
(based on Eurostat data for 2017). To put things into perspective, the largest integrated US market is the
Pennsylvania-New Jersey-Maryland interconnection (PJM) serving all or parts of Delaware, Illinois, Indiana,
Kentucky, Maryland, Michigan, New Jersey, North Carolina, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Tennessee, Virginia, West
Virginia, and the District of Columbia with an annual demand of about 0.8 TWh (https://www.pjm.com/
-/media/about-pjm/newsroom/annual-reports/2017-annual-report.ashx).



                                                    32
reliability margins to coping with uncertainties underlying in managing the system in real
time. All these methodologies attempt to fix a problem that would not exist if day-ahead
market outcomes where closer to real-time system operation. Furthermore, these calcula-
tions are made before the day-ahead market clears and therefore are not suitable to react
quickly to changes in bidding strategies of market participants. Moreover, as the Italian ex-
perience shows, there might be other relevant security constraints rather than transmission
constraints that will determine the final dispatch.
   Another concern is the divergence between day-ahead market prices and actual hourly
cost to serve load shown in this paper. While hourly day-ahead market prices are used for
clearing forward contracts but also for demand side management, they do not reflect the
true cost of an additional unit of demand in real time. While the day-ahead market prices
are granular with respect to time and optimally also with respect to location, the re-dispatch
cost shows up on the monthly bill of a final consumer in form of the grid fee, averaged over
time and location. This can lead to inefficient price signals for new investment in demand
response, storage, and other load-shifting technologies.
   This aspect of the divergence between day-ahead market operation and real-time market
operation is also concerning in a wholesale market combined with a regulated re-dispatch
process. Consider the following illustrative example take from Germany: Substantial cheap
intermittent generation capacity (e.g., renewables) in the North due to favorable weather
conditions (e.g., a windy area) paired with significant load in the South and insufficient
transmission capacity to transport the low cost, zero-carbon electricity from the North to
the South with the consequence that sometimes renewable production must be curtailed.
However, since the day-ahead market design is agnostic towards the "physical reality" of
how power flows, all the renewable power is sold day-ahead although it will not be possible
to deliver it in real-time. Consequently, this will lead to higher prices in the North compared
to a market design that acknowledges transmission constraints. Suppose an investor who
would like to add renewable capacity to this market. Ignoring subsidies and property prices,


                                              33
she would build the additional renewable capacity at a location with the highest correlation
of expected temporal output and expected temporal electricity prices, i.e., most likely in the
North. Although, this capacity can be sold day-ahead it will be curtailed in real-time in
many hours and through the re-dispatch a fossil-fuel plant in the South will have to produce
the curtailed energy. Hence, from a consumer perspective as well as from an environmental
perspective this investment is inefficient.




                                              34
 Figure 1: System Demand Less Renewable Energy Production in Germany 2007 to 2018




Notes: Hourly net demand in Germany, i.e., the national load minus the supply from wind and solar. Boxes
represent interquartile range (IQR) and upper and lower vertical bars equal to the 1 percent and 99 percent.
Diamonds represent outliers not included in the 1­99 percentile. Hourly data for load, wind, and solar for
the year 2007 are from Entso-e and the four German transmission system operators (see Wozabal et al.,
2016, for a more detailed description on the data sources). Data for the years 2013 and 2018 are from Open
Power System Data (2019).


                                                    35
        Figure 2: Demand Less Renewable Energy Production in Italy 2007 to 2018




                        (a)                                                   (b)
Notes: Hourly net demand in Italy (Panel a), i.e., national load minus the supply from wind and solar.
Panel (b) shows the hourly net demand for the area south of Tuscany. Boxes represent interquartile range
(IQR) and upper and lower vertical bars equal to the 1 percent and 99 percent. Diamonds represent outliers
not included in the 1­99 percentile. Hourly data for load and wind for the year 2007 was derived from
day-ahead market bidding data used in Graf and Wolak (2020). Solar generation was negligible in 2007
and zonal wind generation data was scaled to match the annual output (see https://download.terna.
it/terna/0000/0113/12.pdf). Data for the years 2013 and 2018 are provided by the Italian transmission
operator.
                                                   36
           Figure 3: Day-ahead Market vs. Real-Time Re-dispatch Market Prices




                        (a)                                                 (b)

Notes: Panel (a): Northern bidding zone, Panel (b): Center-South bidding zone. The day-ahead market
price is the average hourly marginal price in EUR/MWh. The INC [DEC] price is the average hourly
accepted median price in EUR/MWh for INCing [DECing] output in the re-dispatch or real-time balancing
market conditional on a demand for INC or DEC. Averages are taken over all hours in 2017 and 2018.




                                      Figure 4: INC Example




                        (a)                                                 (b)

Notes: Offer behavior and schedules for a CCGT unit located in the Foggia bidding zone on April 15, 2018.
Panel (a): Short-run marginal cost and offer curves in different market segments for hour 3, Panel (b):
Resulting hourly schedules after each market-clearing. The offer curve in the re-dispatch market does not
include the offer to provide secondary reserve.




                                                   37
                                      Figure 5: DEC Example




                        (a)                                                  (b)

Notes: Offer behavior and schedules for a CCGT unit located in the Rossano bidding zone on April 15,
2018. Panel (a): Short-run marginal cost and offer curves in different market segments for hour 3 , Panel
(b): Resulting hourly schedules after each market-clearing. The offer curve in the re-dispatch market does
not include the offer to provide secondary reserve.




                                Figure 6: INC and DEC Quantities




                        (a)                                                  (b)

Notes: Panel (a): Accepted quantities in the re-dispatch market, Panel (b): Total INC and DEC quantities
including real-time balancing market. Quantities are expressed in MWh and averages are taken over all
hours in 2017 and 2018.




                                                   38
   Figure 7: Binscatter of Markups and Predicted Probability of getting INCed/DECed




                         (a)                                                     (b)

Notes: Panel (a): Day-ahead offer markup and predicted probability of getting INCed, Panel (b): Day-ahead
offer markup and predicted probability of getting DECed. Markups in EUR/MWh. Binscatter regression
controls for unit, hour-of-day, day-of-week and month-of-year fixed effects using Cattaneo et al. (2019)
nonparametric approach. Number of bins minimizes the (asymptotic) integrated mean squared error.




                 Figure 8: Daily Re-dispatch Cost vs. Average Daily Net Load




                         (a)                                                     (b)

Notes: Panel (a): Average daily re-dispatch cost and average daily net load for the years 2017 and 2018;
Panel (b) Corresponding average marginal effects of a change in the daily net load evaluated at the net load
deciles. Model 1 refers to a linear regression model aiming to explain the daily re-dispatch cost by the daily
average net, the square of it, and month of the sample fixed effects. In Model 2 we also include the intradaily
standard deviation of the net load. Both models are summarized in Table 9, Col (2) and Col (3).



                                                      39
   Table 2: Regressing Markups on Predicted Probability of getting INCed or DECed

                                              INC                                          DEC
                              (1)       (2)         (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)          (7)        (8)
                                            Panel A: All observations
Predicted Pi [yi = 1|X ]      81.37     88.34    79.35     103.08     -160.63     -158.78     -149.19      -159.81
                            (19.89)   (16.12) (13.87)     (17.26)      (31.85)     (30.35)     (29.90)      (28.57)
Net Load                                                    10.69                                             -0.99
                                                           (2.26)                                            (2.24)
(Net Load)2                                                -0.43                                             -0.02
                                                           (0.09)                                            (0.07)
(Net Load)3                                                  0.00                                              0.00
                                                           (0.00)                                            (0.00)
Intercept                     82.44    116.31  118.33       58.85        75.35        85.49        85.70     131.83
                             (2.71)    (6.77)   (5.03)    (20.18)       (7.99)      (11.46)      (10.43)    (25.95)
Unit FEs                       X         X        X         X            X            X            X          X
Hour-of-day FEs                          X        X         X                         X            X          X
Day-of-week FEs                                             X                                                 X
Month-of-year FEs                        X        X         X                         X         X             X
Unit × Month FEs                                  X                                             X
N                           612,939   612,939 612,939 612,939         497,148      497,148    497,148      497,148
                           Panel B : Only observations with market-relevant transactions
Predicted Pi [yi = 1|X ]     222.24    216.99    207.61     217.49       -61.95    -61.10        -53.65     -63.48
                            (27.35) (28.23) (27.43)        (28.56)       (17.62)   (17.17)       (16.05)    (17.41)
Net Load                                                     14.72                                             0.25
                                                            (3.09)                                           (1.59)
(Net Load)2                                                 -0.45                                            -0.01
                                                            (0.09)                                           (0.06)
(Net Load)3                                                   0.00                                             0.00
                                                            (0.00)                                           (0.00)
Intercept                    -0.94      19.23      32.46 -124.24            7.87      15.03       -0.14       19.69
                             (5.15)    (5.50)     (5.20)   (35.27)        (5.00)     (5.77)       (4.74)    (17.49)
Unit FEs                       X         X          X        X             X          X            X          X
Hour-of-day FEs                          X          X        X                        X            X          X
Day-of-week FEs                                              X                                                X
Month-of-year FEs                        X          X        X                        X         X             X
Unit × Month FEs                                    X                                           X
N                           331,563 331,563 331,563 331,563             406,690 406,690       406,690      406,690
  Notes: The dependent variable is the markup in the day-ahead market in EUR/MWh. Net load is equal to
  the day-ahead forecast of the system load minus the forecast supply from wind and solar measured in GWh.
  Standard errors (clustered at the unit level) in parentheses.




                                                          40
Table 3: Regressing Markups on Predicted Probability of getting INCed or DECed (Alter-
native Forecast Models)

                                              INC                                         DEC
                              (1)       (2)         (3)        (4)       (5)        (6)         (7)       (8)
                                              Panel A: Logit model
 Predicted Pi [yi = 1|X ]     57.62     62.52    49.81     80.72      -124.93     -124.78    -103.08    -127.54
                            (21.11)   (15.84) (14.54) (16.33)          (27.00)     (25.33)    (26.89)    (23.31)
 Net Load                                                    9.00                                          -1.74
                                                          (2.19)                                          (2.06)
 (Net Load)2                                              -0.37                                           -0.03
                                                          (0.08)                                          (0.07)
 (Net Load)3                                                 0.00                                           0.00
                                                          (0.00)                                          (0.00)
 Unit FEs                     X          X        X         X             X          X          X          X
 Hour-of-day FEs                         X        X         X                        X          X          X
 Day-of-week FEs                                            X                                              X
 Month-of-year FEs                       X        X         X                        X         X           X
 Unit × Month FEs                                 X                                            X
 N                          599,148   599,148 599,148 599,148          496,258    496,258    496,258    496,258
                                        Panel B : Linear probability model
 Predicted Pi [yi = 1|X ]     55.81     61.54      44.93     82.55     -130.80    -131.25    -108.11    -134.42
                            (25.68)   (19.14) (19.07) (19.43)           (27.94)    (26.10)    (28.51)    (24.01)
 Net Load                                                     8.72                                        -1.13
                                                            (2.11)                                        (2.13)
 (Net Load)2                                                -0.38                                         -0.04
                                                            (0.08)                                        (0.07)
 (Net Load)3                                                  0.00                                          0.00
                                                            (0.00)                                        (0.00)
 Unit FEs                     X          X          X         X            X         X          X          X
 Hour-of-day FEs                         X          X         X                      X          X          X
 Day-of-week FEs                                              X                                            X
 Month-of-year FEs                       X          X         X                      X         X           X
 Unit × Month FEs                                   X                                          X
 N                          612,939   612,939 612,939 612,939          497,148    497,148    497,148    497,148
   Notes: The dependent variable is the markup in the day-ahead market in EUR/MWh. Net load is equal to
   the day-ahead forecast of the system load minus the forecast supply from wind and solar measured in GWh.
   Performing logit regressions to predict the probability of getting INCed or DECed at the unit level slightly
   decreases the number of observations because categories such as e.g., month-of-year, that lead to a perfect
   prediction are dropped from the sample. Standard errors (clustered at the unit level) in parentheses.




                                                          41
Table 4: Regressing Markups on whether a Unit has been INCed or DECed (Two-Stage
Least Squares)

                                INC                                             DEC
              (1)        (2)          (3)        (4)           (5)        (6)            (7)     (8)
              Panel A: Instrument is predicted Pi [yi = 1|X ] using random forest model
    yi        53.38    57.70     50.52     67.05        -99.99     -97.88    -85.72    -98.47
            (12.92) (10.47)     (8.78) (11.12)          (20.11)    (18.95)   (17.99)   (17.81)
    N      612,939    612,939       612,939   612,939        497,148    497,148     497,148    497,148
                   Panel B : Instrument is predicted Pi [yi = 1|X ] using logit model
    yi        57.19    62.05       49.36    80.03     -124.40 -124.21 -102.41                  -127.24
            (20.61) (15.44) (14.17) (15.92)              (26.47)    (24.81)     (26.30)         (22.83)
    N      599,148    599,148       599,148   599,148        496,258    496,258     496,258    496,258
            Panel C : Instrument is predicted Pi [yi = 1|X ] using linear probability model
    yi        55.81     61.54    44.93      82.72      -130.80 -131.25 -108.11 -134.79
            (25.36) (18.90) (18.82) (19.25)              (27.50)    (25.69)    (28.05)   (23.65)
    N      612,939    612,939       612,939   612,939        497,148    497,148     497,148    497,148
         Notes: The dependent variable is the markup in the day-ahead market in EUR/MWh. The four
         model specifications for INC and DEC correspond to the specifications in terms of fixed effects
         and covariates presented in Table 2. Performing logit regressions to predict the probability of
         getting INCed or DECed at the unit level slightly decreases the number of observations because
         categories such as e.g., month-of-year, that lead to a perfect prediction are dropped from the
         sample. Standard errors (clustered at the unit level) in parentheses.




Table 5: Markups on Predicted Probability of getting INCed or DECed using Double/Debi-
ased Machine Learning

                                                             INC           DEC
                         Predicted Pi [yi = 1|X ]        103.7714       -161.4813
                                                         (0.6319)        (0.6533)
                         N                                612,939         497,148
                               Notes: The dependent variable is the markup in the day-
                               ahead market in EUR/MWh. Robust standard errors in
                               parentheses.




                                                        42
Table 6: Summary of Prediction Models (Alternative Specifications)

                           INC                         DEC
                    Panel A: Portfolio effects
       Accuracy          0.94                         0.90
                         (0.03)                       (0.03)
       Precision         0.98                         0.93
                         (0.03)                       (0.07)
       Recall            0.53                         0.55
                         (0.17)                       (0.25)
                 Panel B : Real-time re-dispatch
       Accuracy          0.94                         0.86
                         (0.03)                       (0.04)
       Precision         0.98                         0.91
                         (0.03)                       (0.06)
       Recall            0.50                         0.59
                         (0.17)                       (0.22)
       Panel C : Real-time re-dispatch and portfolio effects
       Accuracy          0.94                        0.87
                         (0.03)                      (0.04)
       Precision         0.98                        0.91
                         (0.03)                      (0.06)
       Recall            0.54                        0.63
                         (0.17)                      (0.20)
         Notes : Table displays mean and standard devia-
         tion (in parentheses) of unit-level predictions to be
         INCed or DECed across all units. Results corre-
         spond to a cross-validated random forest model.




                                 43
Table 7: Regressing Markups on Predicted Probability of getting INCed or DECed (Alter-
native Forecast Model Specifications)

                                               INC                                     DEC
                                    (1)         (2)         (3)            (4)          (5)         (6)
                                    Panel A: Ordinary least squares
  Predicted Pi [yi = 1|X ]          90.76    80.62     90.27     -182.05 -160.16 -181.47
                                  (20.40) (19.67) (20.07)         (31.52) (30.06) (30.43)
  Unit FEs                           X        X         X           X       X       X
  N                               612,939 612,939 612,939        497,148 497,148 497,148
                                   Panel B : Two-stage least squares
  yi                                59.99     52.94     59.9     -116.54             -95.83 -112.28
                                  (13.37) (12.78) (13.19)         (21.16)            (17.83) (19.30)
  Unit FEs                           X         X        X            X                 X       X
  N                               612,939 612,939 612,939         497,148            497,148 497,148
       Notes: The dependent variable is the markup in the day-ahead market in EUR/MWh. Standard
       errors (clustered at the unit level) in parentheses. Columns (1) and (4): Portfolio effects considered
       in the unit level forecast model. Columns (2) and (5): Real-time balancing quantities considered in
       the unit level forecast model. Columns (3) and (6): Portfolio effects as well as real-time balancing
       considered in the unit level forecast model. In Panel (B) we instrument yi with the predicted
       Pi [yi = 1|X ] derived from the random forest model.




                                                       44
Table 8: Regressing Competitive Offer Share on Predicted Probability of getting INCed or
DECed

                                                INC                                         DEC
                               (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)        (5)       (6)         (7)        (8)
                                          Panel A: Ordinary least squares
 Predicted Pi [yi = 1|X ]      -0.37     -0.39     -0.36     -0.44          0.62       0.63         0.61      0.63
                               (0.08)    (0.06)    (0.06)    (0.05)       (0.10)     (0.10)       (0.10)    (0.09)
 Net Load                                                    -0.05                                          -0.01
                                                             (0.01)                                         (0.01)
 (Net Load)2                                                   0.00                                           0.00
                                                             (0.00)                                         (0.00)
 (Net Load)3                                                   0.00                                           0.00
                                                             (0.00)                                         (0.00)
 Unit FEs                       X          X        X         X            X           X           X         X
 Hour-of-day FEs                           X        X         X                        X           X         X
 Day-of-week FEs                                              X                                              X
 Month-of-year FEs                         X        X         X                        X         X           X
 Unit × Month FEs                                   X                                            X
 N                           612,939    612,939 612,939 612,939         497,148     497,148   497,148      497,148
     Panel B : Two-stage least squares, instrument is predicted Pi [yi = 1|X ] using random forest model
 yi                        -0.24     -0.26     -0.23      -0.29            0.39       0.39     0.35      0.39
                           (0.05)    (0.04)    (0.04)     (0.03)         (0.06)     (0.06)   (0.06)   (0.06)
 Net Load                                                 -0.05                                       -0.01
                                                          (0.01)                                      (0.01)
 (Net Load)2                                                0.00                                         0.00
                                                          (0.00)                                      (0.00)
 (Net Load)3                                                0.00                                         0.00
                                                          (0.00)                                      (0.00)
 Unit FEs                   X          X         X          X             X          X        X         X
 Hour-of-day FEs                       X         X          X                        X        X         X
 Day-of-week FEs                                            X                                           X
 Month-of-year FEs                     X         X          X                        X        X         X
 Unit × Month FEs                                X                                            X
 N                       612,939 612,939 612,939 612,939               497,148 497,148 497,148 497,148
      Notes: The dependent variable is the competitively offered quantity offered in the day-ahead market relative
      to the available capacity. Net load is equal to the day-ahead forecast of the system load minus the forecast
      supply from wind and solar measured in GWh. Standard errors (clustered at the unit level) in parentheses.




                                                            45
                         Table 9: Daily Re-dispatch Cost and Net Load

                                                (1)           (2)              (3)
                 Net load                   -45, 887 -1, 494, 401 -1, 436, 106
                                            (16,785)   (143,631)    (149,020)
                 (Net load)2                               25,478       23,535
                                                          (2,514)      (2,619)
                 Net load SD                                          336,409
                                                                     (65,610)
                 Intercept                      X              X               X
                 Month of sample FEs            X              X               X
                 Adj. R2                          0.40              0.49             0.51
                 N                                 726               726              726
                   Notes: The dependent variable is the daily cost of re-dispatch in EUR.
                   Net load values are daily averages expressed in GWh Net load SD is
                   the intradaily standard deviation. Standard errors in parentheses.




 Figure 9: Total Cost to Serve Load vs. Load Weighted Average Day-Ahead Market Price




Notes: Average total cost to serve load (Total) is calculated as the demand valued at the demand-side day-
ahead market price plus the re-dispatch cost. This value is then divided by the demand to get an average
cost per MWh demand. Demand purchased or sold in the intra-day markets is ignored. Daily averages for
the years 2017 and 2018.



                                                      46
References
Bohn, Roger E, Michael C Caramanis, and Fred C Schweppe, "Optimal pricing in
 electrical networks over space and time," The Rand Journal of Economics, 1984, pp. 360­
 376.

Cattaneo, Matias D., Richard K. Crump, Max H. Farrell, and Yingjie Feng,
 "Binscatter Regressions," Technical Report, arXiv 2019.

Chernozhukov, Victor, Denis Chetverikov, Mert Demirer, Esther Duflo, Chris-
 tian Hansen, Whitney Newey, and James Robins, "Double/debiased machine learn-
 ing for treatment and structural parameters," The Econometrics Journal, 2018, 21, C1­
 C68.

Graf, Christoph and Frank A. Wolak, "Measuring the Ability to Exercise Unilateral
 Market Power in Locational-Pricing Markets: An Application to the Italian Electricity
 Market," Technical Report, Working Paper 2020.

  , Federico Quaglia, and Frank A. Wolak, "Market Performance Assessment in Loca-
  tional Markets with Non-convexities," Technical Report, Working Paper 2020.

Hirth, Lion and Ingmar Schlecht, "Redispatch Markets in Zonal Electricity Markets:
 Inc-Dec Gaming as a Consequence of Inconsistent Power Market Design (not Market
 Power)," EconStor Preprints 194292, ZBW - Leibniz Information Centre for Economics
 2019.

Ito, Koichiro and Mar Reguant, "Sequential Markets, Market Power, and Arbitrage,"
  American Economic Review, 2016, 106 (7), 1921­1957.

Open Power System Data, "Data Package Time series," 2019. Version 2019-06-05.

Wozabal, David, Christoph Graf, and David Hirschmann, "The effect of intermittent
 renewables on the electricity price variance," OR Spectrum, 2016, 38 (3), 687­709.




                                          47
A      Additional Econometric Analyses

In this Section, we extend the empirical analysis presented in Section 5 by enlarging the
sample size. Instead of selecting only combined cycle units that historically did the most
INC and DEC action, we now use all combined cycle units that are eligible to participate
in the re-dispatch market and do not have cost-of-service contracts with the transmission
operator. Excluding the set of units with such contracts is reasonable as these units are
obliged to either offer their available capacity at their short-run marginal cost or at zero
to the day-ahead market. Hence, even if there were a positive likelihood of getting INCed
or DECed in the re-dispatch market, these units are not able to take advantage of it. Our
sample comprises now 76 units for the INC product and 73 for the DEC product. The reason
why the number of units in the INC category is different from the number of units in the
DEC category is that we require at least two instances of an INC or a DEC for each category.
    The statistical analysis presented in Table 10, Panel A, is broadly similar to that presented
in Table (2), Panel A, with the only difference that we now consider the full set of units.
The qualitative interpretation does not change. The only difference is that the coefficients of
the INC side are smaller than before but still statistically significant. The results also hold
when instrumenting for the indicator variable for whether a unit is INCed or DECed using
the predicted probability as instrument (compare Table 10, Panel B, with Table 4, Panel A).




                                               48
                           Table 10: Regressing Markups on Predicted Probability of getting INCed or DECed

                                                           INC                                                      DEC
                                       (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)             (5)           (6)          (7)           (8)
                                               Panel A: Ordinary least squares
     Predicted Pi [yi = 1|X ]     79.03     81.85       70.74      89.05      -189.84 -182.21 -173.02 -178.60
                                (16.54)   (14.42)     (12.56)    (14.14)       (27.36)   (26.37)   (25.35)   (24.86)
     Net Load                                                       6.93                                        3.58
                                                                  (1.74)                                      (1.50)
     (Net Load)2                                                  -0.29                                       -0.17
                                                                  (0.06)                                      (0.05)
                3
     (Net Load)                                                     0.00                                        0.00
                                                                  (0.00)                                      (0.00)
     Unit FEs                     X         X           X          X             X         X         X         X
     Hour-of-day FEs                        X           X          X                       X         X         X
     Day-of-week FEs                                               X                                           X
     Month-of-year FEs                      X           X          X                       X         X         X
     Unit × Month FEs                                   X                                            X




49
     N                        1,137,062 1,137,062 1,137,062 1,137,062        1,093,849 1,093,849 1,093,849 1,093,849
                                 Panel B : Instrument is predicted Pi [yi = 1|X ] using random forest model
     yi                                51.40       53.06       44.74        57.55       -116.77 -111.29      -98.91 -108.98
                                     (10.78)      (9.42)      (7.98)       (9.26)        (17.18)    (16.44)  (15.18)   (15.45)
     Net Load                                                                6.33                                         3.93
                                                                           (1.64)                                       (1.46)
     (Net Load)2                                                           -0.28                                        -0.19
                                                                           (0.06)                                       (0.05)
     (Net Load)3                                                             0.00                                         0.00
                                                                           (0.00)                                       (0.00)
     Unit FEs                          X          X            X            X              X          X        X         X
     Hour-of-day FEs                              X            X            X                         X        X         X
     Day-of-week FEs                                                        X                                            X
     Month-of-year FEs                            X            X            X                         X        X         X
     Unit × Month FEs                                          X                                               X
     N                             1,137,062 1,137,062 1,137,062 1,137,062             1,093,849 1,093,849 1,093,849 1,093,849
          Notes: The dependent variable is the markup in the day-ahead market in EUR/MWh. Net load is equal to the day-ahead forecast of the
          system load minus the forecast supply from wind and solar measured in GWh. Standard errors (clustered at the unit level) in parentheses.
Table 11: Regressing Markups on Predicted Probability of getting INCed or DECed (Ignoring
Renewable Generation forecast data in Prediction Models)

                                               INC                        DEC
                                         (1)         (2)            (3)         (4)
                             Panel A: Ordinary least squares
          Predicted Pi [yi = 1|X ]   86.25      86.29     -168.73 -200.03
                                   (21.75)    (18.60)      (33.20)   (28.40)
          Unit FEs                    X         X            X         X
          N                        612,939 1,137,062       497,148 1,093,849
                               Panel B : Two-stage least squares
          yi                             57.78      56.45     -107.46 -125.85
                                      (14.44)    (12.19)       (21.54)  (18.31)
          Unit FEs                        X        X             X        X
          N                           612,939 1,137,062       497,148 1,093,849
               Notes: The dependent variable is the markup in the day-ahead market in
               EUR/MWh. Standard errors (clustered at the unit level) in parentheses.
               Columns (1) and (3): most important CCGT units; Columns (2) and (4):
               all eligible CCGT units. In Panel (B) we instrument yi with the predicted
               Pi [yi = 1|X ] derived from the random forest model.




                                                50
