                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       THE GREAT MIGRATION OF BLACK AMERICANS FROM THE US SOUTH:
                      A GUIDE AND INTERPRETATION

                                       William J. Collins

                                      Working Paper 27268
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27268


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                           May 2020, Revised November 2020




I appreciate valuable suggestions on earlier drafts from Jeremy Atack, Brian Beach, Leah
Boustan, Carola Frydman, Nicholas Holtkamp, Robert A. Margo, Marianne Wanamaker, Ariell
Zimran, and three anonymous referees. Some of the more speculative ideas expressed here
originated in an invited address at Northwestern University in May 2019, where attendees asked
insightful questions prompting further thought. I gratefully acknowledge that most of the text was
written while I was a visiting scholar at the University of Colorado-Boulder in Fall 2019. The
NSF supported some of my earlier work on the Great Migration with Wanamaker (SES 1156085
and 1156057). All errors and omissions are my fault, and all opinions are my own. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by William J. Collins. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
The Great Migration of Black Americans from the US South: A Guide and Interpretation
William J. Collins
NBER Working Paper No. 27268
May 2020, Revised November 2020
JEL No. J15,J61,J7,N32,N92

                                          ABSTRACT

The Great Migration from the US South is a prominent theme in economic history research not
only because it was a prime example of large scale internal migration, but also because it had far-
reaching ramifications for American economic, social, and political change. This article offers a
concise review of the literature focused on questions of timing, selection, and migrants'
outcomes, and then offers a more speculative interpretation of how the Great Migration fostered
the advancement of Civil Rights. It concludes by pointing out areas where further exploration
would be valuable.


William J. Collins
Department of Economics
Vanderbilt University
VU Station B #351819
2301 Vanderbilt Place
Nashville, TN 37235-1819
and NBER
william.collins@vanderbilt.edu
1. Introduction
        Between 1910 and 1970, several million Black Americans migrated from the South in what
became known as "the Great Migration." This resulted in a large-scale redistribution of the Black
population--nearly 90 percent of Black Americans lived in the South in 1910, but by 1970, less than
half did. Over the same 60-year period, the Black share of residents in New York, Philadelphia,
Chicago, Detroit, and Los Angeles, some of the main destinations for Black migrants, increased from
approximately 3 percent to 26 percent.1
        Although the Great Migration ended 50 years ago, it is a prominent research topic in
economics and other social sciences. Among many recent publications and working papers, see
Alexander et al. (2017); Black et al. (2015); Boustan (2017); Calderon et al. (2019); Collins and
Wanamaker (2014, 2015); Derenoncourt (2019); Leibbrand et al. (2020), Stuart and Taylor
(forthcoming A and B); and Tabellini (2019). It has also been the subject of best-selling books, such
as Nicholas Lehmann's The Promised Land: The Great Black Migration and How It Changed
America (1991) and Isabel Wilkerson's The Warmth of Other Suns: The Epic Story of America's
Great Migration (2010), which interpret the Great Migration through the experiences of specific
individuals, families, and places.
        A key theme in this literature and this essay is that the Great Migration is an important
subject not only because it is a prime example of internal migration--thereby useful for testing
economic models of selection, networks, destination choice, and so on--but more importantly,
because it has had deep and long-lasting ramifications for American society. The Great Migration
provides a window on the interaction of race, economics, and politics in America's past, present, and
future. Its story helps to connect the dots between historical and modern racial inequality in the
United States, ranging from the rural post-Civil War South to the urban post-World War II North and
West. This is what draws many scholars to study the Great Migration--it is hard to understand the
modern United States without some appreciation for how the Great Migration transformed it.
        In this article, I review some of the literature's main questions and answers about the Great
Migration, many of which are grounded in microeconometric approaches to the study of migration
and cities. New data sources, techniques, and scholars have repeatedly opened the way for re-
examination and deeper dives into these questions. Then, I widen the essay's scope to pose questions
about the Great Migration and the broader course of American history and politics. In particular, I
speculate on the Great Migration's connections and contributions to the Civil Rights Movement,

1
 Black shares calculated with the 1-percent 1910 IPUMS sample (Ruggles et al. 2015) and the 1972 City Data
Book file from ICPSR Study 2896 (Haines and ICPSR 2010)
                                                                                                         1
which I suggest are an important but underappreciated legacy in the economic history literature.


2. Facts and figures about the Great Migration
         For perspective on the magnitude of the Great Migration, Figure 1 shows the share of the
southern-born Black population residing outside of the South, plotted separately for ten-year birth
cohorts and observed at ten-year census intervals. The figure is built from repeated cross-sections of
the IPUMS microdata samples of Census of Population data (Ruggles et al. 2015), relying on
variables for state of birth, state of residence, and age (converted to birth cohort).2
         After 1910, large shares of each cohort relocated outside the South. The 1900-10 birth
cohort, for instance, increased their non-southern residence during the 1920s by about 15 percentage
points; by 1950, 36 percent of this cohort lived outside the South. For the 1920-30 birth cohort, the
changes were even more stark, with a 23 percentage point jump in the 1940s and a 44 percent share
outside the South by 1980.3 After 1970, the outflow of migrants was much reduced, such that the
1950s birth cohort had the lowest outmigration rate of any group since the 1880s cohort. The
conventional view is that the Great Migration ended in the 1970s as Black migration from the South
declined, Black migration to the South increased (Long and Hansen 1975; Adelman et al. 2000; Hunt
et al. 2008), and parts of the South prospered in the wake of the Civil Rights revolution (Wright
2013).
         Figure 2 shows the pre- and post-Great Migration distribution of the US-born Black
population by census division. The geographic concentration of the Black population in southern
census divisions in 1910 stands out (shown in black bars). By 1970 (gray bars), the share of the
Black population had declined in every southern census division and in every southern state with the
exception of Maryland and Florida. It had increased in the Mid-Atlantic, East North Central, and
Pacific divisions, especially in New York, Illinois, and California. In fact, the Black population in
New York State was larger than in any single southern state by 1970. A dissimilarity index that
summarizes differences in the White and Black population distributions over states declines sharply
between 1910 and 1970, from approximately 0.65 to 0.28, but even so, it is important to recognize
that the Black population remained quite differently distributed than the White population within
2
  Documentation and code for replication of figures reported in this article are available at OpenICPSR
(Collins 2020). There is some age heaping in the Black population, especially for those born in the nineteenth
century, which could lead to some misclassification into birth cohorts. Re-centering cohort definitions (e.g.,
grouping 35-44 year olds rather than 30-39 year olds) results in a picture that is visually similar to Figure 1
(e.g., peaking at over 40 percent for some cohorts in census years 1960 to 1990).
3
  For perspective, the maximum share for southern-born White cohorts residing outside the South was only 23
percent (for the 1920s birth cohort observed in 1960).
                                                                                                                  2
states and within metropolitan areas.4 These differences imply that economic shocks and trends that
varied over space likely had substantially different implications for Black and White workers.
        Figure 3A reports occupational distributions in 1930 and 1960 for Black migrants and three
comparison groups: Black men who remained in the South, Black men who were born and resided in
the North and West, and White men who were born and resided in the North and West. I chose these
dates because the first large wave of the Great Migration ended circa 1930 with the onset of the Great
Depression, and the next large wave came during the 1940s and 1950s and therefore should be
reflected in 1960's census data. In 1930 (upper panel), the most striking differences are that Black
men in the North and West, including migrants, rarely worked in agriculture, whereas agriculture was
the modal sector for southern Black men; migrants were less likely to be in white-collar work and
more likely to be unskilled laborers than northern Black non-migrants; and Black men in the North
(both migrants and non-migrants) had substantially lower occupational status than White men (i.e.,
less white-collar work and less skilled blue-collar work). In 1960 (lower panel), northern Black men
had reduced their share of employment in unskilled labor and increased their share in operative, craft,
and white-collar employment compared to 1930, but they still lagged far behind northern White men
in professional and managerial work.5 Another important trend is that by 1960 a relatively large
share of Black men in each comparison group was not in the labor force despite being ages 25-54.6
        Figure 3B reports occupational distributions for women in 1930 and 1960 for the same
comparison groups. Black women in the North in the 1930, both migrant and non-migrant, were
much more likely than White women to be in the labor force and much more likely to work in
household and non-household service. By 1960, differences in labor force participation had
narrowed somewhat, but where White women were primarily concentrated in clerical and sales work
(if in the labor force), Black women were still primarily in service occupations. Notably, northern-
born Black women in 1960, many of whom would have been children of the earlier wave migrants,

4
  The dissimilarity index ranges between 0 and 1 and represents the share of the White or Black population that
would have to move across state lines to equalize the White and Black distributions (Duncan 1955). At the
county level, the dissimilarity indices are higher (approximately 0.70 in 1910 and 0.47 in 1970); the relatively
high 1970 figure reflects the uneven distribution of the Black population across counties in the North and
West. These were calculated using county data from Haines and ICPSR Study 2896, excluding Alaska and
Hawaii. Within metropolitan areas, Black residential segregation increased sharply during the Great Migration
(Cutler, Glaeser, and Vigdor 1999). See also Logan and Parman (2017) who show that residential segregation
increased in both rural and urban areas between 1880 and 1940. This issue is taken up later in the paper.
5
  In a sample of 40-49 year old men in 1950, the ratio of southern-born Black over non-southern born White
annual income is 0.67 (including only those with positive income and using sample line weights.)
6
  Note that the "labor force" concept and its derivation from census questions was not the same in 1930 and
1960. See the IPUMS documentation on the labforce variable at https://usa.ipums.org/usa-
action/variables/LABFORCE#comparability_section.
                                                                                                              3
were substantially more likely than migrants to have made inroads in professional and clerical and
sales work.7
        In sum, while their earnings prospects were, on average, better in the North than in the South,
it is also clear that within the North, Black migrants were a relatively low-paid segment of the labor
force during the Great Migration. Figure 4 depicts men's annual earnings in 1949, based on the 1950
census microdata, for a few specific comparison groups. Men who worked as farmers and farm
laborers are dropped from the sample here because it is difficult to assess their in-kind income. This
drops some of the poorest southern Black men from the sample.8 Even so, the earnings distribution
for southern Black men is located far to the left of the distribution for Black migrants in the North or
West, consistent with large potential earnings gains from migration (subject to concerns about
migrant selection and cost of living differences). The Black migrants' earnings distribution, on the
other hand, is located far to the left of the northern White earnings distribution, indicating the limits
of migration as a source of Black-White income convergence.


3. Survey: A concise introduction to the Great Migration literature
        The century-long and multidisciplinary literature on the Great Migration cannot be fully
reviewed in the space of one essay. I will focus primarily on work in economics and economic
history, but I will also try to incorporate some references to relevant branches of research in
sociology and history.9 The goal is to provide readers with a sense of how research has developed
over time and how it has responded to new opportunities in the form of improved data and methods.
        From the beginning, scholars have engaged fundamental questions regarding the timing of
the Great Migration's onset, the migrants' selection (i.e., how migrants differed from the base
population), the migrants' choice of destinations, their earnings gains, and their impact on
employment, wages, and housing markets in receiving and sending areas (for early examples, see
Scroggs 1917, Woodson 1918, Haynes 1918, Scott 1920, Donald 1921). Scholars have made
progress in all of these areas, but data shortcomings and common challenges of interpretation (e.g.,
making causal inferences from observational data) have always meant that there is more to learn and,
potentially, better answers on the horizon.
        Before summarizing some key aspects of the literature, it is worthwhile to reflect on the fact

7
  For longer-run views of Black women's labor market outcomes, see Jones (1985), Sundstrom (2000), Bailey
and Collins (2004), Curtis White (2005), Boustan and Collins (2014), and Collins and Moody (2017).
8
  In addition to in-kind income, regional differences in cost of living complicate comparisons of census
reported income, especially since housing characteristics are so different across regions historically.
9
  See Tolnay (2003) for an earlier review and discussion of research on the Great Migration.
                                                                                                            4
that Black Americans are and have been greatly under-represented in the economics profession.10
The economics literature on the Great Migration tends to reflect this fact, though Black scholars in
economics and other fields have made many important contributions that are featured in the
discussion below. It is surely possible that a more diverse economics profession would have engaged
the study of the Great Migration differently, more intensively, or more continuously over the time. It
is notable that in the concluding chapter of his history of Black migration (published in 1918), Carter
G. Woodson, an eminent Black historian, anticipated several of the fundamental themes that
economists have taken up in recent decades. That chapter is a fitting place to start reading about the
Great Migration--it marks the beginning of a century of multidisciplinary scholarship that continues
to extend and revise our understanding of US economic history. It is also a fitting place to
contemplate missed opportunities, as the Great Migration unfolded with comparatively little
contemporaneous attention in the leading economics journals.11


3.1 The timing of the Great Migration
        Given large regional differences in observed wages and income per capita in the post Civil
War era (Easterlin 1960, Margo 2004), a basic question about the Great Migration is why it began in
the 1910s, rather than several decades before. Before the Civil War, about 95 percent of Black
southerners were slaves (Ransom 2006). After the war, there was no large-scale redistribution of
land or compensation granted to former slaves (Oubre 1978, Foner 1988); therefore, most Black
southerners circa 1865 possessed no capital, land, or formal education. It may appear that Black
southerners had little incentive to stay in the South, especially as southern Whites re-asserted
political control after Reconstruction, perpetrated widespread violence against Black residents and


10
   The 2017 Report of the Committee on the Status of Minority Groups in the Economics Profession indicated that
Black students were under-represented at all levels of degrees granted in economics circa 2015-16, even more so
than in STEM fields (Table 1). Moreover, the trend from 1995 to 2015 showed no improvement (Figure 2). Black
under-representation was also clear among economics faculty of all ranks (Table 5).
11
   For instance, Vickery's "selected bibliography" from his 1969 dissertation (1977) lists no papers specifically
focused on Black migration in major economics journals after Scroggs (1917), nor did I find such papers in
that timeframe in JSTOR searches of the Journal of Political Economy, Quarterly Journal of Economics, and
American Economic Review (though it is sometimes mentioned in passing). Darity (1994, p. 61) points out a
general "hiatus" in economics journals' publications on race from the 1910s until the late 1950s, following a
turn-of-the-century literature that assumed Black inferiority. See Wilson (2006) for a history of Black social
scientists and their research in the early to mid-twentieth century, including work on the Great Migration.
Some notable mid-century books by economists did engage the Great Migration. Myrdal (1944) discusses
migration Black migration at various points. Among Myrdal's many collaborators on that book were Black
social scientists Ralph Bunche, E. Franklin Frazier, and Charles S. Johnson (Bok 1996, xxiii). Robert
Weaver's Negro Labor: A National Problem (1946) also discusses Black migration in the context of the
wartime labor market.
                                                                                                                5
political leaders, and eroded Blacks' civil and political rights.12 In practice, however, poor and
predominantly agricultural populations are often slow to engage in long-distance migration,
especially when they lack extensive networks of contacts in potential destinations (Spitzer and
Zimran 2019). In this case, one could argue that the South's labor market was comparatively isolated
and disconnected from the North circa 1865 (Wright 1986, ch. 3; Rosenbloom 2002), whereas the
North's labor market was already tightly integrated with Europe's, as evidenced by the migration of
approximately 30 million Europeans in the "Age of Mass Migration" (Hatton and Williamson 1998,
Abramitzky and Boustan 2017). At this time, northern employers commonly discriminated in favor
of White workers, including European immigrants when they were available, further limiting
potential Black migrants' access to jobs (Whatley 1990, Collins 1997).13 Thus, in the nineteenth
century, migration to the North may have been a costly and risky venture for most Black southerners,
at least in comparison to conditions that prevailed later.
        An alternative, but not mutually exclusive, interpretation of the relatively low level of
outmigration before the 1910s would emphasize the determination of Black families to acquire land
and make a living in the South. Indeed, despite the obstacles, Black southerners accumulated
property and literacy at substantial rates in the decades after the Civil War (Higgs 1982, Margo 1984,
Williams 2005, Collins and Margo 2006, 2011), a testament to their resolve to build a better life for
themselves and their children in the South. Such advances in wealth and human capital, although
still far behind White levels on average, might have helped set the stage for the Great Migration by
loosening the constraints of poverty and illiteracy on migration (Margo 1990, ch. 7). But the
initiation of the Great Migration apparently required more than just the existence of large regional
wage differences and gradual increases in southern Black wealth and literacy. The onset coincided
with the increase in industrial production during World War I and the simultaneous decline in
immigration from Europe. Most US industrial centers were in the North, and their demand for labor




12
   See Foner (1988) for detailed history of the Reconstruction period. On the post-Reconstruction southern
"Redeemers" he writes: "They shared...a commitment to dismantling the Reconstruction state, reducing the
political power of blacks, and reshaping the South's legal system in the interests of labor control and racial
subordination" (p. 588). Models of locational choice (e.g., Sjaastad 1962, Roback 1982) help clarify the role
of factors other than wages in determining the relative attractiveness of locations.
13
   A notable exception is that Black workers were sometimes recruited for breaking strikes (Whatley 1993).
Before the Civil War but after the onset of mass migration from Europe, Frederick Douglass observed, "Every
hour see the black man [in the North] elbowed out of employment by some newly arrived immigrant whose
hunger and whose color are thought to give him a better title to the place" (quoted in Myrdal 1944, pp. 291-
292).
                                                                                                             6
was met in part by Black migrants from the South.14 This timing has anchored the view that the
war's positive shock to industrial labor demand and simultaneous negative shock to European
immigrant labor supply spurred the first wave of large-scale migration from the South (Woodson
1918, p. 172; Thomas 1954; Collins 1997). Even before the returns from the 1920 census schedules
were tabulated, it was clear to scholars and many other observers that Black men and women were
leaving the South at an unprecedented pace.15 W. E. B. Du Bois (1920) urged southern migrants to
pour "into the open doors of mine and factory" while immigration remained low.
        Three aspects of the early stages of the Great Migration led to self-sustaining migration flows
from the South after World War I. First, as Whatley (1990) shows with data from Cincinnati, some
northern firms gained their first experience employing Black workers, and this appears to have
facilitated future hiring. Second, migrants supplied information and assistance to relatives and
friends who remained in the South, which reduced the costs and uncertainty of migration (inter alia,
Scott 1920, Marks 1989, Carrington et al. 1996, Stuart and Taylor forthcoming A). Given this,
Grossman asserts that by 1917 it was no longer necessary for northern firms to send recruiters south
(1989, p. 47). Third, northern Black newspapers, such as the Chicago Defender, began to circulate
widely in the South, and they too conveyed useful information and encouraged migration (Grossman
1989, ch. 3).16 In addition to these self-perpetuating features of migration, negative shocks to
southern agriculture, most famously the boll weevil and the New Deal's AAA program, may have
loosened Black workers' attachment to the region and increased migration.17 Higgs (1976) argues
that the boll weevil was neither necessary nor sufficient to drive the Great Migration, though it may
have mattered for certain states in the 1920s (see also Lewis 1931). In any case, Black migration
from the South during the 1920s, long after the demand spike associated with World War I had
passed, far exceeded migration levels during the 1910s (Eldridge and Thomas 1964, table 1.27).
        To be clear, it is well understood that racial discrimination was widespread in the North and
West before, during, and after the beginning of the Great Migration. This had important and
detrimental implications for the jobs Black workers were able to secure (Du Bois 1899; Myrdal 1944;


14
   A large number of White southerners migrated during this period, as well (Collins and Wanamaker 2015).
Although the number of White migrants was large in absolute terms, their migration rate (relative to
population) was lower than that of the Black population.
15
   See early publications by Scroggs (1917), Woodson (1918), and the US Department of Labor (1919).
16
   See the map of the Defender's shipping list in Grossman (1989, pp. 76-77). Also see Panels 33 and 34 of
Jacob Lawrence's Migration Series of paintings (Lawrence 1941), which highlight that letters and newspapers
were important sources of information in spurring migration.
17
   See Whatley (1983) on the New Deal. See Day (1967) and Grove and Heinicke (2003) on mechanization in
later decades.
                                                                                                          7
Weaver 1950; Peterson 1979; Foote, Whatley, and Wright 2003), the unemployment rates they
would endure (Sundstrom 1992; Eichenlaub et al. 2010), and the housing they could access (Abrams
1955; Massey and Denton 1993; Meyer 2000). But it is also clear that the scope for Black
Americans' economic, educational, and political activity was greater in the North and West than in
the South, a theme I return to later in the paper.


3.2 The migrants: selection, gains, and losses
        Scholars and commentators immediately recognized that documenting the characteristics of
southern migrants was essential to understanding the migration's implications for both the sending
and receiving regions. The early literature was limited, however, by the aggregate nature of census
data reported in published census volumes. One of the great benefits of microdata samples that
became available after 1960 is that scholars could more carefully compare migrants and non-
migrants either in the place from which they departed or the place to which they moved. In cross-
sectional data with birthplace information, inter-regional migrants are typically defined as those born
in the South but living elsewhere (as in Figure 1). To my knowledge, microdata-based comparisons
were first featured in a literature motivated by concentrated poverty in northern cities in the 1960s.
For instance, studies by Masters (1972) and Weiss and Williamson (1972) focus on comparisons of
labor market outcomes for southern-born Black workers residing in northern or western cities with
non-southern-born Black workers in those same places.18 The idea was to see whether southern
migrants to the North were disproportionately poor; if so, it might imply that the economic plight of
northern Black families circa 1970 was rooted directly in the poverty of the South and transmitted by
migration.19 However, the microdata revealed that Black migrants fared at least as well as, if not
better than, northern-born Black workers on most dimensions of labor market outcomes even though
they had lower levels of educational attainment. Positive selection into migration on
"unobservables" (e.g., motivation, health, skills not reflected in educational attainment) might well
account for this finding. But in any case, it was clear that the economic and social problems of
American ghettos, which motivated much of this research, were not simply an urban manifestation of
transplanted southern poverty. Boustan (2009, 2010) and Derenoncourt (2019), which I discuss in
more detail later, pick up this thread of investigation on how migrants fared in the North and,

18
   Weiss and Williamson (1972), for example, studied the Survey of Economic Opportunities, taken circa
1967, and Masters (1972) studied the 1/1000 sample of the 1960 census. Long and Heltman (1975) and
Lieberson (1978), among others, also address this question, albeit without microdata.
19
   For instance, Masters asks, "How many of the problems facing northern (or urban) Negroes can be attributed
directly to their migration from the South (or from rural areas)?" (1972, p. 412).
                                                                                                            8
importantly, how conditions changed in the North in response to the migrants' arrival.
     Margo's examination of education and propensity for migration (1990, ch. 7) is an important
early study in the microdata-based literature on the Great Migration. He uses micro-level data from
the 1900, 1910, 1940, and 1950 "public use tapes." These were relatively small but nationally
representative samples of cross-sectional census data, the precursors to the IPUMS samples. Like the
studies mentioned above, the microdata allowed close comparisons between migrants and non-
migrants. Margo shows that better educated southern-born Black men were more likely to move to
the North than others, even after controlling for observables such as age, marital status, and family
size (table 7.3). His interpretation emphasizes the importance of "supply-side" factors affecting the
Black inter-regional migration rate--specifically the low but rising level of Black literacy in the late
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. In this framework, advances in educational attainment from
one generation to the next helped support an increasing flow of Black outmigration, even if the post-
1914 surge of the Great Migration still required an exogenous shock (p. 117). Margo's work was at
the forefront of a new wave of research on the Great Migration that would draw heavily on microdata
sources.20 The dissemination of the IPUMS (Ruggles et al. 1995), which harmonized historical
public use microdata from the US census and made samples available for convenient and free
downloading, combined with rapid increases in desktop computing power, greatly increased
scholars' ability to analyze detailed data pertaining to the Great Migration.
     A key shortcoming of the IPUMS data in this context is their cross-sectional nature--one cannot
observe the same person at two points in time, which obscures information that would be helpful in
understanding the population's selection into migration and workers' labor market gains from
migrating. There is some traction to be gained from using state-of-birth and year-of-birth
information in the cross-sectional data, but of course this approach leaves open the questions of when
any given migrant actually moved (e.g., as a child or adult, before or after completing their
schooling, and so on), the environment from which they departed (e.g., rural or urban; cotton-
intensive or not), and what they were doing before their departure (e.g., farm or non-farm
employment).
     The value of longitudinal datasets for the study of migration is clear, but until recently such data



20
  Among many others that rely heavily on samples of IPUMS data, see for example Tolnay (1998), Vigdor
(2002), Curtis White (2005), and Eichenlaub et al. (2010). Eichenlaub et al. (2010) uses the IPUMS cross-
sections from 1940 to 1980 to show that Black male migrants tended to have substantially higher nominal
income but lower employment rates (especially in the West) than those who migrated within the South.
Occupational status measured (using an index gauging prestige) is similar.
                                                                                                            9
were scarce for the Great Migration era.21 For instance, the National Longitudinal Surveys and Panel
Study of Income Dynamics--workhorse longitudinal datasets for modern social scientists--
commenced in the late 1960s, when the Great Migration was at or near its end. New data sources
and methods enabled Collins and Wanamaker (2014) to overcome this problem by linking census
records over time in the early twentieth century. Specifically, we linked males who resided in the
South in 1910 forward in time to the 1930 census manuscripts (searched via Ancestry.com and then
transcribed) to study selection into migration and to measure the migrants' gains.22 We find evidence
that migrants were somewhat better off than non-migrants even before leaving the South, though the
difference on average was not very large; therefore, we emphasize the broad-based nature of the
Great Migration over this period. It is possible, of course, that patterns of migrant selection were
different and more positively skewed before World War I, reflecting the nature of migration costs
and variation over time in northern labor demand for unskilled labor.
     A strong interpretation of the early decades of the Great Migration in terms of the Roy model
(Roy 1951, Borjas 1987), which predicts that migrants will be drawn disproportionately from the
more skilled or educated workers of the base population when returns to skill are relatively high in
the potential destination, is difficult due to the scarcity of data on race-specific income distributions
and skill differentials. Collins and Wanamaker (2014, pp. 224-225 and 242-243) offer some
discussion of the evidence, suggesting that positively selected Black migration is not consistent with
a simple version of the Roy model but might be consistent with richer versions of the model, such as
those that incorporate differential migration costs across skill groups (Chiquiar and Hanson 2005).
Readers interested in this line of investigation should also see Vigdor (2002), which studies selection
patterns in cross sectional data for 1940 and 1970.
     Collins and Wanamaker (2014) estimate large earnings gains for migrants, reflecting both
changes in occupations (a tendency to move into higher paying jobs) and changes in locations (within
occupations, northern pay was higher than southern).23 There is no random assignment into

21
   Maloney (2001) demonstrated some of the promise of longitudinal records for studying the Great Migration
based on linking 1920 census records and World War I registration data to study occupational mobility in
Cincinnati. Also, see Bodnar et al. (1982) on Pittsburgh and Logan (2009) on Black Civil War veterans.
Logan finds that health shocks influenced veterans' likelihood of migration up to 1900, a form of positive selection
that could have broader implications for understanding historical migration patterns.
22
   Linking women is difficult due to name changes at marriage, hence our focus on men. The possibilities and
technologies for census data linkage have changed rapidly since the early 2010s. The full count census
manuscripts with names are now available up to 1940 for researchers with approved projects and access to the
data. Searching and transcribing by hand Ancestry.com's census of population records is no longer necessary.
23
   A perennial challenge to working with historical data on labor market outcomes is that individual-level
earnings are not reported in the census, hence our reliance on occupation, race, and location to impute
                                                                                                                  10
migration in Collins and Wanamaker (2014), but we do measure the gains from several different
perspectives (comparisons of men from the same county, from the same household, or "within
person" changes in occupational earnings scores for men in the labor force in both 1910 and 1930),
all of which point toward large earnings gains. Finally, we use estimated earnings gains to calculate
the change in the Black-White occupational earnings ratio from 1910 to 1930 that might be
attributable to migration. We conclude that in absence of the Great Migration, the Black-White
earnings ratio might have fallen rather than risen slightly.
    Although work specifically focused on health outcomes of Black migrants is relatively new,
evidence is building that migrants paid a price in terms of their health. In historical settings, it is not
uncommon for migrants to large cities to experience worse health outcomes than those remaining in
rural areas (Haines 2001), though for the overall US population, these rural-urban mortality gaps had
closed by the time of the Great Migration. Eriksson and Niemesh (2016) show that Black infant
mortality rates increased due to migration to northern cities, at least prior to 1940. For later cohorts
of migrants, Black et al. (2015) show that longevity declined in the Duke SSA/Medicare dataset,
which covers people over age 65 in 1976 to 2001 and includes detailed birthplace and time of death
information. A key innovation in this paper is to use proximity to railways in the early twentieth
century as an instrumental variable for migration to avoid bias associated with selective migration. It
has long been recognized that Black migration to the North tended to follow the railways, with those
from the South Atlantic tending to migrate to the large cities on the East Coast, whereas those from
the South Central were more likely to select the large cities of the Midwest. Black et al. estimate that
migrants, conditional on living to age 65, were about 10 percentage points less likely to survive to
age 75 than if they had not migrated.
    There is also evidence building that migrants were more likely to be incarcerated than men who
stayed in the South. This line of research is particularly timely given rising interest in how the
history of racial discrimination has shaped current levels and disparities in incarceration. Eriksson
(2019) examines incarceration rates, as revealed in the "group quarters" variable in 1940's full count
census data. She finds that Black migrants (southern-born men who left the South after 1920 and
were found in the North in 1940) had much higher chances of being incarcerated in 1940 than non-
migrants, even when compared to brothers who stayed in the South. She shows that this is
particularly true for recent migrants, perhaps reflecting the difficulty of finding steady work in urban
northern labor markets in the late 1930s. Relative to the overall rise in Black incarceration rates in

"earnings scores." See Collins and Wanamaker (2014) for a detailed discussion in this context. See Inwood,
Minns, and Summerfield (2019) and Saavedra and Twinam (2020) for more general discussions of the issue.
                                                                                                          11
the early twentieth century, the Great Migration's contribution seems small but not trivial. Her work
complements Muller (2012), who emphasizes the importance of both the redistribution of the Black
population to the North (where incarceration rates were relatively high) and rising Black
incarceration rates within the North as the Great Migration progressed. For the post-WWII period,
Derenoncourt (2019) presents causal evidence that the Great Migration increased Black incarceration
rates and police expenditures in northern and western cities. Finally, though not focused on
incarceration per se, Stuart and Taylor (forthcoming B) develop evidence, using the Great Migration
as a source of variation in social networks, that non-southern communities with higher levels of
connectedness experienced less crime after 1970.
     Much of the recent work reviewed here, especially that which relies on linked census records,
focuses on Black men's outcomes. There are technical reasons for this--name changes at time of
marriage make census record linkage difficult--but the omission of women is a clear shortcoming of
the economic history literature to date.24 Figure 3 shows how different Black women's labor force
participation and occupations were from those of white women and Black men. Curtis White (2005)
describes Black female migrants' labor market outcomes in detail using cross-sectional IPUMS
samples, and Curtis White et al. (2005) compare migration patterns of single and married women.
Yet there is much more to learn here, and with appropriate caution even selected samples of linked
census records might be insightful. In any case, bringing women's experiences more fully into the
economic history literature on the Great Migration would be valuable.25


3.3 Migration patterns: sources and destinations
     Figures 1 and 2 convey the magnitude of the geographic redistribution of the Black population
from 1910 to 1970. But within the South, there was sizable variation across locations in the rate of
Black out-migration from the region, and within the rest of the US, there was sizable variation in the
rate of Black in-migration. Furthermore, there was a great deal of migration within the South, which
tends to be neglected in studies of the Great Migration even though it is relevant to thinking about
southern workers' locational decisions. Scholars have long appreciated these facts, and in the late
1960s economists started to undertake econometric analyses of various "push" and "pull" factors that

24
   The use of marriage certificates (see Martha Bailey's LIFE-M project at https://life-m.org) and family tree
information from genealogical databases may provide a way forward.
25
   Ross Haynes (1923) provides an early empirical exploration of Black domestic workers, many of whom
were migrants. Trotter points out that through kin networks, "black women played a conspicuous role in
helping to organize the black migration" (2002, p. 32). And Jones (1985) provides detailed insights into the
connections between migration and Black women's labor at various points in her book.

                                                                                                                 12
were hypothesized to affect local migration rates. In essence, the cross-place variation provided a
means to test economic theories of migration and to "explain" migration rates.
        William Vickery (1977), in his 1969 dissertation at the University of Chicago, was one of the
first scholars to undertake an econometric analysis of state-level migration patterns from 1900 to
1960. This entailed a methodological step forward because, "None of the earlier research on this
topic exploits the ability of multiple regression analysis to help identify and measure the relative
strengths of the main determinants of Negro migration" (p. 9). Of course, this was long before the
existence of harmonized IPUMS data. Instead, Vickery analyzes migration at the state level by
regressing migration measures on state-level characteristics, separately for each decade. The results
are generally consistent with economic interpretations of migration (e.g., locations with higher
income levels attract more migrants). It is tenuous to interpret such conditional correlations as if they
measure causal relationships. Even so, by combining economic hypotheses about the determinants of
migration with historical perspective and data on Black migration, Vickery's work provided an
empirical foundation on which later work built.26 Flora Gill's 1975 dissertation (1979) is another
important and early econometric study based on state-level data. Collins (1997), which is specifically
interested in testing whether the prevalence of European immigration tended to depress rates of
Black migration to the North, also relies heavily on state- and city-level data from published census
volumes.
        Collins and Wanamaker (2015) examines migration patterns using micro-level data from
linked census records for both Black and White male southerners between 1910 and 1930. As
described above, an advantage of linked microdata is the ability to observe an individual's pre-
migration background characteristics, including location, in detail. In this paper, we were especially
interested in expanding the scope of investigation to include and compare migration patterns of
southern White men, who also left the South in large numbers but at lower per capita rates than Black
men. We show that there were substantial differences in White and Black migration patterns and that
observable characteristics in 1910 cannot account for those differences. We also show that in
choosing destinations, Black men were more deterred by distance than White men, more attracted to
manufacturing centers, and more responsive to variation in labor demand growth. We found only
mixed evidence that Black inter-state migrants were more likely than White inter-state migrants to
leave the South, conditional on potential destinations' observable economic characteristics (e.g.,

26
  Vickery's committee included Robert Fogel, who suggested the topic (Vickery 1977, acknowledgements).
Vickery also thanks Larry Sjaastad, who had recently expounded his theory of migration as an investment
(1962).
                                                                                                          13
proximity, income levels, industry mix). There were, however, notable Black-White differences in
choice of destination across non-southern regions (conditional on destination characteristics), with
Black men sorting relatively strongly into the industrial Midwest and Northeast and White men
sorting relatively strongly into the West. Although beyond the scope of the Collins and Wanamaker
data, this pattern changed in the 1940s, when Black southerners began migrating to the West
(especially California) in much larger numbers. Broadly speaking, it would be useful to have better
identified measures of how differences and changes in local "amenities" (i.e., local characteristics
valued by workers apart from real wages) affected migration patterns during the Great Migration.
        Stuart and Taylor (forthcoming A) provide an even more detailed view of migration patterns
by analyzing the Duke SSA/Medicare administrative data, which provides information on town of
birth. They illustrate the role of networks in channeling migration from place to place during the
Great Migration, finding that one new Black migrant from the South tended to pave the way for two
additional migrants. The general importance of networks for migration flows has long been
appreciated in the social sciences, but the scope, detail, and methodology in this study break new
ground.27


3.4 The North
        In 1910, less than two percent of the non-southern population was Black. A few cities had
sizable Black populations, but for the most part, only a small share of the urban northern population
was Black.28 The North held out some promise for economic advancement and political voice
relative to the South, though discrimination was widespread. James Grossman characterizes Chicago
in this pre-Great Migration era as follows: "Although discrimination circumscribed Black life in
Chicago and interacted with the material circumstances of most migrants to relegate them to the
worst housing and least desirable employment in the city, the color line was not ubiquitous. Nor did
it reflect the public values embodied in the laws of the state and city" (1989, p. 166). What unfolded
in northern cities with the arrival of millions of Black migrants after 1910 constitutes an important
branch of the Great Migration literature, one that connects the history of Black migration to some of
today's most pressing domestic policy issues.


27
   On networks in the Great Migration, also see Carrington et al. (1996) and Chay and Munshi (2015). On
more general patterns, also see Tolnay et al. (2005) and Curtis White et al. (2005).
28
   Philadelphia's population was 5.6 percent Black in 1910, the highest share among large northern cities. See
Du Bois (1899) for an insightful description. Several smaller northern cities had higher Black shares than
Philadelphia but all were under 10 percent, including St. Louis, Cincinnati, Omaha, Columbus, Indianapolis,
and Kansas City. Tabulations are from IPUMS 1910 1-percent sample (Ruggles et al. 2015).
                                                                                                            14
        In the aftermath of any large influx of immigrants, a natural question for economists is
whether and how their arrival affected the receiving area's economy. The impact of migration on
local economies and especially local labor markets is an area of common interest and, sometimes,
common methods for scholars of the Great Migration and scholars of international migration.
Boustan (2009) is a prime example of this common ground in that it studies how the arrival of
southern Black migrants affected the labor market outcomes of non-migrant Black and White
workers in the North. The paper's empirical work picks up the story in 1940, when wage data are
first available in the census. Building on methods from the immigration literature, Boustan uses
migration-induced variation in the North's Black labor supply (measured separately by education-
experience bins) to estimate the elasticity of substitution between White and Black workers. With
this parameter estimate in hand, she calculates the effects of Black migration on the wages of
northern Black and White workers between 1940 and 1970. The estimated effects on White workers'
wages were very small, whereas the negative effects on Black workers' wages were large for those
with 10 or more years of education (12-24 percent) (p. 775).29
        As mentioned above, some research on the Great Migration in the economics literature was
motivated by conditions in northern and western cities in the 1960s, where Black migrants tended to
live in highly segregated neighborhoods. The literature on residential segregation in American cities
is far too large to incorporate in full here. Instead, I will highlight some relatively recent work that
investigates the connection between the Great Migration and residential segregation.
        Cutler, Glaeser, and Vigdor (1999) is a useful starting point for discussion because it
documents and interprets the rise (and fall) of urban residential segregation, spanning from the late
nineteenth to the late twentieth centuries.30 This work is motivated in part by the authors' earlier
findings that residential segregation was associated with worse socioeconomic outcomes for young
Black men and women in the late twentieth century (Cutler and Glaeser 1997).31 They find a
positive correlation between Black population growth and increases in segregation after 1910, at least
for cities that were not already highly segregated. They conclude that around mid-century, near the
height of the Great Migration, White households' collective action, ranging from threats of violence
to legal barriers (such as restrictive covenants), enforced high levels of residential segregation. This
29
   See Gardner (2016) for additional work along these lines.
30
   An immediate data problem for this work was the lack of detailed spatial units for characterizing segregation
prior to 1940. Reliance on political ward boundaries within cities before 1940 was the next-best alternative,
but with better data and GIS techniques, scholars can now develop more detailed characterizations of changes
within cities in the pre-war period (e.g., Shertzer et al. 2016).
31
   Collins and Margo (2000) show that this negative association emerged in the late twentieth century but
appears to be absent in mid-twentieth century data.
                                                                                                             15
interpretation is consistent with evidence that Black households faced higher housing costs than
White households and that there was not a discernable difference in prices paid by recent migrants
relative to other Black households. The pattern was different in the late twentieth century and more
consistent with a view that "decentralized racism" was key--White households tended to sort into
exclusively White areas in highly segregated metropolitan areas and paid a premium to do so.
        Boustan (2010) directly investigates the connection between southern Black migrants to
northern cities and decentralized White responses. She shows that Black migration between 1940
and 1970 caused a significant amount of "White flight" from central cities. This interpretation is
based on an instrumental variable approach that combines estimates of southern outmigration post-
1940 with pre-1940 patterns of Black migration (i.e., the share of Black migrants from each southern
state that migrated to each northern city between 1935 and 1940); in practice, OLS results are fairly
similar (Table II). Each Black arrival appears to have led to more than two White departures. This
process may have had detrimental effects for remaining residents of central cities through fiscal
channels and by exacerbating residential segregation, but it may also have facilitated an increase in
Black homeownership in cities (Boustan and Margo 2013). Shertzer and Walsh (2019) extend the
investigation of White flight to the early twentieth century, using data at the neighborhood level
within cities. They find evidence of White flight in response to Black migrants even at the earliest
stages of the Great Migration.
        Collins and Margo (2011) show that at a national level, Black home ownership rates
plateaued at around 25 percent as the Great Migration began. In part, the stagnation reflected the
nature of the housing stock in the relatively dense areas of cities where Black migrants settled.
Despite a sizable increase in income associated with migration, the Black population's geographic
redistribution into cities tended to depress their home ownership rate, at least prior to 1940. After
1940, even as the Great Migration peaked in intensity, the Black home ownership rate increased,
doubling by 1970. This was partly driven by Black households' lifecycle accumulation of wealth but
also, as mentioned above, by White households' disproportionate departure from central cities
(Boustan and Margo 2013).
        Derenoncourt (2019) combines methods from Boustan (2010) with more recently revealed
information on variation in intergenerational mobility patterns across locations (Chetty and Hendren
2018). In particular, by using a shift-share instrument for Black migration to specific northern
destinations after 1940, Derenoncourt estimates that the Great Migration had a negative effect on
intergenerational upward mobility (measured at the commuting zone level) in the late twentieth
century, particularly for those from low-income families (pp. 18-19). Important local policy
                                                                                                        16
responses accompanied these changes in mobility; for instance, cities differentially increased their
spending on police by the 1960s but not on education (pp. 30-32), and their incarceration rates
increased. For an earlier period (up to 1930), Tabellini (2019) argues that Black migration led to cuts
in local spending due to declines in property values.
        An important lesson from the work reviewed above is that cities were not passive receptors
of Black migrants. Rather, residents responded to Black migration in ways that amplified the change
in central cities' demographic composition and that may have diminished the economic prospects for
those who remained. For valuable reading in this area outside the economics literature, I would
recommend Wilson (1987), Massey and Denton (1993), and Sharkey (2013). In addition, I would
emphasize a point made by Logan and Parman (2017) on the basis of the full count census records
for 1880 and 1940: Residential segregation was not solely an urban phenomenon, and levels of
residential segregation increased throughout the US after 1880, in both rural and urban areas and in
both the South and the North. In other words, although the Great Migration literature tends to focus
on residential segregation in northern and western cities for good reasons, it is also important to keep
in mind that residential segregation was widespread and rising everywhere.


4. Speculation
4.1 The Great Migration and the Civil Rights Movement
        In the remaining space I will focus primarily on the Great Migration's political and policy
ramifications, which ultimately may have diminished the impetus for Black migration from the
South. The Great Migration and the Civil Rights Movement both sprang from a context of economic
and political deprivation, and both encompassed purposeful efforts by millions of people to make
more of their lives' potential than was possible in the Jim Crow South. These movements--one
geographic, one political--were coterminous and intertwined, but the connections are
underappreciated, or at least underdeveloped, in the economics literature that studies the Great
Migration. In part, I think this is because it is fairly straightforward for economists to study topics
such as the determinants of migration or the local economic effects of migrant arrivals--we have
well developed (if imperfect) tools for causal inference and measurement in this domain--but it is
less straightforward to quantify and describe formally the origins and dynamics of social
movements.32 Recent work by Calderon, Fouka, Tabellini (2019) deserves mention here--it
connects variation in Black migration to variation in local political support for civil rights, an

32
  See Chong (1991) and also Collins (2003a and 2006), which study the political economy of anti-
discrimination laws at the state level.
                                                                                                          17
important step. Yet there is room for expansion on this theme, and it would result in a richer and
better-connected economic history of the American twentieth century.
           I will discuss some ways in which the Great Migration might have helped to strengthen the
Civil Rights Movement. However, it is important to acknowledge at the outset that the redistribution
of the Black population could have worked to undermine political support for new civil rights
legislation by generating a backlash among some northern Whites. Massey and Denton (1993, p.
29), for example, point to northern Whites' "increasing hostility and considerable alarm" in response
to southern Black migrants in the early stages of the Great Migration. It is also important to reiterate
that discrimination, violence, and racism were commonplace in the North, even if the institutions of
White supremacy ("Jim Crow") were less fully developed and enforced than in the South.
Nonetheless, I agree with James Gregory's observation that, "There was a particular regional
dynamic behind the twentieth-century drive for rights and equality, an almost Archimedean logic:
African Americans had to leave the South in order to gain the leverage needed to lift it and the rest of
the nation out of Jim Crow segregation" (2005, p. 237).
           Cities are hubs for innovative ideas and political organization, and the Great Migration
entailed the movement of Black Americans to many of the nation's largest cities. It is not surprising
that centers of Black migration also became centers of Black political power, particularly Chicago
and New York.33 In his history of the Civil Rights Movement in the North, Thomas Sugrue writes,
"the scope and scale and form of racial protest changed dramatically as millions of African
Americans moved northward in the 1920s...In the wake of the influx, northern cities became
hothouses of organizing" (2008, p. xx). The influx of Black migrants sometimes affected the balance
of political power within northern cities (Gregory 2005), where many voted for the first time. But the
perspective I want to emphasize here is that Black migrants, their descendants, and their political
allies were eventually able to project that power nationally. Keneshia Grant (2019) and Eric
Schickler (2016) have recently taken up this theme in their research. How this was accomplished
should be a central part of the story of the Great Migration, as well as the story of the Civil Rights
Movement and its origins.
           By the start of World War II, millions of Black Americans resided in (or had strong network
connections to) urban areas that would become centers for defense production. Initially, however,
Black workers were largely excluded from high paying defense production jobs. A. Philip Randolph,
the influential leader of the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters (a labor union based in New York),


33
     Gregory (2005, chapter 7) develops this theme in more depth.
                                                                                                         18
threatened to lead a March on Washington to demand the opening of defense jobs to Black workers.
This spurred President Roosevelt's executive orders that sought to curb discrimination in all defense-
related industries (Reed 1991, Collins 2001). Successfully organizing to advance the idea that
private sector discrimination was not only morally wrong but that the government could and should
do something about it was path breaking. At the same time, the wartime surge in labor demand in
northern and western centers of defense production prompted a large wave of Black migration from
the South, further strengthening Black political influence in these areas.
        Federal "fair employment" policies lapsed at the war's conclusion, but the idea had taken
root and was revisited repeatedly in Congress before the 1960s' legislative breakthroughs. In the
meantime, northern Black residents gained traction on the fundamental problems of formulating and
advancing anti-discrimination policies at the state and local levels (Lockard 1968; Collins 2003a,
2006; Sugrue 2008). State-level anti-discrimination laws borrowed heavily from ideas and policies
implemented by executive order during World War II. The laws were advocated and advanced by a
political coalition that included Black civil rights organizations, of course, and also labor
organizations, Jewish organizations, and others that were sympathetic to the principles at stake.34 The
laws might not have delivered major advances in Black workers' economic status in the North
(Collins 2003b, 2004), but they were an important legislative departure from the history of laissez
faire with respect to racial discrimination in the private sector.
        By the time Congress passed federal civil rights legislation in the 1960s, most Black residents
of northern and western cities were already covered by comparable state legislation or local
ordinances. The extension of such protections to the South in the mid-1960s was revolutionary but
not unforeseeable. Indeed, the principles and policies commonly associated with the federal Civil
Rights Act of 1964 and Fair Housing Act of 1968 were pioneered years before, even decades before,
in northern cities and states. The state laws had been expanding with the backing of a political
coalition that was catalyzed and strengthened by Black migration to northern cities. The growing
Black constituencies outside the South eventually provided leverage to help move federal policy.
        I would also suggest a less direct but perhaps fundamental connection between the Great
Migration and the Civil Rights Movement. To the extent that the Civil Rights Movement benefited
from a growing professional and middle-class Black population in terms of resources, organizational
strength, and leadership, it is plausible that better educational opportunities in the North were
complementary to political activism over the long haul of the Civil Rights Movement. Through the

34
  Photos of the anti-discrimination bill signings in Trends in Housing (a newsletter published by National
Committee Against Discrimination in Housing) typically include representatives from each of these groups.
                                                                                                             19
early twentieth century, Black elementary schools were relatively poorly funded and Black public
high schools were scarce in the South (Caliver 1933, Margo 1990, Carruthers and Wanamaker 2013),
with clear implications for Black children's educational attainment. For perspective on the regional
differences in education, consider the situation of young Black adults circa 1940. In the 1940
IPUMS sample, among 19 to 22 year olds, the rate of high school completion (12th grade or higher)
was three times higher in the North than in the South (30 versus 10 percent). Tabulations specifically
for those born outside the South but with parents born in the South (likely children of migrants) are
similar. For similar age ranges, young Black adults' college attendance rate was about twice as high
outside the South. Though I have only sketched the idea here, it is plausible that a rapidly growing,
predominantly urban, and better educated Black population in the North and West contributed to the
timing and success of the Civil Rights Movement.
        It is also possible that the Great Migration indirectly led to improvements in educational
resources for Black children in the South, which in turn might have helped increase political
awareness and engagement. For instance, the threat of outmigration and loss of local workers might
have led to improvements in southern Black schools (Margo 1990, pp. 48-50), at least relative to a
counterfactual with more limited outside options. In addition, the NAACP, based in New York,
began contesting discrimination in southern school systems decades before the Brown v. Board
decision of 1954 (Kluger 1975; Tushnet 1987). As the legal challenges unfolded, measures of Black-
White gaps in school quality (e.g., class sizes, length of school year, and expenditures) began to
narrow, starting long before Brown v. Board (Margo 1990; Card and Krueger 1992; Donohue,
Heckman, and Todd 2002).
        What would the Civil Rights Movement have looked like and accomplished in the absence of
the Great Migration? Can the two be separated and addressed in a meaningful counterfactual sense,
even for an essay that demands "speculation"? Tackling this head on is difficult, but it is something
we should contemplate when trying to assess the importance of the connection. This runs into an
immediate problem--it is hard to imagine World War I and II occurring without generating internal
migration to industrial centers, so this is shaky ground. Nonetheless, in light of the discussion above,
I would venture this: Without the Great Migration, there would have been less scope for Black
Americans' political organization and power; there would have been less attention drawn to what
Gunnar Myrdal (1944) called the "American Creed" during World War II and in its wake; there




                                                                                                        20
would have been weaker ties between northern and southern Black communities and activists;35 there
would have been less groundwork for anti-discrimination policy in state law; and northern politicians
might well have neglected the Black population's interests and rights, as they had for decades before
the Great Migration. Thus, the Civil Rights Movement might have been slower, later, and less
revolutionary in its effects than it actually was.36 Even a marginally weaker Civil Rights Movement
might have fallen short of key legislative achievements in the 1960s.
        I should point out that pressure for change might still have mounted without the Great
Migration for several reasons. Within the South, rising Black urbanization, education, and income
would have led in this direction. Black veterans would still have mobilized to confront White
supremacy (Brooks 2004, Parker 2009). External pressure for change might have been felt due to the
Cold War (Dudziak 2000), in which the treatment of Black Americans was an international
embarrassment. Judicial decisions might have worked to undermine Jim Crow institutions (though
southern resistance to the Brown v. Board decision is notable). In addition, the diffusion of television
and televised violence against Black Americans might have finally moved northern White politicians
to act. But in the end, I speculate that the Great Migration mattered and was, in fact, decisive in the
arrival of new civil rights legislation in the 1960s. If so, then the Great Migration is also plausibly
connected to the major shift in southern Whites' political party affiliation that occurred during and
after the 1960s (Kuziemko and Washington 2018), to Black workers' labor market gains in the South
(Donohue and Heckman 1991), and to the relatively rapid regional growth and modernization that
occurred in the wake of the Civil Rights Movement (Wright 2013).


4.2 Other avenues for future research
        I hope that the discussion above has sparked some ideas for potential future research. A few
additional and broad areas for exploration that stand out to me include the implications of the Great
Migration for the South and those who did not migrate, the role of migration in changing
intergenerational trajectories, and the effect of the Great Migration on a wider range of social
outcomes and innovative activity.
        First, it makes sense that studies of the Great Migration tend to focus on the migrants
themselves and on the receiving cities in the North and West. But the implications for those who

35
   By mid-century, Sugrue points out that, "...northern and southern activists influenced one
another...Northern activists shared their experiences with their southern counterparts, and by turn, they were
moved to action by the example of the southern civil rights movement" (2008, p. xviii).
36
   One might also argue that the 1960 election of John Kennedy and Lyndon Johnson hinged on winning a
close vote in Illinois, a major destination for Black migrants.
                                                                                                                 21
stayed in the South are also significant and merit more attention. There is much more to learn about
how outmigration shaped southern labor markets, demography, economic growth, and political
economy.37 In turn, endogenous changes in all of those areas (labor, demography, growth, politics)
would have impacted future outmigration, perhaps leading to the end of the Great Migration as
relative conditions in the South improved.38 Some questions in this area may be well suited to
standard difference-in-differences analyses, where local variation is used to identify local effects, but
others are likely to require a more general equilibrium approach to modeling that can situate the
Great Migration--both its rise and fall--in the broader context of regional economic convergence.39
        Second, long distance migration is often the start of a new chapter of any family's history,
but we are just at the beginning of being able to see the Great Migration from a micro-level
intergenerational perspective backed by large-scale datasets.40 Complete count census data and
automated linkage techniques are enabling scholars to document patterns of intergenerational change
in American history up to 1940, including for Black families (Collins and Wanamaker 2017), albeit
with caveats about measurement error (Ward 2020). New data initiatives that link the full count
1940 census into later census and administrative records (Massey et al. 2018) will open the way for
more extensive study of participants in the later decades of the Great Migration or the children of
earlier migrants. Alexander et al. (2017) is notable in this regard, as it uses data linked from 1940 to
2000 to shed new light on migrants' children's educational and labor market outcomes. The
literature reviewed in section 3 indicates that while many migrants gained in some dimensions
(income, political rights), many may have lost on other dimensions (health, incarceration). One
could imagine a multigenerational and multifaceted perspective on the Great Migration's participants
and their descendants (along with non-migrants for comparison) spanning most of the twentieth
century, which would enrich our understanding of the Great Migration's complicated legacy.
        Third, for the most part, my comments in this section tend to stay within the footprint of
topics that economists recognize as familiar turf--areas where new data and techniques might greatly
37
   In a new working paper, Feigenbaum et al. (2020) have started down this path, arguing that migration
induced by the boll weevil affected local levels of violence and repression. See also Hornbeck and Naidu
(2014) on landowners' responses to Black outmigration following the Great Mississippi Flood of 1927.
38
   Greta de Jong (2005) argues that "migration acquired new meanings in the minds of many black
southerners" after the passage of Civil Rights legislation in the 1960s. "Leaving the South seemed less like a
form of protest than a capitulation to the forces that were driving African Americans out of the region..." (p.
387).
39
   The literature on the Age of Mass Migration has relevance here (Hatton and Williamson 1998, ch. 9-11).
40
   Wilkerson (2016), for instance, highlights several examples of famous children whose families participated
in the Great Migration (e.g., Jackie Robinson, Jacob Lawrence, James Earl Jones). Their accomplishments
demonstrate the possibilities for achievement in the North and West that may have been impossible in the
South, but of course they are exceptional cases.
                                                                                                              22
enhance or even overturn existing answers to fundamental questions about the Great Migration. But
I also hasten to add that the Great Migration's causes and consequences extend beyond the traditional
purview of the literature reviewed above; therefore, there are opportunities to expand the boundaries
of the economics-based literature. For instance, the Great Migration had significant implications for
American music, art, and literature (Huggins 1971; Gregory 2005, Ch. 4; Wilkerson 2016). Studying
how variation in Great Migration intensity, sources, and networks influenced subsequent patterns of
artistic or other forms of innovation and entrepreneurship seems fascinating and within reach. Lisa
Cook's work on African American patenting between 1870 and 1940--most of which took place
outside the South--shows that the social and legal environment affected technological innovation
(Cook 2011, 2014). I am suggesting that linking the Great Migration to patterns of innovation in a
broad array of creative endeavors and entrepreneurship would bring a fuller view of its implications
into the economic history literature.41


5. Conclusions
        Millions of Black Americans chose to participate in the Great Migration. By doing so, many
were able to make more of their lives' potential than was possible at that time in the South. But it is
also clear that there was variation in the migrants' economic gains (or losses), and there are important
caveats regarding the long-term health of migrants, discrimination and violence in the North and
West, the shifting geography of upward mobility, rising incarceration, and the ill effects of hyper-
segregated cities in the later decades of the twentieth century. All of this must be taken on board in
considering the Great Migration and its repercussions.
        The research discussed in this article has made headway on several fundamental questions
about the Great Migration--who moved, why did they choose certain destination, what did they gain
in terms of earnings (on average), what were the effects on local labor or housing markets--often by
harnessing new and improved data sources. Progress along these lines will surely continue. I am
especially looking forward to the release of 1950's census manuscripts given the importance of the
1940s in the Great Migration. But the Great Migration's ramifications are far-reaching and
multifaceted. Economists naturally tackle the questions for which they have well suited empirical
frameworks and data, but a fuller assessment of the Great Migration's importance requires stretching
further. As I have emphasized above, this includes contemplating the Great Migration's connections
to the Civil Rights Movement, its effects within the South, its role in altering multigenerational

41
   See Boyd (1996) for some discussion of the Great Migration and how it affected Black businesses in northern
cities.
                                                                                                                 23
trajectories, and its implications for social phenomena that range outside the typical focus on labor
and housing markets. It also includes paying more attention to women's decisions and outcomes in
the context of the Great Migration.
        In conclusion, I would also emphasize to readers that, as with any historical topic, the
questions that previous generations of scholars (and I) have found most interesting and important
may or may not be those that motivate the next generation of scholars. Times change and the
demands for new historical inquiry and interpretation change, too. While I speculate that some
fundamental questions will remain near the center of economic historians' inquiry about the Great
Migration, I also hope that scholars who are new to the field will continue to see connections and
opportunities for exploration and understanding that their predecessors did not.




                                                                                                        24
References
Abramitzky, Ran and Leah Boustan. "Immigration in American Economic History." Journal of
Economic Literature 55, 4 (2017): 1311-1345.
Abrams, Charles. Forbidden Neighbors: A Study of Prejudice in Housing. New York: Harper and
Brothers, 1955.
Adelman, Robert M., Chris Morett, and Stewart E. Tolnay. "Homeward Bound: The Return
Migration of Southern-Born Black Women, 1940-1990." Sociological Spectrum 20, 4 (2000): 433-
63.
Alexander, J. Trent, Christine Leibbrand, Catherine Massey, and Stewart Tolnay. "Second-
Generation Outcomes of the Great Migration." Demography 54 (2017): 2247-2271.
American Economic Association Committee on the Status of Minority Groups in the Economics
Profession. Report (December 2017): https://www.aeaweb.org/content/file?id=6592. Accessed
October 20, 2020.
Aneja, Abhay P. and Carlos F. Avenancio-Leon. "The Effect of Political Power on the Labor Market
Inequality: Evidence from the 1965 Voting Rights Act." Unpublished working paper, 2019.
https://abhayaneja.files.wordpress.com/2019/09/vralabor_sept2019.pdf.
Bailey, Martha J. and William J. Collins. "The Wage Gains of African American Women in the
1940s." Journal of Economic History 66, 3 (2006): 737-777.
Black, Dan A., Seth G. Sanders, Evan J. Taylor, and Lowell J. Taylor. "The Impact of the Great
Migration on Mortality of African-Americans: Evidence from the Deep South." American Economic
Review 105, 2 (2015): 477-503.
Bodnar, John, Roger Simon, and Michael P. Weber. Lives of Their Own: Black, Italians, and Poles in
Pittsburgh, 1900-1960. Champaign, IL: University of Illinois Press, 1982.
Bok, Sissela. "Introduction to the Transaction Fiftieth Anniversary Edition." In An American
Dilemma, by Myrdal, Gunnar. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers, 1996: pp. xxi-xxxii.
Borjas, George. 1987. "Self-Selection and the Earnings of Immigrants." American Economic Review 77, 4
(1987): 531­53.
Boustan, Leah Platt. "Competition in the Promised Land: Black Migration and Racial Wage
Convergence in the North, 1940-1970." Journal of Economic History 69, 3 (2009): 755-82.
Boustan, Leah Platt. "Was Postwar Suburbanization `White Flight'? Evidence from the Black
Migration" Quarterly Journal of Economics (2010): 417-443.
Boustan, Leah Platt. Competition in the Promised Land: Black Migrants in Northern Cities and
Labor Markets. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2017.
Boustan, Leah Platt and William J. Collins. "The Origins and Persistence of Black-White Differences
in Women's Labor Force Participation from the Civil War to the Present." In Human Capital and
History: The American Record, edited by L. Boustan, C. Frydman, and R. Margo. Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press, 2014: pp. 205-240.
Boustan, Leah P. and Robert A. Margo. "A Silver Lining to White Flight? Evidence from the Black
Migration." Journal of Urban Economics 78 (2013): 71-80.
Boyd, Robert L. "Demographic Change and Entrepreneurial Occupations: African Americans in
Northern Cities." American Journal of Economics and Sociology 55, 2 (1996): 129-143.

                                                                                                  25
Brooks, Jennifer E. Defining the Peace: World War II Veterans, Race, and the Remaking of Southern
Political Tradition. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2004.
Calderon, Alvaro, Vasiliki Fouka, and Marco Tabellini. "Legislators' Response to Changes in the
Electorate: The Great Migration and Civil Rights." Unpublished working paper, 2019.
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3447469
Caliver, Ambrose. Secondary Education for Negroes. United States Department of the Interior,
National Survey of Secondary Education, Monograph 7. Washington, DC: Government Printing
Office, 1933 [Reprinted in 1969, New York: Negro Universities Press].
Card, David and Alan B. Krueger. "School Quality and Black-White Relative Earnings: A Direct
Assessment." Quarterly Journal of Economics 107, 1 (1992): 151-200.
Carrington, William J., Enrica Detragiache, and Tara Vishwanath. "Migration with Endogenous
Moving Costs." American Economic Review 86, 4 (1996): 909-30.
Carruthers, Celeste K. and Marianne H. Wanamaker. "Closing the Gap? The Effect of Private
Philanthropy on the Provision of African-American Schooling in the US South." Journal of Public
Economics 101 (2013): 53-67.
Chay, Kenneth, and Kaivan Munshi. "Black Networks after Emancipation: Evidence from
Reconstruction and the Great Migration." Unpublished working paper, 2015.
Chetty, Raj and Nathaniel Hendren. "The impacts of neighborhoods on intergenerational mobility II:
County-level estimates." Quarterly Journal of Economics 133, 3 (2018): 1163­1228.
Chiquiar, Daniel, and Gordon H. Hanson. 2005. "International Migration, Self-Selection, and the
Distribution of Wages: Evidence from Mexico and the United States." Journal of Political Economy
113, 2: 239­81.
Chong, Dennis. Collective Action and the Civil Rights Movement. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1991.
Cook, Lisa. "Inventing Social Capital: Evidence from African American Inventors, 1843-1930."
Explorations in Economic History 48 (2011): 507-518.
Cook, Lisa. "Violence and Economic Activity: Evidence from African American Patents, 1870-
1940." Journal of Economic Growth 19 (2014): 221-257.
Collins, William J. "When the Tide Turned: Immigration and the Delay of the Great Black
Migration." Journal of Economic History 57, 3 (1997): 607-32.
Collins, William J. "Race, Roosevelt, and Wartime Production: Fair Employment in World War II
Labor Markets." American Economic Review 91, 1 (2001): 272-286.
Collins, William J. "The Political Economy of State-Level Fair Employment Laws, 1940-1964."
Explorations in Economic History 40 (2003a): 24-51.
Collins, William J. "The Labor Market Impact of State-Level Anti-Discrimination Laws, 1940-
1960." Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 56, 2 (2003b): 244-272.
Collins, William J. "The Housing Market Impact of State-Level Anti-Discrimination Laws, 1960-
1970." Journal of Urban Economics 55, 3 (2004): 534-564.
Collins, William J. "The Political Economy of State Fair Housing Laws before 1968." Social Science
History 30, 1 (2006): 15-49.


                                                                                                  26
Collins, William J. "Replication: The Great Migration of Black Americans from the US South: A
Guide and Interpretation." Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social
Research [distributor], 2020-11-06. https://doi.org/10.3886/E126001V1.
Collins, William J. and Robert A. Margo. "Residential Segregation and Socioeconomic Outcomes:
When Did Ghettos Go Bad?" Economic Letters 69, 2: (2000) 239-243.
Collins, William J. and Robert A. Margo. "Historical Perspectives on Racial Differences in
Schooling in the United States." In Handbook of the Economics of Education: Volume 1, edited by E.
Hanushek and F. Welch, 107-54. New York, NY: North-Holland, 2006.
Collins, William J. and Robert A. Margo. "Race and Home Ownership from the End of the Civil War
to the Present." American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 101, 3 (2011): 355-359.
Collins, William J. and Michael Moody. "Racial Differences in American Women's Labor Market
Outcomes: A Long-Run View." In Oxford Handbook on the Economics of Women, edited S. Averett,
L. Argys, and S. Hoffman, 595-622. New York: Oxford University Press, 2017.
Collins, William J. and Marianne H. Wanamaker. "Selection and Income Gains in the Great
Migration of African Americans." American Economic Journal: Applied 6, 1 (2014): 220-52.
Collins, William J. and Marianne H. Wanamaker. "The Great Migration in Black and White: New
Evidence on the Selection and Sorting of Southern Migrants." Journal of Economic History 75, 4
(2015): 947-992.
Collins, William J. and Marianne H. Wanamaker. "African American Intergenerational Mobility
since 1880." NBER Working Paper 23395 (2017).
Curtis White, Katherine J. "Women in the Great Migration: Economic Activity of Black and White
Southern-Born Female Migrants in 1920, 1940, and 1970." Social Science History 29, 3 (2005): 413-
455.
Curtis White, Katherine J., Kyle Crowder, Stewart E. Tolnay, and Robert M. Adelman. "Race,
Gender, and Marriage: Destination Selection during the Great Migration." Demography 42 (2005):
215-241.
Cutler, David M. and Edward L. Glaeser. "Are Ghettos Good or Bad?" Quarterly Journal of
Economics 112 (1997): 827-872.
Cutler, David M., Edward L. Glaeser, and Jacob L. Vigdor. "The Rise and Decline of the American
Ghetto." Journal of Political Economy 107 (1999): 455-506.
Darity, William. "Many Roads to Extinction: Early AEA Economists and the Black Disappearance
Hypothesis." History of Economics Review 21 (1994): 47-64.
Day, Richard. "The Economics of Technical Change and the Demise of the Sharecropper." American
Economic Review XVII (1967): 427-449.
de Jong, Greta. "Staying in Place: Black Migration, the Civil Rights Movement, and the War on
Poverty in the Rural South." Journal of African American History 90, 4 (2005): 387-409.
Derenoncourt, Ellora. "Can You Move to Opportunity: Evidence from the Great Migration."
Unpublished working paper, 2019.
https://www.dropbox.com/s/l34h2avpjomylrb/derenoncourt_2019.pdf?dl=0
Donald, Henderson H. "The Negro Migration of 1916-1918." Journal of Negro History 6, 4 (1921):
383-498.

                                                                                                 27
Donohue, John J. III and James J. Heckman. "Continuous versus Episodic Change: The Impact of
Civil Rights Policy on the Economic Status of Blacks." Journal of Economic Literature 29, 4 (1991):
1603-1643.
Donohue, John J. III, James J. Heckman, Petra E. Todd. "The Schooling of Southern Blacks: The
Roles of Legal Activism and Private Philanthropy, 1910-1960." Quarterly Journal of Economics
117, 1 (2002): 225-268.
Du Bois, W. E. B. The Philadelphia Negro: A Social Study. Philadelphia: University of
Pennsylvania, 1899.
Du Bois, W. E. B. "Brothers, Come North." The Crisis 19, 3 (January 1920): 105-106.
Dudziak, Mary L. Cold War Civil Rights: Race and the Image of American Democracy. Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 2000.
Duncan, Otis Dudley and Beverly Duncan. "A Methodological Analysis of Segregation
Indexes." American Sociological Review 20, 2 (1955): 210­217.
Easterlin, Richard. "Interregional Differences in Per Capita Income, Population, and Total Income,
1840-1950." In Trends in the American Economy in the Nineteenth Century, The Conference on
Research in Income and Wealth, 73­140. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1960.
Eichenlaub, Suzanne C., Stewart E. Tolnay, and J. Trent Alexander. "Moving Up but Not Up:
Economic Outcomes in the Great Migration." American Sociological Review 75, 1 (2010): 101-125.
Eldridge, Hope T., and Dorothy Swaine Thomas. Population Redistribution and Economic Growth,
United States, 1870-1950: Demographic Analyses and Interpretations. Philadelphia: American
Philosophical Society, 1964.
Eriksson, Katherine. "Moving North and into Jail? The Great Migration and Black Incarceration."
Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 159 (2019): 526-538.
Eriksson, Katherine and Gregory Niemesh. "Death in the Promised Land: The Great Migration and
Black Infant Mortality." Unpublished working paper, 2016.
Feigenbaum, James J., Soumyajit Mazumder, and Cory Smith. "When Coercive Economies Fail: The
Political Economy of the US South After the Boll Weevil." NBER Working Paper 27161.
Foner, Eric. Reconstruction: America's Unfinished Revolution, 1863-1877. New York: Harper &
Row, 1988.
Foote, Christopher L., Warren C. Whatley, and Gavin Wright. "Arbitraging a Discriminatory Labor
Market: Black Workers at the Ford Motor Company, 1918-1947." Journal of Labor Economics 21, 3
(2003): 493-532.
Gardner, John. "Immigration and Wages: New Evidence from the American Great Migration." IZA
Journal of Migration 5, 22 (2016): 1-45.
Gill, Flora. Economics and the Black Exodus: An Analysis of Negro Emigration from the Southern
United States: 1910-70. New York: Garland Publishing, 1979.
Grant, Keneshia N. "Great Migration Politics: The Impact of the Great Migration on Democratic
Presidential Election Campaigns from 1948-1960." Du Bois Review 16, 1: 37-61.
Gregory, James N. The Southern Diaspora: How the Great Migrations of Black and White
Southerners Transformed America. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2005.


                                                                                                     28
Grossman, James R. Land of Hope: Chicago, Black Southerners, and the Great Migration. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1989.
Grove, Wayne A. and Craig Heinicke. "Better Opportunities or Worse? The Demise of Cotton
Harvest Labor, 1949-1964." Journal of Economic History 63, 3 (2003): 736-767.
Haines, Michael R. "The Urban Mortality Transition in the United States, 1800-1940." NBER
Historical Paper 134 (2001).
Haines, Michael R. and Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research [ICPSR].
Historical, Demographic, Economic, and Social Data: The United States, 1790-2002 [computer file].
ICPSR02896-v3. Ann Arbor, MI: ICPSR [distributor], 2010.
Hatton, Timothy J. and Jeffrey G. Williamson. The Age of Mass Migration: Causes and Economic
Impact. New York: Oxford University Press, 1998.
Haynes, George Edmund. "Negroes Move North: I. Their Departure from the South." The Survey 40,
5 (1918): 115-122.
Higgs, Robert. "The Boll Weevil, the Cotton Economy, and Black Migration 1910-1930."
Agricultural History 50, 2 (1976): 335-50.
Higgs, Robert. "Accumulation of Property by Southern Blacks Before World War I." American
Economic Review 72, 4 (1982): 725-37.
Hornbeck, Richard and Suresh Naidu. "When the Levee Breaks: Black Migration and the Economic
Development in the American South." American Economic Review 104, 4 (2014): 963-990.
Huggins, Nathan Irvin. Harlem Renaissance. New York: Oxford University Press, 1971.
Hunt, Larry L., Matthew O. Hunt, William W. Falk. "Who Is Headed South? US Migration Trends in
Black and White, 1970-2000." Social Forces 87, 1 (2008): 95-119.
Inwood, Kris, Chris Minns, and Fraser Summerfield. "Occupational Income Scores and Immigrant
Assimilation: Evidence from Canada." Explorations in Economic History 72 (2019): 114-122.
Jones, Jacqueline. Labor of Love, Labor of Sorrow: Black Women, Work, and the Family from
Slavery to the Present. New York: Basic Books, 1985.
Kluger, Richard. Simple Justice: The History of Brown v. Board of Education and Black America's
Struggle for Equality. New York: Alfred A. Knoft, 1975.
Kuziemko, Ilyana and Ebonya Washington. "Why Did the Democrats Lose the South? Bringing New
Data to an Old Debate," American Economic Review 108, 10 (2018): 2830-2867
Lawrence, Jacob. The Migration Series. New York: The Museum of Modern Art, and Washington,
D.C.: The Phillips Collection, 1940-41.
Leibbrand, Christine, Catherine Massey, J. Trent Alexander, Katie Genadek, and Stewart Tolnay.
"The Great Migration and Residential Segregation in American Cities during the Twentieth
Century." Social Science History 44, 1 (2020): 19-55
Lemann, Nicholas. The Promised Land: The Great Black Migration and How It Changed America.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1991.
Lewis, Edward E. The Mobility of the Negro: A Study in the American Labor Supply. New York:
Columbia University Press, 1931.


                                                                                                  29
Lieberson, Stanley. "A Reconsideration of the Income Differences Found between Migrants and
Northern-Born Blacks." American Journal of Sociology 83, 4 (1978): 940-966.
Lockard, Duane. Toward Equal Opportunity: A Study of State and Local Antidiscrimination Laws.
New York: Macmillan, 1968.
Logan, Trevon. "Health, Human Capital and African American Migration before 1910."
Explorations in Economic History 46, 2 (2009): 169-85.
Logan, Trevon D. and John M. Parman. "The National Rise in Residential Segregation." Journal of
Economic History 77, 1 (2017): 127-170.
Long, Larry H. and Lynne R. Heltman. "Migration and Income Differences between Black and
White Men in the North." American Journal of Sociology 80, 6 (1975): 1391-1409.
Long, Larry H. and Kristin A. Hansen. "Trends in Recent Return Migration to the South."
Demography 12, 4 (1975): 601-14.
Maloney, Thomas N. "Migration and Economic Opportunity in the 1910s: New Evidence on
African-American Occupational Mobility in the North." Explorations in Economic History 38, 1
(2001): 147-65.
Margo, Robert A. "Accumulation of Property by Southern Blacks Before World War I: Comment
and Further Evidence." American Economic Review 74, 4 (1984): 768-76.
Margo, Robert A. Race and Schooling in the South 1880-1950: An Economic History. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1990.
Margo, Robert A. 2004. "The North-South Wage Gap, Before and After the Civil War." In Slavery in
the Development of the Americas, edited by D. Eltis, F. Lewis, and K. Sokoloff, 324-351. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Margo, Robert A. "Obama, Katrina, and the Persistence of Racial Inequality." Journal of Economic
History 76, 2 (2016): 301-341.
Marks, Carole. Farewell, We're Good and Gone: The Great Black Migration. Bloomington: Indiana
University Press, 1989.
Massey, Douglas S. and Nancy A. Denton. American Apartheid: Segregation and the Making of the
Underclass. Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press, 1993.
Massey, Catherine G., Katie R. Genadek, J. Trent Alexander, Todd K. Gardner, and Amy O'Hara.
"Linking the 1940 US Census with Modern Data." Historical Methods 51, 4 (2018): 246-257.
Masters, Stanley H. "Are Black Migrants from the South to the Northern Cities Worse off than
Blacks Already There?" Journal of Human Resources 7, 4 (1972) 411-423.
Meyer, Stephan Grant. As Long as They Don't Move Next Door: Segregation and Racial Conflict in
American Neighborhoods. New York: Rowman and Littlefield, 2000.
Myrdal, Gunnar. An American Dilemma: The Negro Problem and Modern Democracy. New York:
Harper & Brothers Publishers, 1944.
Muller, Christopher. "Northward Migration and the Rise of Racial Disparity in American
Incarceration, 1880-1950." American Journal of Sociology 118, 2 (2012): 281-326.
Oubre, Claude F. Forty Acres and a Mule: The Freedmen's Bureau and Black Land Ownership.
Baton Rouge, LA: LSU Press, 1978.

                                                                                                  30
Parker, Christopher. "When Politics Becomes Protest: Black Veterans and Political Activism in the
Postwar South." Journal of Politics 71, 1 (2009): 113-131.
Peterson, Joyce Shaw. "Black Automobile Workers in Detroit, 1910-1930." Journal of Negro
History 64, 3 (1979): 177-190.
Ransom, Roger L. "Table Eh1-7: Population of the Slave States, by State, Race, and Slave Status:
1860-1870." In S. Carter et al. (eds.), Historical Statistics of the United States, Millennial Edition.
New York: Cambridge University Press, 2006: p. 5-783.
Reed, Merl E. Seedtime for the Modern Civil Rights Movement: The President's Committee on Fair
Employment Practices, 1941-1946. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1991.
Roback, Jennifer. "Wages, Rents, and the Quality of Life." Journal of Political Economy 90, 6
(1982): 1257-78.
Rosenbloom, Joshua L. Looking for Work, Searching for Workers: American Labor Markets during
Industrialization. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2002.
Ross Haynes, Elizabeth. "Negroes in Domestic Service in the United States: Introduction." Journal
of Negro History 8, 2 (1923): 384-442.
Roy, A. D. "Some Thoughts on the Distribution of Earnings." Oxford Economic Papers 3, 2 (1951):
135-46.
Ruggles, Steven, J. David Hacker, and Matthew Sobek. "General Design of the Integrated Public Use
Microdata Series, Historical Methods 28, 1 (1995): 33-39.
Ruggles, Steven, Katie Genadek, Ronald Goeken, Josiah Grover, and Matthew Sobek. Integrated
Public Use Microdata Series: version 6.0 [machine-readable database]. Minneapolis, MN, 2015.
Saavedra, Martin and Tate Twinam. "A Machine Learning Approach to Improving Occupational
Income Scores." Explorations in Economic History 75 (2020): 101304.
Schickler, Eric. Racial Realignment: The Transformation of American Liberalism, 1932-1965.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2016.
Scott, Emmett J. Negro Migration during the War. New York: Oxford University Press, 1920.
Scroggs, Wm. O. "Interstate Migration of Negro Population." Journal of Political Economy 25, 10
(1917): 1034-43.
Sharkey, Patrick. Stuck in Place: Urban Neighborhoods and the End of Progress toward Racial
Equality. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2013.
Shertzer, Allison, Randall P. Walsh, and John R. Logan. "Segregation and Neighborhood Change in
Northern Cities: New historical GIS data from 1900-1930." Historical Methods 49, 4 (2016): 187-
197.
Shertzer, Allison and Randall P. Walsh. "Racial Sorting and the Emergence of Segregation in
American Cities." Review of Economics and Statistics 101, 3 (2019): 415-427,
Sjaastad, Larry A. "The Costs and Returns of Human Migration." Journal of Political Economy 70,
October (1962): 80-93.
Spitzer, Yannay and Ariell Zimran. "Like an Ink Blot on Paper: Testing the Diffusion Hypothesis of
Mass Migration, Italy 1876-1920." Unpublished working paper, 2019.


                                                                                                          31
Stuart, Bryan A. and Evan J. Taylor. "Migration Networks and Location Decisions: Evidence from
US Mass Migration." American Economic Journal--Applied Economics, forthcoming A.
Stuart, Bryan A. and Evan J. Taylor. "The Effect of Social Connection on Crime: Evidence from the
Great Migration." Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming B.
Sugrue, Thomas J. Sweet Land of Liberty: The Forgotten Struggle for Civil Rights in the North. New
York: Random House, 2008.
Sundstrom, William A. "Last Hired, First Fired? Unemployment and Urban Black Workers during
the Great Depression." Journal of Economic History 52, 2 (1992): 415-429.
Sundstrom, William A. "From Servants to Secretaries: The Occupations of African-American
Women 1940-1980." Unpublished working paper, 2000.
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1104056.
Tabellini, Marco. "Racial Heterogeneity and Local Government Finances: Evidence from the Great
Migration." Unpublished working paper, 2019.
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3220439
Thomas, Brinley. Migration and Economic Growth. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press,
1954.
Tolnay, Stewart E. "Educational Selection in the Migration of Southern Blacks, 1880-1990." Social
Forces 77, 2 (1998): 487-514.
Tolnay, Stewart E. "The African American `Great Migration' and Beyond." Annual Review of
Sociology 29 (2003): 209-232.
Tolnay, Stewart E., Katherine Curtis White, Kyle D. Crowder, and Robert M. Adelman. "Distances
Traveled During the `Great Migration': An Analysis of Racial Differences Among Male Migrants."
Social Science History 29, 4 (2005): 523-48.
Trotter, Joe Williams Jr. "The Great Migration." Organization of American Historians Magazine of
History 17, 1 (2002): 31-33.
Tushnet, Mark V. The NAACP's Legal Strategy Against Segregated Education, 1925-50. Chapel
Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press, 1987.
U.S. Department of Labor. Negro Migration in 1916-17. Washington D.C.: GPO, 1919.
Vickery, William E. The Economics of Negro Migration, 1900-1960. New York, NY: Arno Press,
1977.
Vigdor, Jacob L. "The Pursuit of Opportunity: Explaining Selective Black Migration." Journal of
Urban Economics 51, 3 (2002): 391-417.
Ward, Zachary. "Intergenerational Mobility in American History: Accounting for Race and
Measurement Error." Unpublished working paper, 2020.
Weaver, Robert C. "Negro Labor since 1929." Journal of Negro History 35, 1 (1950): 20-38.
Weaver, Robert C. Negro Labor: A National Problem. New York, NY: Harcourt, Brace, and Co.,
1946.
Weiss, Leonard and Jeffrey G. Williamson. "Black Education, Earnings, and Inter-regional
Migration: Some New Evidence." American Economic Review 62, 3 (1972): 372-383.


                                                                                                  32
Whatley, Warren. "Labor for the Picking: The New Deal in the South." Journal of Economic History
43, 4 (1983): 905-929.
Whatley, Warren. "Getting a Foot in the Door: `Learning,' State Dependence, and the Racial
Integration of Firms." Journal of Economic History 50, 1 (1990): 43-66.
Whatley, Warren. "African-American Strikebreaking from the Civil War to the New Deal." Social
Science History 17, 4 (1993): 525-558.
Wilkerson, Isabel. The Warmth of Other Suns: The Epic Story of America's Great Migration. New
York, NY: Random House, 2010.
Wilkerson, Isabel. "The Long-Lasting Legacy of the Great Migration." Smithsonian Magazine
(September 2016): https://www.smithsonianmag.com/history/long-lasting-legacy-great-migration-
180960118/. Accessed October 6, 2020.
Williams, Heather Andrea. Self-Taught: African American Education in Slavery and Freedom.
Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press, 2005.
Wilson, Francille Rusan. The Segregated Scholars: Black Social Scientists and the Creation of Black
Labor Studies, 1890-1950. Charlottesville, VA: University of Virginia Press, 2006.
Wilson, William Julius. The Truly Disadvantaged: The Inner City, the Underclass, and Public
Policy. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1987.
Woodson, Carter G. A Century of Negro Migration. Washington, DC: Association of Negro Life and
History, 1918 [Reprinted in 2002, Mineola, NY: Dover Publications.]
Wright, Gavin. Old South, New South: Revolutions in the Southern Economy since the Civil War.
New York, NY: Basic Books, 1986.
Wright, Gavin. Sharing the Prize: The Economics of the Civil Rights Revolution in the American
South. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2013.




                                                                                                 33
Figure 1: Share of Southern-Born Black Population Residing Outside the South, by Birth Cohort

            .5

            .4

            .3

            .2

            .1

             0
             80

                    90

                           00

                                 10

                                        20

                                               30

                                                      40

                                                             50

                                                                   60

                                                                          70

                                                                                 80

                                                                                        90

                                                                                               00
           18

                  18

                         19

                                19

                                      19

                                             19

                                                    19

                                                           19

                                                                  19

                                                                        19

                                                                               19

                                                                                      19

                                                                                             20
                                         1870s cohort                1920s cohort
                                         1880s cohort                1930s cohort
                                         1890s cohort                1940s cohort
                                         1900s cohort                1950s cohort
                                         1910s cohort


Notes: The South in this figure excludes Delaware, Maryland, and Washington, DC. The year markers on the
x-axis correspond to census years. For example, in 1990, just over 20 percent of the cohort born in the South
in the 1950s resided outside the South, whereas more than 40 percent of cohort born in the South in the 1930s
resided outside the South.
Sources: Author's calculations from the IPUMS 1-percent samples (Ruggles et al. 2015).




                                                                                                            34
          Figure 2: Distribution of the Black population, 1910 and 1970, by census division


            40




            30




            20




            10




             0
                    New England



                                  Mid Atlantic



                                                 East North Central



                                                                      West North Central



                                                                                           South Atlantic



                                                                                                            East South Central



                                                                                                                                 West South Central



                                                                                                                                                      Mountain



                                                                                                                                                                 Pacific
Notes: Black bars depict the distribution of the Black population in 1910 (these sum to 100 over states). Gray
bars depict the distribution of the Black population 1970. Hawaii and Alaska are omitted.
Sources: 1910 IPUMS 1-percent sample. 1970 IPUMS 1-percent state F1 sample. Ruggles et al. (2015).




                                                                                                                                                                           35
Figure 3A: Occupations, men, ages 25-54, 1930 (top panel) and 1960 (bottom panel)

 100
  90
  80
  70
  60
  50
  40
  30
  20
  10
   0
          Wht,North          Blk,North       Blk,Migrant        Blk,South

          Prof.andManager ClericalandSales           Craft
          Operative             Service              Laborer
          Farm                  NotinLF

  100
   90
   80
   70
   60
   50
   40
   30
   20
   10
    0
           Wht,North         Blk,North       Blk,Migrant        Blk,South

          Prof.andManager ClericalandSales           Craft
          Operative             Service              Laborer
          Farm                  NotinLF



                                                                                    36
       Figure 3B: Occupations, women, ages 25-54, 1930 (top panel) and 1960 (bottom panel)
           100
            90
            80
            70
            60
            50
            40
            30
            20
            10
             0
                     Wht,North            Blk,North          Blk,Migrant          Blk,South

                     Prof.andManager ClericalandSales                 Craft
                     Operative               Service                  Laborer
                     Farm                    NotinLF

           100
            90
            80
            70
            60
            50
            40
            30
            20
            10
             0
                     Wht,North            Blk,North          Blk,Migrant          Blk,South

                     Prof.andManager ClericalandSales                 Craft
                     Operative               Service                  Laborer
                     Farm                    NotinLF


Notes: Samples include US-born men (3A) or women (3B) ages 25-54. "Blk, North" denotes Black men born and
residing outside the South. "Blk, Migrant" denotes southern-born Black men residing outside the South. "Blk,
South" denotes Black men born and residing in the South. The "South" includes Washington, DC, following the

                                                                                                               37
census region coding. The "Farm" category includes farmers and farm laborers; the "service" category includes
both household and non-household service workers. Those in the military (occ1950=595) and those reported as in
the labor force but without an occupation code are omitted.
Sources: IPUMS 1-percent sample for 1930 and 5-percent sample for 1960 (Ruggles et al. 2015).




                                                                                                                 38
   .0005
   .0004
   .0003
   .0002
   .0001
   0           Figure 4: Distribution of total income in 1949, non-farm male workers, ages 25-54




           0            2000           4000           6000              8000            10000
                                        Total Income 1950

                                Wht, Non-South                Black, Migrant
                                Black, South

Notes: The figure depicts kernel density plots of annual income in 1949. The sample includes men, ages 25-54, who
worked at least 1 week in 1949 and reported positive total income, and who were not farmers, farm managers, or
farm laborers. "Black, Migrant" refers to southern-born Black men who reside in another region. "Black, South"
refers to southern-born Black men in the South. "Wht, Non-South" refers to non-southern-born White men who
reside outside the South. The variable topcode is $10,000, hence the bump for White men in the right tail.
Sources: IPUMS 1-percent sample for 1950 (Ruggles et al. 2015).




                                                                                                              39
