                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 AN EXPERIMENTAL COMPARISON OF CARBON PRICING UNDER UNCERTAINTY
                     IN ELECTRICITY MARKETS

                                      Trevor L. Davis
                                      Mark C. Thurber
                                      Frank A. Wolak

                                     Working Paper 27260
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27260


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2020




The authors would like to thank staff and students at the Program on Energy and Sustainable
Development as well as Sunny Wang, Arpita Kalra, and Leigh Johnson for their help in
developing and running these experiments during the Energy@Stanford & SLAC 2016 and 2017
Conferences hosted by the Precourt Institute for Energy. We gratefully acknowledge funding
support from the William and Flora Hewlett Foundation and from the Office of the Vice Provost
for Graduate Education at Stanford. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Trevor L. Davis, Mark C. Thurber, and Frank A. Wolak. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
An Experimental Comparison of Carbon Pricing Under Uncertainty in Electricity Markets
Trevor L. Davis, Mark C. Thurber, and Frank A. Wolak
NBER Working Paper No. 27260
May 2020
JEL No. Q4,Q52,Q54

                                         ABSTRACT

We report on an economic experiment that compares outcomes in electricity markets subject to
carbon-tax and cap-and-trade policies. Under conditions of uncertainty, price-based and quantity-
based policy instruments cannot be truly equivalent, so we compared three matched carbon-tax/
cap-and-trade pairs with equivalent emissions targets, mean emissions, and mean carbon prices,
respectively. Across these matched pairs, the cap-and-trade mechanism produced much higher
wholesale electricity prices (38.5% to 52.6% higher) and lower total electricity production (2.5%
to 4.0% lower) than the "equivalent" carbon tax, without any lower carbon emissions. Market
participants who forecast a lower price of carbon in the cap-and-trade games ran their units more
than those who forecast a higher price of carbon, which caused emissions from the dirtiest
generating units (Coal and Gas Peakers) to be significantly higher (15.2% to 33.0%) than in the
carbon tax games. These merit order "mistakes" in the cap-and-trade games suggest an important
advantage of the carbon tax as policy: namely, that the cost of carbon can treated by firms as a
known input to production.

Trevor L. Davis                                 Frank A. Wolak
Program on Energy                               Department of Economics
and Sustainable Development                     Stanford University
Stanford University                             Stanford, CA 94305-6072
616 Jane Stanford Way                           and NBER
Encina Hall East, 4th Floor                     wolak@zia.stanford.edu
Stanford, CA 94305-6055
trevor.l.davis@gmail.com

Mark C. Thurber
Program on Energy
and Sustainable Development
Stanford University
Encina Hall East E412
616 Serra St
Stanford, CA 94305
mthurber@stanford.edu
1     Introduction

With a known demand for carbon emissions, a carbon tax and a cap-and-trade mechanism
can be made equivalent. Consider Figure 1, where setting P1 as the carbon price yields
emissions E1 for the emissions demand curve D1 . Setting a cap on carbon emissions equal to
E1 yields a price of carbon equal to P1 for this same emissions demand curve. An analogous
equivalence result holds for the demand curve D2 .
    If the demand for emissions is uncertain this equivalence relationship breaks down. Fig-
ure 1 shows that setting P1 results in either E1 or E21 emissions and setting a cap of E1
yields a price of carbon of P1 or P21 , depending on the emissions demand curve realization.
Emissions demand uncertainty can result from uncertainty in electricity demand, intermit-
tent renewable energy production, and input fossil fuel prices, among other factors. Higher
electricity demand, lower renewable energy production, or lower input fossil fuel prices all
imply an outward shift of the emissions demand curve.
    With an uncertain emissions demand curve, a fixed carbon price produces a distribution
of emissions outcomes. Conversely, a fixed carbon cap yields a distribution of carbon prices.
Setting the carbon cap equal to the expected value of the distribution of emissions from a
fixed carbon tax does not yield a distribution of carbon prices that has expectation equal to
the fixed carbon tax. Setting the carbon tax equal to the expected value of the distribution
of carbon prices from a fixed carbon cap does not yield a distribution of carbon emissions
that has expectation equal to the initial carbon cap.
    Weitzman (1974) pointed out this inherent lack of equivalence between price- and quantity-
based instruments of emissions control under uncertainty. However, economic theory pro-
vides no unambiguous predictions about the relative performance of an electricity supply
industry with a carbon tax versus a cap-and-trade mechanism under uncertainty, and there


                                              2
are no real-world settings that allow for a direct comparison between the two mechanisms.
Economic experiments therefore have the potential to increase our understanding of the de-
terminants of the relative performance of these two emissions control mechanisms. In this
paper, we describe the results of an economic experiment that compares the performance of a
carbon tax and a cap-and-trade mechanism in a stylized but realistic electricity market with
an uncertain demand for emissions. Electricity is a policy-relevant space in which to evaluate
carbon pricing, given that the power sector (including production of electricity and heat) is
responsible for approximately one-quarter of global greenhouse gas emissions (IPCC, 2014)
and has been an early focus for implementation of carbon pricing programs in a number of
jurisdictions.
   In our experiment, we seek insights into which carbon pricing instrument achieves lower-
cost emissions reductions in an electricity market with realistic sources of emissions demand
uncertainty. Across matched pairs of three types of "equivalent" (to be defined below)
carbon tax and cap-and-trade games, we find that the cap-and-trade mechanism results in
much higher wholesale electricity prices (38.5% to 52.6% higher) and lower total electricity
generation (2.5% to 4.0% lower) than the carbon tax, without any significant decrease in
carbon emissions. Market participants that based their offers to supply electricity on a
lower price of carbon in the cap-and-trade games ran their generation units more than those
that based their offers on a higher price of carbon, which caused emissions from the dirtiest
generating units (Coal and Gas Peakers) to be significantly higher (15.2% to 33.0%) than in
the carbon tax games.
   We also use our experiment to investigate the mechanisms that cause outcomes from
a cap-and-trade policy to deviate from those observed with a carbon tax under conditions
of uncertainty. For example, the collective inability of market participants to accurately



                                              3
forecast the carbon price needed to meet the cap could lead to inefficiencies in emissions
mitigation. Designers of cap-and-trade systems are sometimes retroactively criticized for a
failure to set the "right" level of the emissions cap, leading to carbon prices that are "too
high" or "too low," but as Borenstein et al. (2019) argue and demonstrate for the case of
California's cap and trade mechanism, this uncertainty about how easy or difficult a cap
will be to meet is a fundamental characteristic of any cap-and-trade system. Variation in
the forecasts of the carbon price by market participants, due to asymmetric information or
differences in forecasting capability, could affect market efficiency.1
       If compliance penalties are significant, generating companies might hedge against the risk
of failing to cover their emissions (or the risk of having to acquire allowances later at a very
high price) by trying to accumulate allowances early in the compliance period at high prices.
Dormady (2014) raised the possibility that such a "declining price anomaly" (McAfee and
Vincent, 1993) could be observed in emissions markets. High initial carbon prices would
presumably be passed through into electricity market price offers, which would increase
electricity prices and lower emissions, both by preferentially pushing dirty units out of the
merit order and by shrinking demand. This could lead to an eventual crash in the carbon
price when it became clear that emissions were trending below the carbon cap. Depending
on when this crash occurred, however, average electricity prices over the compliance period
could still end up being higher than under the "equivalent" tax. If risk aversion in the face
of high compliance penalties causes carbon prices to diverge from underlying fundamentals,
   1
     If market participants factor different carbon prices into their electricity market price offers due to
different forecasts, this could lead to merit order "mistakes." Market participants that anticipate lower
carbon prices would bid lower than those that forecast higher carbon prices, irrespective of actual differences
in emissions rates and fuel and other variable costs between units. This would produce an aggregate offer
curve in which units with higher marginal costs run before units with lower marginal costs, increasing the
overall cost of generation and blunting the effectiveness of the cap-and-trade system at reducing emissions
(Thurber and Wolak, 2013).




                                                      4
it could erode the efficiency of the cap-and-trade system.
      The carbon market could also serve as a coordination device for the exercise of market
power in the electricity market. If prices are high in the carbon market, and most generating
companies factor these high carbon prices into their electricity market offers, it will push
up electricity market prices, benefiting all generation unit owners.2 . If the existence of cap-
and-trade mechanism somehow encourages the exercise of market power in the electricity
market, we would expect different outcomes from the carbon tax case.
      We find little evidence in favor of these last two explanations for the superior market
efficiency properties of the carbon tax. Rather, the major source of differences in electricity
market outcomes appears to be the fact that with a carbon tax, the cost of carbon is stable
and known to all suppliers, similar to the price of any other input to production. In contrast,
under a cap-and-trade mechanism, the price of carbon varies over the term of the carbon
cap depending on what new information arrives about the demand for emissions over time,
and firms need to predict the carbon price in order to make profit-maximizing bids into the
electricity market. Firms may have different abilities to make these predictions as well as
asymmetric information about the factors affecting carbon price. This has the potential to
cause inefficiencies in the overall market, as firms that project a lower carbon price run their
generating units more than firms that project a higher one, irrespective of the underlying
differences in variable costs (including the cost to buy carbon allowances) between units. We
find evidence in favor of this mechanism driving the difference in market outcomes between
the two carbon pricing mechanisms.
      The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 reviews previous literature
on the differences between a carbon tax and a cap-and-trade mechanism and situates our
  2
   Kolstad and Wolak (2013) present evidence of this behavior for the Southern California N Ox emissions
market


                                                   5
experiment within this literature. Section 3 describes the experiment and the statistical
methods we use to test our hypotheses about the relative performance of carbon-tax and
cap-and-trade policies and about the mechanisms that explain any differences. Section 4
lays out our experimental findings, and Section 5 concludes with a discussion of the policy
implications of these results.



2     Review of the Literature Comparing Carbon Tax

      with Cap and Trade Under Uncertainty

Various authors have made the observation that a carbon tax and a cap-and-trade system can
in theory provide equivalent outcomes for greenhouse gas emissions when the marginal cost
and marginal benefit of abatement curves are known with certainty and perfectly foreseeable
into the future (Metcalf, 2009; Aldy et al., 2010; Keohane, 2009; Strand, 2013; Goulder and
Schein, 2013). However, Weitzman (1974) points out that either a price-based or a quantity-
based approach may be better at minimizing policy "errors" depending on the relative slopes
of the marginal cost and marginal benefit curves. For the particular case of greenhouse gas
emissions reduction, Newell and Pizer (2003) and Aldy et al. (2010) argue that the marginal
benefits curve is likely to be flat, implying that a carbon tax would lead to lower policy
errors under uncertainty.
    There are many drivers of emissions demand uncertainty under a cap-and-trade mecha-
nism in the real-world context. As Borenstein et al. (2019) demonstrate for the California
cap-and-trade market, there is substantial uncertainty in emissions demand throughout the
term of the mechanism. Improved information about the actual level of emissions may show
that demand for allowances is higher or lower than anticipated. For example, carbon prices


                                            6
in the EU ETS dropped precipitously in the spring of 2006 when new data showed that emis-
sions had been lower than expected, and that the allowances that had been allocated were
ample to cover them (Goulder and Schein, 2013). Specific policy implementations may be
uncertain in their effectiveness and durability. For example, carbon pricing programs might
prompt emitters to relocate outside the region with the carbon price, causing emissions leak-
age. Cap-and-trade programs may be subject to the leakage mechanisms of non-additional
offsets (Wara and Victor, 2008) and "reshuffling" (Borenstein et al., 2014). Carbon prices in
cap-and-trade systems can tend toward extreme values (Borenstein et al., 2019), and politi-
cians may weaken or dismantle cap-and-trade programs if prices grow too high (Luong et al.,
2003; Metcalf, 2009). One can imagine many other possible shortcomings in the practical
implementation of carbon pricing that could cause performance to fall short of theoretical
projections.
   Political and institutional considerations can also affect which carbon pricing instrument
is preferred in a real-world setting. For example, taxes are administratively simpler and may
create a more stable environment for investment in abatement technologies (Metcalf, 2009).
They do not require the development of allowance registries and tracking of trades (Goulder
and Schein, 2013). They do not require mitigation of market power that could potentially
arise in a carbon market (Borenstein et al., 2014). Governments typically already have
administrative capability to levy taxes, which could speed implementation (Metcalf, 2009).
On the other side of the ledger, taxes are often politically unpopular. Cap-and-trade systems
have the potential political advantage of keeping attention on emissions while making costs
less transparent and possibly providing compensation to affected industries in the form of
free allowances (Stavins, 2007; Keohane, 2009; Strand, 2013).
   Economic experiments let us abstract away from these manifold practical issues of policy



                                             7
fit and regulatory uncertainty to focus only on how the inherent uncertainty in the demand
for carbon emissions in a cap-and-trade mechanism causes market outcomes to diverge from
the carbon tax case. As shown in Table 1, previous experiments have considered aspects of
emissions pricing in electricity markets. Notably, van Koten (2015) and Wr°
                                                                          ake et al. (2010)
find that efficient abatement is observed with simple, perfectly competitive markets in which
experimental subjects are price takers of exogenously set emissions permit and electricity
prices across several rounds of an experimental game. Dormady (2014); Godby (2000); Go-
eree et al. (2010); Cason and Gangadharan (2006); Stranlund et al. (2011); Grimm and Ilieva
(2013); Camacho-Cuena et al. (2012) find that efficient levels of emissions abatement are not
reached in games with imperfect competition in either the emissions allowance market or the
electricity market. As far as we are aware, our experiment is the first to directly compare
electricity market and carbon emissions outcomes under pairs of "equivalent" carbon-tax
and cap-and-trade policies with an uncertain demand for carbon emissions. It also achieves
new levels of richness and realism by incorporating important emissions abatement channels
in electricity markets, such as merit-order shifting, demand reduction, and the ability to in-
troduce new low-emission generating units. Specific details of the web-based energy market
game we use in this experiment are described in the following section.



3     Methodology

3.1    Basic experimental setup

We designed and ran an experiment of 160 games simulating wholesale electricity markets un-
der various "equivalent" carbon tax and cap and trade scenarios. (As discussed in Section 1,
genuine equivalence between a carbon tax and a cap-and-trade system is not possible under


                                              8
conditions of uncertainty; later in this section, we describe the specific carbon-tax/cap-and-
trade pairs we defined for purposes of comparison.) In each game, eight players placed price
offers--one for each of the dispatchable generation units in their identical portfolios--into a
wholesale electricity market that employed a uniform-price auction. Each player also owned
wind generation units that produced an uncertain amount energy each period. Players could
buy additional wind generation units for future periods, and in the cap-and-trade games
could trade carbon allowances with other players. Each game had the potential for imper-
fect competition in the electricity market as well as, in games under a cap-and-trade system,
imperfect competition in carbon allowance trading. The exogenous uncertainty in how much
energy wind generation units would produce as well as the endogenous uncertainty about
how other players in a game would act both determined the demand for carbon emissions.
Players were paid at the end of the experiment in proportion to how much money the gen-
erating companies they operated earned in the games, with pay-outs that ranged from $8 to
$18.3
       The experimental games took place in September 2016 and September 2017. In each
year, the game participants were 128 incoming Stanford graduate students with a stated
interest in energy who took part in a week-long energy-focused conference before the start
of classes.4 The games themselves were played over a period of three days at the conference,
with approximately three hours of training (including two practice games) in advance of the
experimental games to ensure the participants were able to act as sophisticated players.
   3
     These dollar amounts were paid to individuals, and all games were played on an individual basis, but
we grouped the student players into teams of four to encourage strategizing, discussion, and learning that
they could apply in their separate individual games. The final individual payouts were then based on overall
team performance, with all members of any given team receiving the same payout. Random allocation of
players to games was constrained so that two players from the same team were never in the same game.
   4
     62% percent of the graduate students were from various engineering departments, 18% were business
school students, and the rest were from other programs like Chemistry, Physics, Economics, etc.




                                                     9
       The games were run using custom carbon-tax and cap-and-trade scenarios created for
the Energy Market Game (EMG) developed at Stanford University's Program on Energy
and Sustainable Development (see Section 3.2 for a detailed description of the EMG). This
experiment incorporated four electricity market periods in each game. Before each period,
each of the eight players were allowed to buy up to two wind generation units and, in cap-
and-trade games, trade carbon allowances. Following these actions, players would place price
offers for each of their dispatchable generation units into the wholesale electricity market.
The electricity market for that period would be run, and the players could observe the results.
In cap-and-trade games, players also had a final period after the last electricity market period
in which they could trade carbon allowances before non-compliance penalties were assessed
on whichever gencos did not have enough carbon allowances to cover their cumulative CO2
emissions.5 The total time to run one full four-period game was approximately 23 minutes.
       In each year's conference, the 128 students participated in 5 game rounds. Within each
round, every student was randomly assigned to one of 16 games (8 players per game) that
were run simultaneously in that round. Over the course of the 5 rounds, each student player
played 2 or 3 carbon tax games and 2 or 3 cap-and-trade games.


3.2       Description of the Energy Market Game

The experiment described in this paper uses the web-based Energy Market Game (EMG)
previously described in Thurber and Wolak (2013); Thurber et al. (2015); Davis (2019).
Development of the EMG was begun at Stanford University's Program on Energy and Sus-
tainable Development in 2013, with the goal of allowing students to play electricity market
scenarios in real time in the classroom. We subsequently expanded the use of the game
   5
    Non-compliance penalties were set at $400 per tonne for CO2 emissions in excess of allowance holdings
at the end of the final trading period.


                                                   10
to include workshops with policymakers and regulators. The EMG is structured to allow
the incorporation of new policy scenarios, power generation portfolios, and transmission
network configurations as needed. Game features incorporated to date include multiple
market participant types (generating company, retailer, and vertically-integrated utility),
fixed-price forward contracts for electricity, financial transmission rights (FTRs), capacity
markets, carbon pricing (carbon tax and cap-and-trade system), renewable energy certifi-
cates, variable fuel price (with ability to hedge prices), power plant purchase and retirement
decisionmaking, and energy storage. Game scenarios are freely available for use by the public
at https://energymarketgame.org/, and at any given moment, it is likely that a number
of these games are running simultaneously in classes and other educational settings around
the world.
   Participants in this experiment placed price offers for each of their fossil fuel generating
units into each of the four electricity market periods using the Energy Market Game bidding
screen shown in Figure 2. Wind units are treated as non-dispatchable, "must run" resources
that are automatically bid in at at a price of zero due to their zero marginal cost; they
generate electricity according to the realization of the wind resource in each market period.
(If players so desired, they could buy additional wind plants by means of a power capacity
management screen, subject to the limitations described in Section 3.1.) Players were given
the distribution of the random variable characterizing wind output, which is displayed as a
histogram in Figure 3, but they did not learn the actual wind realization for a given period
until after they placed their offers. Total market demand for electricity in each period was
downward-sloping but fairly inelastic. The equation is Demand (in MWh) = 16,705 - 5 ×
Price (in $/MWh). This equation was known to all players.
   A key element of the game interface in this experiment was a button at the top of the



                                              11
bidding screen that allowed players to factor a carbon price of their choice into all of their
electricity market price offers. This button, which could be used at any time, set the bids
for each generating unit in all future periods to the marginal cost of that unit including that
price of carbon. In the cap-and-trade games, this button provided a quick and easy way
for players to incorporate their estimated carbon price into their electricity bids. (To avoid
possible impacts on the results due to variation in the game interface, this button appeared
in both carbon tax and cap-and-trade games, even though the price of carbon was explicitly
known in the carbon tax game.)
   After each market period was run, players could review a summary of the electricity
market results in chart form, as shown in Figure 4. The market results chart included bars
showing the price offers for each of the generating units, with gray and black marks on these
bars showing the marginal cost of the unit for a zero carbon price and for a benchmark
carbon price, respectively. This gave players some sense of the carbon prices that other
players were factoring into their price offers.
   In the cap-and-trade games, players could trade carbon allowances before each of the four
electricity market periods and again after the final electricity market period. The trading
screen allowed players to submit buy or sell offers for allowances, or they had the option
of accepting offers other players had made. The trading screen showed a player's current
allowance holdings as well as their cumulative emissions to that point, clearly indicating
whether they were in allowance deficit or surplus.
   A market statistics screen displayed cumulative carbon emissions as well as, in the cap-
and-trade games, traded carbon prices for previous periods. This screen was particularly
important in the cap-and-trade games because it let players track whether overall emissions
in the market were trending over the cap, suggesting traded carbon prices were likely to be



                                                  12
higher, or under the cap, suggesting traded carbon prices were likely to be lower.


3.3       Market design

The electricity market in the game was designed to have three important characteristics:
      First, the exercise of unilateral market power in the electricity market was possible, but
difficult enough to achieve that such behavior would not render the carbon market irrelevant.
The concern is as follows. If each player's generation capacity was larger than the difference
between electricity demand and the sum of all the other players' capacity, that would make
each player pivotal, meaning they know their capacity is needed to meet demand. In such a
case, we would expect players to routinely offer very high prices (possibly at or near the offer
cap) to push up electricity price and the revenue they receive in the electricity market. These
high prices would tend to shrink demand, which could potentially push emissions below the
carbon cap--and carbon prices to zero--in most market runs.
      In the games here, the total demand in each period of approximately 17,000 MWh (see
Section 3.2) was significantly less than the total available generation from dispatchable units
of 24,000 MWh (3,000 MWh per player for all eight players). The games also started with two
wind units per player; with each wind unit having an expected hourly output of 240 MWh,
this added another 3,840 MWh of expected generation from wind. The ample generation
capacity relative to demand, and the fact that no player was pivotal, made the exercise of
unilateral market power in the electricity market relatively difficult. Additionally, in order
to prevent excessive market concentration in the wind sector, we limited new wind purchases
to two units per player before each of the first three periods, for a maximum of six new wind
units per player.6 Figure 5 illustrates the offer curve at two different carbon prices when all
  6
      New wind units came online after a one-period delay.



                                                     13
generating units bid marginal cost and there are 16 wind units in the market.
      Second, there was exogenous and endogenous uncertainty in emissions, but the amount
of uncertainty was sufficiently bounded that players could observe trends and develop carbon
trading strategies and electricity pricing strategies to take advantage of them. Exogenous
uncertainty in emissions was provided through the random variation in the output of wind
generation units from period to period. The output per wind unit was randomly chosen
from a normal distribution with µ = 240 MWh and  = 96 MWh, censored to 0-960 MWh
(see Figure 3), with all wind units having the same output in a given period. When the
wind output was lower than expected, more thermal generation units needed to operate in
the game, increasing overall emissions; when wind output was higher than expected, the
opposite was true.
      In test runs prior to the experiments, this level of exogenous variation proved sufficient
to drive discernible trends in emissions--and, in the cap-and-trade games, carbon price--
without being so large that last-period emissions variations would frequently wipe out any
trends to that point. Because demand was identical in each of the four game periods, and
because players' financial incentives encouraged them to maintain a broadly stable number
of wind generation units (see below), players could reasonably track whether emissions were
trending under or over the carbon emissions cap--and formulate carbon trading strategies
accordingly. Endogenous uncertainty in emissions was produced by player bidding behavior
in the electricity market as well as player decisions about how many wind generation units
to buy. Of the two wind generation units owned by each player at the start of game, one
was retired after period 1 and the second was retired after period 2. A player could buy
up to two wind generation units per period, with the new generation units coming online
after a one-period delay.7 Each new wind plant incurred a fixed cost of $33,600 for each
  7
      By purchasing new unit before period 1 and a second unit after period 2, a player could maintain two

                                                    14
period it was online. Given this fixed cost, wind generation units were profitable if there
were 16 or fewer of them, under the assumptions that wind output was exactly as forecast,
all players bid marginal cost for all generating units, and a carbon price of $127 was factored
into electricity market price offers. This meant that players were incentivized, on average, to
exactly replace their retiring wind units, which had the benefit of making expected emissions
the same across all four periods, making it easier for players to calculate whether carbon
emissions were trending under or over the cap. The average number of wind units in a game
period did in fact turn out to be 16, though some periods in some games had more and
others had less (see Figure 6).
    Third, the electricity market included different types of generation units with stylized
but realistic characteristics that would yield merit order shifts at higher carbon prices.8
This goal was achieved with the use of a simple portfolio of six thermal units, each with
a different variable cost and emissions rate (see Table 2). In addition to the two original
wind units plus any additional wind units that were purchased, each player operated two
baseload coal-fired units (low variable cost and high emissions rate), one baseload gas-fired
unit (low variable cost and low emissions rate), two different gas-fired "mid" units (medium
variable cost and medium emissions rate), and one gas-fired peaker (high variable cost and
high emissions rate). At higher carbon prices, the generation units with higher emissions
rates are relatively more expensive to operate, which should lead to significant merit order
shifts, with displacement of the baseload coal-fired generation units by gas-fired alternatives.
Figure 7 illustrates the carbon prices at which merit order shifts would occur--and the effects
on emissions and electricity price--if all players made price offers at marginal cost for all
wind units for all four periods of the game.
   8
     The merit order of generation units is the aggregate offer curve of units assuming all units submit offers
equal to their marginal cost, including the cost of carbon.




                                                      15
units and total wind generation took on different specified values.


3.4       Equivalence of a carbon tax and cap-and-trade system

Under perfectly competitive markets with no uncertainty, one can construct a pair of cap-
and-trade and carbon-tax policies that yield identical carbon prices, wholesale electricity
prices, and emissions. Under such conditions it is easy to create "equivalent" cap-and-trade
and carbon-tax policies. However, in real wholesale electricity markets there is neither perfect
competition nor perfect certainty. Therefore, as discussed in Section 1, it is not possible to
construct a pair of cap-and-trade and carbon-tax policies such that there are identical carbon
prices and emissions. What does it mean in such a context for a cap-and-trade policy to be
equivalent to a carbon-tax policy?
       Most papers consider a cap-and-trade policy to be equivalent to a carbon-tax policy
when the cap-and-trade cap is equal to the expected emissions from the carbon-tax policy
(Strand, 2013). In this paper we call such an equivalency an equivalent "Emissions Target".
However, a cap-and-trade policy and carbon tax with equal emissions targets will likely have
unequal expected carbon prices (and vice versa). To illustrate this, we simulated 250,000
carbon tax games assuming marginal cost pricing with a carbon tax of $127.00 and no change
in wind holdings from the original 16 generation units9 . Because each game has different
realizations of wind across the 4 periods, this leads to 250,000 different realizations of game
emissions, which is shown in Figure 8. The mean emissions from these simulated carbon tax
game runs was 32,697 tonnes of CO2 . We then simulated 250,000 cap-and-trade games with
a carbon cap of 32,697 tonnes of CO2 , assuming marginal cost bidding, no change in wind
holdings from the original 16 generation units, and the exact same wind realizations as in the
   9
    With a carbon tax of $127, marginal cost pricing, and 16 generation units it is not profitable for a genco
to move to more/less wind units.


                                                     16
previous carbon tax simulation. In each game we assume players have perfect information
as to what the wind will be and they all agree on the lowest (non-zero)10 carbon price such
that emissions are (weakly)11 less than the carbon cap. Because each game has different
realizations of wind, this leads to 250,000 different realizations of the carbon price needed to
not exceed the carbon cap, which is shown in Figure 9. The mean of these simulated cap-
and-trade carbon prices was $136.21, which is 7% more than the expected $127 carbon price
of the carbon tax with the equivalent "Emissions Target". This illustrates in a concrete way
that we cannot construct "equivalent" carbon tax and cap-and-trade games such that both
expected emissions and expected carbon prices are the same under conditions of realistic
uncertainty.
       We observe that, under uncertainty, expected emissions from a given carbon cap policy
may be less than the cap. To see why, consider Figure 9, which shows the histogram of
carbon prices from 250,000 simulations of one of our carbon cap treatments. The distri-
bution of cap-and-trade carbon prices is not smooth but instead concentrates probability
mass at a few points corresponding to carbon prices where merit order shifts occur in our
wholesale-electricity-market supply curve. At these price points, we see large and discontin-
uous decreases in emissions12 . For simulated games with a merit-order-shifting carbon price,
such discontinuous decreases in emissions can make overall emissions strictly less than the
cap13 . We also observe that the distribution of carbon prices in the simulated games is not
symmetric but instead has a long tail of high carbon prices, with the mean carbon price
higher than the median. This explains why the average carbon price in the cap-and-trade
  10
     In less than 0.2% of the simulations we do in fact observe a carbon price of $0.
  11
     In one half of the simulations are they able to find a non-zero carbon price to exactly hit the carbon cap.
  12
     See for example Figure 7 (a), (c), (e)
  13
     In a few rare simulations wind conditions were so strong that we also didn't reach the cap even with a
carbon price of zero.




                                                      17
game is higher than that in the carbon tax game with the equivalent "Emissions Target".
   Therefore, in addition to "Emissions Target" equivalency, our simulations suggest two
other kinds of equivalency that are possible between carbon tax and cap-and-trade policies.
We can define "Mean Emissions" equivalency, where a given carbon tax and cap-and-trade
system yield the same expected emissions, and "Mean Carbon Price" equivalency, where
the two policies have equivalent expected carbon prices. For our experiment, we define six
policy treatments that together encompass the range of these kinds of equivalencies: three
cap-and-trade policies labelled "Cap I", "Cap II", and "Cap III", and three carbon-tax
policies labelled "Tax I", "Tax II", and "Tax III" (see Tables 3 and 4). Cap I, Cap II, Tax
I, and Tax II were from the 2017 conference game. Cap III and Tax III were from the 2016
conference game. The set of treatments was constructed as follows:

  1. Tax I is defined as having a $127 carbon price. In 250,000 simulated games with
     random wind realizations (see below), it produces average emissions of 32,697 tonnes
     of CO2 for the four periods.

  2. Cap I sets the Tax I expected emissions of 32,697 as its cap, such that Cap I and
     Tax I are "Emissions Target" equivalent. We simulated 250,000 games with this cap,
     assuming marginal cost pricing, no change in wind holdings from the original 16 gener-
     ation units, perfect foreknowledge of that game's wind realizations, and the restriction
     that carbon price could not be negative. For each simulated game, we determined the
     carbon price that would produce total emissions as close to the cap as possible without
     going over. The average carbon price across the simulated games was $136.21.

  3. Tax II sets $136.21 (the average carbon price for the Cap I simulations) as its carbon
     price. In 250,000 simulated games, it produces average emissions of 32,552 tonnes of


                                            18
      CO2 .

  4. Cap II sets the Tax II expected emissions of 32,552 as its cap, such that Cap II and
      Tax II are "Emissions Target" equivalent. We used the same simulation procedure as
      for Cap I, finding an average carbon price across the simulated games of $140.83.

  5. Tax III is set to have a $120 carbon price. In 250,000 simulated games with random
      wind realizations, it produces average emissions of 32,807 tonnes of CO2 for the four
      periods.

  6. Cap III sets a cap of 33,152 tonnes of CO2 which leads to an expected emissions of
      32,887 tonnes, such that Cap III and Tax III are "Mean Emissions" equivalent. We
      used the same simulation procedure as for Cap I and Cap II, finding an average carbon
      price across the simulated games of $123.68.

   As described above (and summarized in Table 5), Cap I and Tax I (treatment pair TI)
and Cap II and Tax II (treatment pair TII) were both "Emissions Target" equivalent. Also
(by design), Cap I and Tax II (treatment pair MCP) were "Mean Carbon Price" equivalent.
Finally, Cap III and Tax III (treatment pair ME) were "Mean Emissions" equivalent.


3.5    Regression methodology

For the subset of data corresponding to any treatment pair, we can regress any variable of
interest on a dummy variable indicating the carbon-tax treatment, while controlling for any
relevant fixed effects. All the regressions in this paper control for the pseudo-random seed
used for the wind generation of the game. Because these seeds varied by round and year of the
experiment, they effectively served as Game × Round fixed effects in the TI, TII, ME, and
MCP comparisons. For the regressions of logged market price, assumed carbon price, and

                                             19
generation unit plant price offer markups, we also include a Period fixed effect for the period
of wholesale electrical generation within a game14 . For the regressions of assumed carbon
price and electricity market price offers, we include Player fixed effects. In our electricity
market price offer markup regressions we include Generation Unit fixed effects.15
       To estimate the magnitude of the conditional variance effect, we take the squared residuals
from the mean effect regressions and regress them again on the same regressors used in the
original regression: fixed effects for the variable in question and a dummy of whether we
applied a carbon-tax system to that observation. The coefficient on the carbon-tax dummy
variable measures how much the conditional variances differ between cap-and-trade games
and carbon tax games.16



4        Results

4.1       Overall observations

Several differences between the carbon tax and the cap-and-trade games are immediately
obvious from summary statistics. First and foremost, electricity prices are significantly
higher in the cap-and-trade games, with significantly larger variance (Tables 6 and 7 and
Figure 10). This is a function of the higher and more variable price offers players placed in
  14
     We do not include a Period fixed effect for the ME assumed carbon price regression since in the 2016
version of the experiment we did not store assumed carbon prices for periods 1, 2, and 3
  15
     In the offer price regressions, we exclude wind generation units, which were all automatically priced at
$0.
  16
     To determine whether there are significant differences in the conditional variance of market outcomes
between the various "equivalent" carbon pricing mechanisms, we test the variables of interest for homogeneity
of variance across each "equivalent" treatment pair using Bartlett's test, Fligner-Killeen's test, Levene's test
(with mean center), and Levene's test (with median center), also known as the Brown-Forsythe test of
homogeneity of variances. If almost all tests reject the null hypothesis of homogeneous variances between
cap-and-trade and carbon tax games, we conclude that carbon pricing policy probably has an effect on
variance of the variable in question.



                                                      20
the cap-and-trade games (Tables 8 and 9), which seem to follow from the higher and more
variable carbon prices players assumed when placing these offers (Tables 10 and 11).
       Players explicitly entered their "assumed carbon price" when they placed their electricity
market price offers, with the following logic. In a competitive electricity market (i.e. players
have no ability to exercise unilateral market power), the profit-maximizing pricing strategy
is to price each unit at marginal cost including the marginal cost of carbon, which is the
carbon price ($/tonnes of CO2 ) times the unit's emissions rate (tonnes of CO2 /MWh). To
make it easy to price in this way, each player had the option, on their electricity market
pricing screen, to explicitly factor a particular price of carbon into their electricity market
price offers (see Section 3.2). This would update each of their generation unit offers for that
period (and any future periods) to that unit's marginal cost incorporating the specified price
of carbon.17 The assumed carbon price a player entered in this way--and which the game
program recorded for later analysis--can reasonably be interpreted to represent that player's
expectations about the carbon price.18
       In the carbon tax game, the carbon price was clearly known: it was simply the tax.19
Therefore, it is unsurprising that the assumed carbon price players used for their electricity
market price offers was very tightly clustered around the level of the carbon tax. In the
cap-and-trade game, the assumed carbon price reflected the carbon price at which the player
thought they could buy or sell carbon allowances in the allowance market. This price could
vary as each game progressed, with wind realizations and other players' pricing behavior
  17
     At the beginning of game the default "assumed carbon price" was the carbon price in the "Carbon Price
Mean" column in Table 4, except for in 2016 when the initial assumed carbon price in the Cap III treatment
was set to $120 like in the Tax III treatment.
  18
     While it is possible for a player to enter a carbon price value on the bidding screen that differs from their
actual carbon price expectation--and thus from profit-maximizing behavior--we believe that the pre-game
training was sufficiently thorough to discourage such behavior.
  19
     Players were still given the option on the price offer screen to alter their assumed carbon price.




                                                       21
causing the expected carbon price to go up or down. However, the observed distribution
of assumed carbon prices was not symmetrical about the expected level of the carbon price
before the game was run; instead, the assumed carbon prices skewed significantly higher than
the expected carbon prices needed to meet the cap in the simulations (See Figure 11). As
discussed in Section 2, one possible explanation is risk aversion, with players shading their
assumed carbon prices higher to limit the risk of facing non-compliance penalties or the need
to buy carbon allowances at a high price after the last electricity market period. Another
possible explanation could be that the assumed carbon price is a coordinating mechanism
for pushing electricity prices higher. Finally, it could be that inefficiencies in the merit order
produced by the players' collective pricing actually required higher carbon prices to keep
emissions under the cap. Later in this paper, we will consider the evidence for each of these
hypotheses.
       Higher electricity prices translated into more variable and, on average, substantially
higher profits for generators in the cap-and-trade games, as shown in Tables 12 and 13 as
well as the histograms of Figure 12. Table 14 confirms that the effect on genco profits was
statistically significant as well as large20 . At the same time, as shown in Table 15, total CO2
emissions did not show a clear systematic change in moving from cap and trade to a carbon
tax across matched emissions target (TI: Cap I/Tax I; TII: Cap II/Tax II), matched mean
emissions target (ME: Cap III/Tax III), and matched carbon price (MCP: Cap I/Tax II)
treatment pairs.21
       Emissions were comparable between carbon pricing policies despite the fact that elec-
tricity generation was higher in the carbon tax case (Table 16), a function of the lower
  20
     Note generating companies were charged by the government for their initial allowances (see Table 3 for
the price they were charged)
  21
     There was also no discernible difference in the number of wind generation units built under any of the
treatments.


                                                    22
electricity prices. The reason emissions remained comparable was that there was signifi-
cantly more generation from the "dirtiest" generation units--coal units and low-efficiency
gas peaker units--in the cap-and-trade games (see Table 17). An important part of the
explanation, which will be explored further in Section 4.2, is that players did not always
agree in the carbon prices they assumed under cap-and-trade (see Table 18). This allowed
high-carbon generation units whose owners assumed a low carbon price to run ahead of
lower-carbon generation units whose owners assumed a higher carbon price.
       Because emissions under the cap-and-trade system were broadly the same as under the
carbon tax, while electricity prices were substantially higher, the consumer surplus was
markedly lower in the cap-and-trade case (Table 19). In effect, consumers paid much more
for emissions reductions under the cap-and-trade system.
       In the remainder of this paper, we explore the factors that may have led to the above
observations, and what they imply about the relative strengths and weaknesses of carbon-
tax and cap-and-trade policies under uncertainty. First, we consider how uncertainty in the
carbon price due to imperfect foreknowledge might lead to inefficiencies in cap-and-trade
systems. Second, we consider the evidence that risk aversion with regard to compliance
penalties may have led to inflated carbon prices in the cap-and-trade game. Third, we assess
whether carbon price could act as a mechanism to facilitate the exercise of market power in
the electricity market.22
  22
    As an example of such behavior in another emissions market, Kolstad and Wolak (2013) found that high
NOx permit prices in the SCAQMD market (in Southern California) during the Western U.S. Energy crisis
of 2000 and 2001 were used as a means for generators to justify higher electricity market offers that would
increase prices.




                                                    23
4.2       Effects of carbon price uncertainty

Table 10 and Table 18 show that both unconditional and conditional variance, respectively,
of carbon prices assumed by players in their price offers was significantly higher in the cap-
and-trade game than in the carbon tax game. This was expected, as the carbon price was
known in the carbon tax game--it was the tax--while it was market-determined in the cap-
and-trade game. Players rationally adjusted their carbon price expectations over the course
of each cap-and-trade game depending on whether total emissions appeared to be trending
over or under the cap.23 This would naturally cause some variation in carbon price across
the game periods.
       However, there was an additional source of variation in the assumed carbon price, and
that was the variation between the eight players in a game in the carbon prices they assumed
within a period. Figure 13 shows that this variation was quite significant in the cap-and-
trade games. As discussed in section 4.1, disagreement in assumed carbon price among
players was likely a major reason why more "dirty" generation units (coal generation units
and low efficiency gas peaker generation units) ran in the cap-and-trade games, as indicated
by Table 17. When all market participants agree on the carbon price, it produces the
"proper" shifts in merit order, causing fewer high-emitting generation units to run as carbon
price increases because their operating costs go up accordingly. When, on the other hand,
there is disagreement on the carbon price market participants factor into their offers, dirtier
generation units may end up running simply because their owner assumed a lower carbon
price than other market participants.
       The effect of this variation in carbon price forecasts is to make emissions mitigation and
  23
    If, for example, total emissions were at 65% of the cap after 3 (75%) of the 4 electricity market periods
had been run, players could see that it was unlikely emissions would exceed the cap, and adjust their carbon
price expectations downward accordingly.



                                                     24
electricity market functioning less efficient under the cap-and-trade program. "Errors" in the
merit order that are caused by carbon price disagreement have the effect of increasing total
generation costs. To illustrate this phenomenon, Figure 14 simulates how a given level of
carbon price disagreement would affect total generation costs for the game configurations we
ran. Assumed carbon price for each of the eight players is modeled as a normally-distributed
random variable, with the standard deviation increased from 0 (second chart from top) to
50 (bottom chart).24 As standard deviation of assumed carbon price is increased in the
simulation of Figure 14, average generation costs increase, and their variance grows larger.
      One source of variation in carbon price expectations can be limited or asymmetric in-
formation. All players in our games had access to significant information about the carbon
market. They could see all the bid and ask offers submitted to the market during allowance
trading, and they were given the volume-weighted carbon price for all the transactions ex-
ecuted in a trading period once that trading period had closed. Nevertheless, Figure 13
suggests this information was not sufficient to keep carbon price expectations among players
within in a tight range. Perhaps the remaining price disagreements were the product of
illiquid carbon markets that did not send clear enough price signals. Perhaps players varied
in their willingness to accept the risk of being short on permits at the end. Or perhaps there
were irreconcilable differences between players in where they believed carbon prices would
end up. Some of these issues could have been accentuated by the relatively short duration
of the games and the relatively small size of the markets (eight market participants). How-
ever, as we discuss in Section 5, there is reason to believe the same phenomena factor into
real-world markets as well.
 24
    As shown in Figure 13, the standard deviation of assumed carbon prices in our actual games was
frequently higher than 50.




                                               25
4.3      Possible reasons for high carbon prices in cap-and-trade games

Why are carbon prices so much higher on average in the cap-and-trade games? We consider
the evidence for three possible explanations: 1) that this represents risk-averse offer behavior
from players that fear being left short of allowances at the end of the game, 2) that carbon
price acts as an implicit coordination mechanism for the exercise of market power in the
electricity market, and 3) that merit order inefficiencies due to the disagreement on carbon
price discussed above allow high carbon prices to persist even in the absence of the other
two mechanisms.
   Dormady (2014) raises the possibility that emitters might pay high prices for allowances
early in a compliance period out of fear of being left short at the end. These high carbon
prices would tend to reduce emissions in the wholesale electricity market, and carbon prices
would subsequently decline as market participants realized emissions would be comfortably
under the cap. This is the "declining price anomaly" identified by (McAfee and Vincent,
1993) as a possibility in emissions markets.
   Figure 15, which shows the mean assumed carbon price by period for each game, suggests
that the declining price anomaly is not being observed here, at least not to a significant
extent. If anything, assumed carbon prices tended to rise over the four trading periods
rather than fall. Traded carbon prices corroborate this finding of no declining price anomaly
(see Figure 16). In some games (for example the Cap I games in round 4) allowance prices
drop over time as it becomes apparent there is an oversupply of allowances, and in other
games (for example the Cap II games in round 1) prices rise as it becomes apparent that
emissions are high relative to the cap. However, there is no systematic trend of decreasing
price.
   These high carbon prices might indicate some degree of defensive pricing, as emitters


                                               26
hedge against the possibility of low wind output in late periods, which could cause emissions
to go higher relative to the cap. The substantial non-compliance penalties in the game might
predispose players to defensive behavior. However, it is notable that assumed carbon prices
do not on average drop over time, as one might have expected if high initial assumed carbon
prices pushed emissions down.
   The fact that emissions were not systematically lower in the cap-and-trade games suggests
that the high mean values for assumed carbon price in Figure 15 were for the most part
needed to hold emissions under the cap given the disagreement in assumed carbon price
between players (Figure 14). If some players ended up running their high-emitting generation
units at high rates because they factored lower carbon prices into offers, other players would
be rational to assume higher carbon prices, which would restrain emissions from their own
portfolios (and limit their need to buy--or use up--high-value carbon allowances). This
seeming equilibrium, in which gencos factored in carbon prices that were high on average
but widely varying, benefited all gencos by significantly increasing average electricity prices.
As discussed in Section 4.1, it also hurt consumer welfare.
   For the most part, there was limited evidence that players explicitly used carbon price
as a coordinating mechanism for exercising market power to increase electricity prices. It
appears that the equilibrium of high and variable assumed carbon prices was more of a
"happy accident" for genco profitability rather than a deliberate strategy to increase elec-
tricity market profits. That said, there appeared to be some players who used the "assumed
carbon price" feature in the price offer screen as a shorthand means of raising their wholesale
electricity market offers. Notably, some players used this feature to factor in a high carbon
price even in the carbon tax games, for which carbon price was known to be between $120
and $136.21. These higher assumed carbon prices in the carbon tax games are visible as



                                              27
high outliers in Figure 17, which plots every player's assumed carbon price in every period
of every game. We have no way of knowing if these players also would have priced high if the
option to automatically factor an assumed carbon price into offers had not been available.



5    Conclusions

By the logic of Weitzman (1974), price-based and quantity-based policy instruments can
never be truly equivalent under uncertainty. In the absence of clear real-world or theoretical
evidence on how the market resolves uncertainty for price-based versus quantity-based modes
of carbon pricing, we turned to a game-based experiment. For purposes of comparison, we
defined matched pairs of carbon-tax/cap-and-trade scenarios that were equivalent on three
separate dimensions: emissions target, mean emissions, and mean carbon price. Across these
matched pairs, the cap-and-trade mechanism produced much higher electricity spot market
prices (38.5% to 52.6% higher) and lower total electrical generation (2.5% to 4.0% lower)
than the "equivalent" carbon tax, without any significant decrease in carbon emissions. This
occurred in part because emissions from the dirtiest generating units (Coal and Gas Peakers)
were significantly higher (15.2% to 33.0%) in the cap-and-trade games. These results suggest
an important practical reason why cap-and-trade policies may struggle in practice to match
the economic efficiency of a carbon tax. Namely, under the conditions of uncertainty faced
by real-world market participants, variation in the carbon prices assumed by emitters can
result in inefficient emissions reduction. The market participant who assumes the lowest
carbon price will run their units the most, and the market participant who forecasts the
highest carbon price will run their units the least, irrespective of unit characteristics. In
the case of our cap-and-trade games, this disagreement in assumed carbon price permitted
more high-emitting generation units to run and also meant a higher average carbon price

                                             28
was needed to keep emissions near the cap. Inefficient dispatch increased generation costs
relative to comparable carbon tax games.
       There is reason to believe that disagreement in carbon price forecasts between market
participants could be an important feature of real-world carbon markets as well. These
markets tend to be relatively illiquid, with price discovery that is not always easy. Moreover,
carbon prices can be volatile, and they may swing between extreme values depending on
available information about the balance between allowance supply and allowance demand.
For example, the allowance spot price in the EU ETS dropped from about EUR 30 per
tonne of CO2 to near zero in September 2007 after information emerged showing allowance
supply was ample to cover emissions. The EU carbon price recovered but has continued to
fluctuate significantly since then, in part in response to policy actions by governments. Given
this level of real-world uncertainty, we believe disagreement in carbon price forecasts among
electricity generators is likely to be a real phenomenon that merits further investigation due
to its potentially deleterious effects on electricity market functioning. Policy measures that
increase transparency around carbon allowance trades and electricity market offers might
help build consensus among market participants about the "correct" carbon price at any
point in time, although it seems unlikely to completely harmonize carbon price expectations.
In electricity markets, the merit order of generation unit dispatch will remain inefficient as
long as carbon pricing disagreements remain.25 The presence of credible floor and ceiling
prices for carbon could mitigate this problem to some extent.
       The results described in this paper point to a fundamental real-world difference between
carbon-tax and cap-and-trade systems as instruments for pricing carbon. Namely, a carbon
tax is treated by market participants as a known input to production, whereas a cap-and-
  25
    And to the extent that such disagreement pushes up electricity prices, generators for their part have no
incentive to rectify the situation.


                                                    29
trade system does not afford the same clarity. With cap and trade, there will always be
some range of expectations about the current carbon price among market participants, and
the spread between the most optimistic and pessimistic estimates will necessarily introduce
inefficiency and uncertainty. Our results reveal a significant market efficiency benefit from
a carbon tax relative to a cap-and-trade mechanism in instances where there is emissions
demand uncertainty and imperfect competition in the electricity market and market for
emissions allowances. These results also support the existence of market efficiency benefits
from maximizing transparency around allowance holdings as well as a floor and a ceiling
price for carbon. Such measures may help mitigate the negative effects of disagreement on
carbon price among market participants.



References

Aldy, J. E., J.Krupnick, A., Newell, R. G., Parry, I. W., and Pizer, W. A. (2010). Designing
  climate mitigation policy. Journal of Economic Literature.

Borenstein, S., Bushnell, J., Wolak, F. A., and Zaragoza-Watkins, M. (2014). Report of the
  market simulation group on competitive supply/demand balance in the california allowance
  market and the potential for market manipulation. Working paper 251, Energy Institute
  at Haas.

Borenstein, S., Bushnell, J., Wolak, F. A., and Zaragoza-Watkins, M. (2019). Expecting the
  unexpected: Emissions uncertainty and environmental market design. American Economic
  Review, 109(11):3953­77.

Camacho-Cuena, E., Requate, T., and Waichman, I. (2012). Investment incentives under
  emission trading: An experimental study. Environmental and Resource Economics.

                                             30
Cason, T. N. and Gangadharan, L. (2006). Emissions variability in tradable permit markets
  with imperfect enforcement and banking. Journal of Economic Behaviour & Organizaton.

Davis, T. L. (2019). Features of the Energy Market Game. https://energymarketgame.
  org/pdf/features-of-the-energy-market-game.pdf.

Dormady, N. C. (2014). Carbon auctions, energy markets & market power: An experimental
  analysis. Energy Economics.

Godby, R. (2000). Market power and emissions trading: theory and laboratory results.
  Pacific Economic Review.

Goeree, J. K., Palmer, K., Holt, C. A., Shobe, W., and Burtraw, D. (2010). An experimen-
  tal study of auctions versus grandfathering to assign pollution permits. Journal of the
  European Economic Association.

Goulder, L. H. and Schein, A. R. (2013). Carbon taxes versus cap and trade: A critical
  review. Climate Change Economics.

Grimm, V. and Ilieva, L. (2013). An experiment on emissions trading: the effect of different
  allocation mechanisms. Journal of Regulatory Economics.

IPCC (2014). Climate change 2014: Mitigation of climate change. contribution of working
  group iii to the fifth assessment report of the intergovernmental panel on climate change.
  Technical report, IPCC.

Keohane, N. O. (2009). Cap and trade, rehabilitated: Using tradable permits to control U.S.
  greenhouse gases. Review of Environmental Economics and Policy.




                                            31
Kolstad, J. T. and Wolak, F. A. (2013). Using environmental emissions permit prices to
  raise electricity prices: Evidence from the California electricity market. Working paper.

Luong, D., Lee, T., Nguyen, D., Tsai, S., Chen, F., and Chau, E. (2003). Annual reclaim
  audit report for 2001 compliance year. Audit report, South Coast Air Quality Management
  District.

McAfee, R. P. and Vincent, D. (1993). The declining price anomaly. Journal of Economic
  Theory, 60(1):191­212.

Metcalf, G. E. (2009). Market-based policy options to control U.S. greenhouse gas emissions.
  Journal of Economic Perspectives.

Newell, R. G. and Pizer, W. A. (2003). Regulating stock externalities under uncertainty.
  Journal of Evironmental Economics and Management.

Stavins, R. N. (2007). A U.S. cap-and-trade system to address global climate change. The
  Hamilton Project: Discussion Paper 2007-13, The Brookings Institution.

Strand, J. (2013). Strategic climate policy with offsets and incomplete abatement: Carbon
  taxes versus cap-and-trade. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management.

Stranlund, J. K., Murphy, J. J., and Spraggon, J. M. (2011). An experimental analysis
  of compliance in dynamic emissions markets. Journal of Environmental Economics and
  Management.

Thurber, M. C., Davis, T. L., and Wolak, F. A. (2015). Simulating the interaction of a
  renewable portfolio standard with electricity and carbon markets. The Electricity Journal.




                                            32
Thurber, M. C. and Wolak, F. A. (2013). Carbon in the classroom: Lessons from a simulation
  of california's electricity market under a stringent cap and trade system. The Electricity
  Journal, 26:8­21.

van Koten, S. (2015). Do emission trading schemes facilitate efficient abatement investments?
  an experimental study. Working paper, EUI.

Wara, M. W. and Victor, D. G. (2008). A realistic policy on international carbon offsets.
  Working paper 74, Stanford University Program on Energy and Sustainable Development.

Weitzman, M. L. (1974). Prices vs. quantities. Review of Economic Studies, pages 477­491.

Wr°
  ake, M., Myers, E., Burtraw, D., Mandell, S., and Holt, C. (2010). Opportunity cost
  for free allocations of emissions permits: An experimental analysis. Environmental and
  Resource Economics.




                                             33
Tables and Figures

                   Table 1: Previous experimental research on carbon pricing


 Paper                          Abatement mechanisms                                        Permits   Electricity
 Dormady (2014)                 None                                                        10        10
 Godby (2000)                   Fixed abatement costs                                       6,11      6,11
 Goeree et al. (2010)           Merit-order shift, Demand reduction                         6         6
 Cason and Gangadharan (2006)   Partially selectable abatement costs                        8         8
 Stranlund et al. (2011)        Supply reduction                                            8         
 Grimm and Ilieva (2013)        Increasing abatement costs                                  16        
 Camacho-Cuena et al. (2012)    Investible abatement costs                                  18        
 van Koten (2015)               Investible abatement costs                                            
 Wr°ake et al. (2010)           None                                                                  
 This paper                     Merit-order shift, Demand reduction, New generation units   8,        8

Note: The (Emissions) Permits and Electricity columns show how many subjects participated in the relevant
market with a comma meaning there were treatments with differing number of subjects.  meant that the
subjects were price-takers, in the case of the Permits column this means that even if the game was presented
in its paper as a cap-and-trade game it was effectively an emissions-tax game. In the Abatement mechanisms
column "None" meant there was no mechanism to reduce overall emissions, "Fixed abatement costs" meant
that un-permitted emissions were fully abated at a fixed cost, "Increasing abatement costs" meant that
un-permitted emissions were fully abated at an increasing cost, "Investible abatement costs" meant that
players could pay money to invest in new technologies to reduce the cost to abate the CO2 emissions for
a generation unit, "Merit-order shift" means that a carbon-price could lead to an emissions reduction by
inducing a merit-order shift, "Demand reduction" means that a carbon-price could lead to an emissions
reduction by reducing demand, and "New generation units" means that a carbon-price could lead to an
emissions reduction by adding new more efficient generation units to the existing stock of generation units.




                                                     34
                                        Table 2: Portfolios
Name    Type                  Notes             Mean capacity   Variable cost Fixed cost   Emissions Rate
Wind Old Wind 1       Retires after period 1        240              $0           $0             0
Wind Old Wind 2       Retires after period 2        240              $0           $0             0
Wind New Wind       buy up to two per period        240              $0        $33,600           0
                    1 period delay until online
Coal     Coal 1                                     300             $17           $0            1.00
Coal     Coal 2                                     300             $20           $0            1.10
Gas     Gas Base                                    800             $30           $0            0.55
Gas     Gas Mid 1                                   400             $40           $0            0.70
Gas     Gas Mid 2                                   400             $45           $0            0.80
Gas     Gas Peak                                    800             $60           $0            1.10
                          Total Starting           3,480

                             Table 3: Game treatment conditions

           Treatment      Tax        Cap                Initial Allowance Cost         Year
           Cap I                     32,704 tonnes      $136.21                        2017
           Tax I          $127                                                         2017
           Cap II                    32,560 tonnes      $140.83                        2017
           Tax II         $136.21                                                      2017
           Cap III                   33,152 tonnes      $120                           2016
           Tax III        $120                                                         2016

                                 Table 4: Simulation statistics

Treatment     Carbon Price Mean (SD) Emissions Mean (SD) Cap used in Calculation
Cap I         $136.21 (88.90)        32,464 (337)        32,697.43
Tax I         $127.00 (0.00)         32,697 (2,687)
Cap II        $140.83 (91.55)        32,328 (329)        32,552.11
Tax II        $136.21 (0.00)         32,552 (2,693)
Cap III       $123.68 (81.44)        32,887 (355)        33,145.30
Tax III       $120.00 (0.00)         32,808 (2,683)

 Table 5: "Equivalent" comparisons assuming marginal cost pricing and 16 wind units

Label    Equivalency                    Treatments                         Differences
TI       SP Emissions Target (I)        Cap I and Tax I           Target Emissions differ by 0.02%
TII      SP Emissions Target (II)       Cap II and Tax II         Target Emissions differ by 0.02%
ME       SP Emissions Mean              Cap III and Tax III       Mean Emissions differ by 0.24%
MCP      SP Carbon Price Mean           Cap I and Tax II


                                                 35
               Table 6: Round × Game × Period data
              carbon-tax I treatment summary statistics :

Statistic          N      Mean       St. Dev.        Min       Max
market price       80    144.612         8.502      102.850   159.700
              carbon-tax II treatment summary statistics :

Statistic          N      Mean       St. Dev.        Min       Max
market price       80    152.109         9.036      107.920   169.830
             carbon-tax III treatment summary statistics :

Statistic          N      Mean       St. Dev.         Min      Max
market price       160   145.100          9.808     124.000   192.000
            cap-and-trade I treatment summary statistics :

Statistic          N      Mean       St. Dev.        Min       Max
market price       80    231.003         65.123     133.000   450.000
            cap-and-trade II treatment summary statistics :

Statistic          N      Mean       St. Dev.        Min       Max
market price       80    246.863         64.626     160.000   500.000
            cap-and-trade III treatment summary statistics :

Statistic           N      Mean          St. Dev.     Min      Max
market price       160    234.220         81.316     99.000   500.000




                                    36
     Table 7: Estimated mean effect on logged wholesale electricity prices ($/MWh)




                                    TI            TII               ME            MCP
                                    (1)           (2)               (3)             (4)
treatment carbon tax FE         -0.435          -0.457         -0.427            -0.385
                                 (0.027)         (0.024)        (0.023)           (0.026)

Seed FE                              X             X                X                X
Period FE                            X             X                X                X
                                                                                 
Note:                                                      p<0.1;      p<0.05;      p<0.01
Robust standard errors. Note seed fixed effects also serve as year x round fixed effects.
Columns represent which "equivalent" cap-and-trade and carbon tax treatments the effect
was estimated on. See Table 5 for the exact comparisons.




                                           37
      Table 8: Round × Game × Period × Player × Generation Unit data
                      carbon-tax treatment I summary statistics :

Statistic      N         Mean      St. Dev.    Min     Pctl(25)      Pctl(75)   Max
offer.price   3,840     155.738     57.486       0      128.9         159.7     500
                      carbon-tax treatment II summary statistics :

Statistic      N         Mean      St. Dev.    Min     Pctl(25)      Pctl(75)   Max
offer.price   3,840     161.563     54.893       0      135.3         169.8     500
                    carbon-tax treatment III summary statistics :

Statistic      N         Mean      St. Dev.    Min     Pctl(25)      Pctl(75)   Max
offer.price   7,680     180.549     114.325      0       124           180      500
                   cap-and-trade treatment I summary statistics :

Statistic      N         Mean      St. Dev.    Min     Pctl(25)      Pctl(75)   Max
offer.price   3,840     269.055     134.351      0       161           365      500
                   cap-and-trade treatment II summary statistics :

Statistic      N         Mean      St. Dev.    Min     Pctl(25)      Pctl(75)   Max
offer.price   3,840     283.840     138.031      0      172.1          400      500
                   cap-and-trade treatment III summary statistics :

Statistic      N         Mean      St. Dev.    Min     Pctl(25)      Pctl(75)   Max
offer.price   7,680     273.267     147.672      0       145           417      500




                                          38
            Table 9: Estimated mean effect on generation unit price offers ($)



                                  TI              TII            ME              MCP
                                  (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)
treatment carbon tax FE      -114.129        -121.844        -91.949        -106.876
                               (1.969)         (1.951)        (1.797)         (1.929)

Seed FE                            X               X              X               X
Period FE                          X               X              X               X
Player FE                          X               X              X               X
Generation Unit FE                 X               X              X               X
                                                          
 Note:                                                     p<0.1;  p<0.05;  p<0.01
Robust standard errors. Note seed fixed effects also serve as year x round fixed effects.
Columns represent which "equivalent" cap-and-trade and carbon tax treatment the effect
was estimated on. See Table 5 for the exact comparisons. Excludes wind generation units
(which were automatically priced at $0).




                                           39
                       Table 10: Round × Game × Period × Player
                         carbon-tax I treatment summary statistics :

Statistic                  N      Mean       St. Dev.      Min    Pctl(25)     Pctl(75)     Max
assumed.carbon.price      640    128.245      12.062        0        127         127         200
                        carbon-tax II treatment summary statistics :

Statistic                  N      Mean       St. Dev.      Min    Pctl(25)     Pctl(75)     Max
assumed.carbon.price      640    137.100       5.398       100      136.2       136.2        200
                        carbon-tax III treatment summary statistics :

Statistic                 N      Mean      St. Dev.      Min     Pctl(25)    Pctl(75)      Max
assumed.carbon.price     320    123.824     22.136      0.000    120.000     120.000      400.000
                       cap-and-trade I treatment summary statistics :
Statistic                 N     Mean       St. Dev.      Min     Pctl(25)    Pctl(75)      Max
assumed.carbon.price     640    207.705    86.829       10.000   136.210     250.000      400.000
                       cap-and-trade II treatment summary statistics :

Statistic                 N      Mean      St. Dev.      Min     Pctl(25)    Pctl(75)      Max
assumed.carbon.price     640    215.156     84.733      0.000    140.830     270.000      400.000
                   cap-and-trade III treatment summary statistics :

Statistic                 N      Mean      St. Dev.      Min     Pctl(25)    Pctl(75)      Max
assumed.carbon.price     320    201.101    110.866      0.000    120.000     282.500      400.000




                                               40
              Table 11: Estimated mean effect on assumed carbon prices ($)




                                   TI             TII            ME                MCP
                                   (1)            (2)            (3)                  (4)
treatment carbon tax FE        -81.414          -80.266       -77.260          -73.125
                                (2.972)          (2.932)       (5.351)          (2.975)

Seed FE                            X               X                 X                X
Period FE                          X               X                                  X
Player FE                          X               X                 X                X
                                                                                   
Note:                                                       p<0.1;       p<0.05;      p<0.01
Robust standard errors. Note seed fixed effects also serve as year x round fixed effects.
Columns represent which "equivalent" cap-and-trade and carbon tax treatment the effect
was estimated on. See Table 5 for the exact comparisons. We do not include a Period
fixed effect for the ME assumed carbon price regression since in the 2016 version of the
experiment we did not record assumed carbon prices for periods 1, 2, and 3




                                           41
                              Table 12: Round × Game (carbon-tax treatments)
                                    carbon-tax I treatment summary statistics :
Statistic                     N        Mean           St. Dev.          Min             Pctl(25)          Pctl(75)            Max
co2 emissions                 20      31,542.700      2,883.894         26,443           29,633.5          33,283.8           36,337
genco profits                 20    2,019,771.000    380,279.300    1,387,086.000     1,678,818.000     2,327,232.000     2,575,301.000
electricity generated         20      63,927.300        81.177          63,757           63,891.8          63,960.8           64,136
dirty electricity generated   20       6,797.700      1,467.926         4,240            5,604.2           7,740.8             9,495
consumer surplus              20   102,168,941.000   258,242.600   101,624,299.000   102,053,203.000   102,270,385.000   102,833,738.000
government revenue            20    4,005,923.000    366,254.500      3,358,261        3,763,454.0       4,227,036.0        4,614,799
carbon social cost 0          20         0.000          0.000              0                 0                 0                 0
carbon social cost 120        20    3,785,124.000    346,067.200      3,173,160         3,556,020         3,994,050         4,360,440
carbon social cost 140        20    4,415,978.000    403,745.100      3,702,020         4,148,690         4,659,725         5,087,180
cs gp and gr minus sc 0       20   108,194,634.000   240,719.000   107,824,456.000   108,045,228.000   108,343,298.000   108,565,665.000
cs gp and gr minus sc 120     20   104,409,510.000   422,072.000   103,729,583.000   104,213,763.000   104,645,734.000   105,153,692.000
cs gp and gr minus sc 140     20   103,778,656.000   470,600.800   103,044,243.000   103,545,808.000   104,021,915.000   104,624,832.000

                                   carbon-tax II treatment summary statistics :
Statistic                     N        Mean           St. Dev.          Min             Pctl(25)          Pctl(75)            Max
co2 emissions                 20      31,094.000      2,930.346         25,768           29,561.8          33,560.5           35,092
genco profits                 20    2,248,929.000    346,656.600    1,616,717.000     2,031,043.000     2,513,286.000     2,828,000.000
electricity generated         20      63,777.100       103.692          63,555            63,744            63,838            64,069
dirty electricity generated   20       6,217.100      1,504.946         3,000            5,475.2            7,313             9,276
consumer surplus              20   101,689,925.000   331,162.300   100,981,547.000   101,586,185.000   101,883,608.000   102,622,617.000
government revenue            20    4,235,314.000    399,142.400    3,509,859.000     4,026,606.000     4,571,276.000     4,779,881.000
carbon social cost 0          20         0.000          0.000              0                 0                 0                 0
carbon social cost 120        20    3,731,280.000    351,641.500      3,092,160         3,547,410         4,027,260         4,211,040
carbon social cost 140        20    4,353,160.000    410,248.400      3,607,520         4,138,645         4,698,470         4,912,880
cs gp and gr minus sc 0       20   108,174,168.000   203,799.900   107,765,143.000   108,057,529.000   108,363,613.000   108,421,514.000
cs gp and gr minus sc 120     20   104,442,888.000   447,689.000   103,743,103.000   104,224,627.000   104,676,622.000   105,133,383.000
cs gp and gr minus sc 140     20   103,821,008.000   500,949.800   103,072,763.000   103,613,114.000   104,072,742.000   104,614,738.000

                                   carbon-tax III treatment summary statistics :
Statistic                     N        Mean           St. Dev.          Min             Pctl(25)          Pctl(75)            Max
co2 emissions                 40      34,685.220      2,938.527         27,076           33,362.2          36,495.2           39,990
genco profits                 40    2,089,032.000    428,330.800     984,495.000      1,830,074.000     2,433,924.000     3,273,901.000
electricity generated         40      63,918.000       135.913         63,542            63,887.5          64,002.5           64,090
dirty electricity generated   40       8,596.519      1,688.215       3,540.818         7,652.663         9,704.714        11,751.930
consumer surplus              40   102,138,716.000   433,240.400   100,944,083.000   102,040,665.000   102,408,061.000   102,688,210.000
government revenue            40    4,162,227.000    352,623.200      3,249,120         4,003,470         4,379,430         4,798,800
carbon social cost 0          40         0.000          0.000              0                 0                 0                 0
carbon social cost 120        40    4,162,227.000    352,623.200      3,249,120         4,003,470         4,379,430         4,798,800
carbon social cost 140        40    4,855,932.000    411,393.800      3,790,640         4,670,715         5,109,335         5,598,600
cs gp and gr minus sc 0       40   108,389,975.000   248,867.100   107,866,615.000   108,240,371.000   108,561,406.000   109,060,286.000
cs gp and gr minus sc 120     40   104,227,748.000   409,297.000   103,384,495.000   103,925,300.000   104,525,681.000   105,054,316.000
cs gp and gr minus sc 140     40   103,534,043.000   457,493.200   102,637,475.000   103,177,333.000   103,857,735.000   104,512,796.000




                                                                   42
                              Table 13: Round × Game (cap-and-trade treatments)
                                     cap-and-trade I treatment summary statistics :
Statistic                      N             Mean             St. Dev.          Min             Pctl(25)           Pctl(75)             Max
co2 emissions                  20           32,058.150       3,636.451         26,731            29,963.2            34,433             38,855
genco profits                  20         6,016,940.000    2,587,682.000    2,728,584.000     4,673,560.000      6,783,110.000     13,331,018.000
electricity generated          20           62,199.850        943.314           59,651           61,789.8            62,708             63,570
dirty electricity generated    20            8,547.600       3,111.508          4,887             6,321              9,508.8           15,325
consumer surplus               20        96,762,555.000    2,894,131.000   89,017,730.000    95,466,550.000      98,339,436.000    101,032,153.000
government revenue             20         5,055,272.000     836,424.400     4,454,612.000     4,454,612.000      5,287,512.000      7,403,012.000
carbon social cost 0           20              0.000           0.000              0                  0                  0                  0
carbon social cost 120         20         3,846,978.000     436,374.100       3,207,720         3,595,590          4,131,960          4,662,600
carbon social cost 140         20         4,488,141.000     509,103.100       3,742,340         4,194,855          4,820,620          5,439,700
cs gp and gr minus sc 0        20        107,834,766.000    310,728.800    107,238,564.000   107,640,405.000    108,051,501.000    108,215,349.000
cs gp and gr minus sc 120      20        103,987,788.000    553,372.000    103,140,301.000   103,500,972.000    104,290,203.000    105,007,629.000
cs gp and gr minus sc 140      20        103,346,625.000    614,973.000    102,363,201.000   102,808,715.000    103,653,808.000    104,473,009.000

                                    cap-and-trade II treatment summary statistics :
Statistic                      N             Mean             St. Dev.          Min             Pctl(25)           Pctl(75)             Max
co2 emissions                  20           31,542.400       3,473.541         25,433             28,166             34,215             36,749
genco profits                  20         6,928,051.000    2,467,789.000    2,322,962.000     5,499,698.000      8,520,528.000     12,662,336.000
electricity generated          20           61,882.700        748.216           59,796           61,494.8           62,442.2            62,944
dirty electricity generated    20            8,027.350       2,234.416          3,827             6,284              9,339.2           12,291
consumer surplus               20        95,777,990.000    2,276,538.000   89,529,109.000    94,561,108.000      97,486,297.000    99,049,210.000
government revenue             20         5,062,485.000     722,347.300     4,585,425.000     4,585,425.000      5,247,425.000      6,965,025.000
carbon social cost 0           20              0.000           0.000              0                  0                  0                  0
carbon social cost 120         20         3,785,088.000     416,825.000       3,051,960         3,379,920          4,105,800          4,409,880
carbon social cost 140         20         4,415,936.000     486,295.800       3,560,620         3,943,240          4,790,100          5,144,860
cs gp and gr minus sc 0        20        107,768,525.000    282,093.400    106,970,869.000   107,686,452.000    107,889,382.000    108,260,241.000
cs gp and gr minus sc 120      20        103,983,437.000    492,620.000    103,039,789.000   103,624,288.000    104,293,531.000    104,750,136.000
cs gp and gr minus sc 140      20        103,352,589.000    551,036.100    102,384,609.000   102,932,094.000    103,737,666.000    104,241,476.000

                                    cap-and-trade III treatment summary statistics :
Statistic                           N            Mean              St. Dev.           Min          Pctl(25)           Pctl(75)           Max
co2 emissions                       40         33,387.100         3,446.938         24,368         30,853.5           36,329.8         39,042
genco profits                       40       6,366,335.000      3,329,197.000     1,181,605      3,574,995.0        8,541,004.0      12,833,841
electricity generated               40         62,225.300         1,358.741         59,790         61,423.2           63,338.5         65,767
dirty electricity generated         40         10,173.920         2,755.656          5,649         7,897.5            12,848.4          14,576
consumer surplus                    40      96,731,941.000      3,908,419.000    89,446,670      94,392,200.0      100,294,912.0     102,562,886
government revenue                  40       4,736,260.000       806,464.100      3,978,240       3,978,240          5,415,940        6,393,440
carbon social cost 0                40            0.000             0.000              0               0                  0                0
carbon social cost 120              40       4,006,452.000       413,632.500      2,924,160       3,702,420          4,359,570        4,685,040
carbon social cost 140              40       4,674,194.000       482,571.300      3,411,520       4,319,490          5,086,165        5,465,880
cs gp and gr minus sc 0             40      107,834,537.000      971,653.200     106,594,171    107,321,788.0      108,117,680.0     112,874,320
cs gp and gr minus sc 120           40      103,828,085.000     1,195,526.000    102,199,171    103,152,691.0      104,240,627.0     109,950,160
cs gp and gr minus sc 140           40      103,160,343.000     1,242,341.000    101,466,671    102,481,683.0      103,570,938.0     109,462,800




                                                                           43
               Table 14: Estimated mean effect on logged genco profits ($)




                                    TI                TII                ME            MCP
                                    (1)               (2)                 (3)            (4)
treatment carbon tax FE         -1.030              -1.064          -0.981            -0.917
                                 (0.085)             (0.076)         (0.091)           (0.081)

Seed FE                              X                 X                  X               X
                                                                                      
Note:                                                           p<0.1;      p<0.05;      p<0.01
Robust standard errors. Note seed fixed effects also serve as year x round fixed effects.
Columns represent which "equivalent" cap-and-trade and carbon tax treatments the effect
was estimated on. See Table 5 for the exact comparisons.



           Table 15: Estimated mean effect on logged CO2 emissions (tonnes)




                                         TI            TII                ME           MCP
                                         (1)             (2)              (3)            (4)
treatment carbon tax FE             -0.014           -0.013          0.040            -0.029
                                    (0.017)          (0.013)         (0.014)          (0.015)

Seed FE                                   X              X                  X             X
                                                                                   
Note:                                                    p<0.1;          p<0.05;       p<0.01
Robust standard errors. Note seed fixed effects also serve as year x round fixed effects.
Columns represent which "equivalent" cap-and-trade and carbon tax treatments the effect
was estimated on. See Table 5 for the exact comparisons.


                                               44
         Table 16: Estimated mean effect on logged electricity generation (MWh)




                                         TI             TII              ME           MCP
                                         (1)            (2)                (3)          (4)
treatment carbon tax FE             0.028             0.030         0.027            0.025
                                    (0.003)           (0.002)       (0.003)          (0.003)

Seed FE                                   X                X               X             X
                                                                                  
Note:                                                     p<0.1;        p<0.05;       p<0.01
Robust standard errors. Note seed fixed effects also serve as year x round fixed effects.
Columns represent which "equivalent" cap-and-trade and carbon tax treatments the effect
was estimated on. See Table 5 for the exact comparisons.


Table 17: Estimated mean effect on logged electricity generation (MWh) from Coal and Gas
Peaker units




                                    TI                TII               ME            MCP
                                    (1)               (2)               (3)             (4)
treatment carbon tax FE          -0.194             -0.247         -0.152            -0.290
                                 (0.078)             (0.062)        (0.043)           (0.076)

Seed FE                              X                 X                 X               X
                                                                                     
Note:                                                          p<0.1;      p<0.05;      p<0.01
Robust standard errors. Note seed fixed effects also serve as year x round fixed effects.
Columns represent which "equivalent" cap-and-trade and carbon tax treatments the effect
was estimated on. See Table 5 for the exact comparisons.


                                               45
 Table 18: Estimated variance effect on assumed carbon prices (Residuals from Table 11)




                                   TI                 TII                 ME                MCP
                                   (1)                (2)                 (3)                 (4)
treatment carbon tax FE        -81.414              -80.266           -77.260          -73.125
                                (2.972)              (2.932)           (5.351)          (2.975)

Seed FE                            X                   X                     X                X
Period FE                          X                   X                                      X
Player FE                          X                   X                     X                X
                                                                                           
Note:                                                               p<0.1;       p<0.05;      p<0.01
Robust standard errors. Note seed fixed effects also serve as year x round fixed effects.
Columns represent which "equivalent" cap-and-trade and carbon tax treatment the effect
was estimated on. See Table 5 for the exact comparisons. We do not include a Period
fixed effect for the ME assumed carbon price regression since in the 2016 version of the
experiment we did not record assumed carbon prices for periods 1, 2, and 3

             Table 19: Estimated mean effect on logged consumer surplus ($)




                                         TI                TII               ME             MCP
                                         (1)               (2)               (3)              (4)
treatment carbon tax FE             0.055             0.060             0.055              0.050
                                    (0.006)           (0.005)           (0.006)            (0.006)

Seed FE                                  X                  X                X                 X
                                                                                      
Note:                                                      p<0.1;         p<0.05;          p<0.01
Robust standard errors. Note seed fixed effects also serve as year x round fixed effects.
Columns represent which "equivalent" cap-and-trade and carbon tax treatments the effect
was estimated on. See Table 5 for the exact comparisons.

                                               46
           Table 20: Estimated mean effect on logged government revenue ($)




                                    TI            TII               ME            MCP
                                    (1)           (2)               (3)             (4)
treatment carbon tax FE         -0.225          -0.174         -0.119            -0.170
                                 (0.025)         (0.021)        (0.021)           (0.025)

Seed FE                              X             X                X                X
                                                                                 
Note:                                                      p<0.1;      p<0.05;      p<0.01
Robust standard errors. Note seed fixed effects also serve as year x round fixed effects.
Columns represent which "equivalent" cap-and-trade and carbon tax treatments the effect
was estimated on. See Table 5 for the exact comparisons.




                                           47
Figure 1: Schematic illustrating carbon price and abatement quantity under a hypothetical
carbon pricing policy.




    Price



        P 21




         P2
         P1




        P 12


                                                      D1               D2
                       E 12 E 1            E 2 E 21
                                                                    Emissions




                                           48
Figure 2: Annotated screenshot of the wholesale electricity market uniform-price auction
price offer interface.



                                                                                                  25
           "Place Bids": Bid into Electricity Market
          Entering a carbon price and clicking "recompute bids with carbon price" sets the bids
          of all plants in all periods to their marginal costs incorporating that carbon price




                   Be sure to click "Update" if you have changed any individual plant bids




                                                      49
Figure 3: Histogram of output per wind unit in a period. Distribution is normal with µ = 240
MWh and  = 96 MWh, censored to 0­960 MWh.




                                            50
Figure 4: Annotated screenshot of wholesale-electricity-market figure provided for each pe-
riod showing the demand curve, supply curve (color coded by player), and the market clearing
price.



                                                                                  28

           Electricity Market Chart                   Marginal cost of
                                                      unit at benchmark
                                                      carbon price ($130
                      Market price                    in this game)

                                     Demand




         Bid price for unit




                                                            Marginal cost of
                                                            unit at zero carbon
                                                            price




                                              51
                    Figure 5: Example period 1 electricity market results




Note:   Assuming marginal cost pricing (left assuming carbon cost of $0/tonne and right assuming
$127/tonne).




                                              52
                                   Figure 6: Wind generation units




Note: Columns are treatments "Cap I", "Cap II", "Cap III", "Tax I", "Tax II", "Tax III" and rows are
round of games 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. The red line is our initial wind generation units of sixteen.




                                                      53
Figure 7: The relationship of carbon prices on CO2 emissions and wholesale electricity market
prices




                (a) 0 MWh of Wind                             (b) 0 MWh of Wind




              (c) 3,840 MWh of Wind                         (d) 3,840 MWh of Wind




              (e) 7,680 MWh of Wind                         (f) 7,680 MWh of Wind

Note: Left column is CO2 emissions and right column is wholesale electricity market prices. Rows are
different realizations of wind: 0 MWh, 3,840 MWh, and 7,680 MWh. Assumes marginal cost pricing.
Dashed vertical lines are carbon prices which cause merit order shifts in the supply curve.


                                                54
                    Figure 8: Histogram of emissions given a carbon tax of $127.00/tonne




              200




              150
      Count




              100




              50




                0


                20000            25000          30000            35000       40000
                                               CO2 emissions (tonnes)


Note: Assumes each gencos holds two wind units and prices at marginal cost incorporating a carbon tax
of $127/tonne. The mean is 32,697 tonnes CO2 .




                                                        55
                      Figure 9: Histogram of carbon prices needed to meet carbon cap



              50000




              40000




              30000
      Count




              20000




              10000




                 0


                        0             200               400                600                800
                                                Carbon price ($/tonne


Note: Assumes that the social planner has perfect knowledge of future game wind realizations and that
for each game (and related set of wind realizations) the social planner sets one carbon price in order for the
CO2 emissions to be (weakly) less than 32,697 tonnes. Assumes each gencos holds two wind units and prices
at marginal cost. The orange dashed lines are the carbon prices which cause merit order shifts. The mean
is $136.21.




                                                     56
                              Figure 10: Wholesale electricity prices




Note: Columns are treatments "Cap I", "Cap II", "Cap III", "Tax I", "Tax II", "Tax III" and rows are
round of games 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. The red line is $141 which is the market price we would observe with 16 wind
generation units producing at mean output and all non-renewable generation units offer prices at marginal
cost assuming a carbon price of $120.




                                                   57
                                  Figure 11: Assumed carbon prices




Note: Columns are treatments "Cap I", "Cap II", "Cap III", "Tax I", "Tax II", "Tax III" and rows are
round of games 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. The red line is at $120.




                                                         58
                                        Figure 12: Genco profits




Note: Columns are treatments "Cap I", "Cap II", "Cap III", "Tax I", "Tax II", "Tax III" and rows are
round of games 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. The red line is $0.




                                                    59
                                               Figure 13: Standard deviations of assumed carbon prices


                                           Assumed carbon price standard deviations (within a game period)
                                                    1                   2                   3                   4                   5
                                     150




                                                                                                                                                cap_and_trade_I cap_and_trade_II cap_and_trade_III
                                                                    q           q                   q   q               q
                                                            q               q                   q   q
                                                                                                                                q       q   q
                                                                                                                                            q
                                                q                                                   q                       q
                                     100                q
                                                            q
                                                                q               q   q
                                                                                    q   q       q   q   q
                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                            q       q
                                                                                                                    q
                                                            q                   q       q       q                       q
                                                                    q                   q
                                                                                    q                                           q           q
                                                                                                            q                           q
                                      50                q   q
                                                                            q   q
                                                                                        q               q   q       q   q
                                                                                                                        q   q
                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                q       q
                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                    q       q       q                                                   q
                                                q                                                                   q       q
                                           q    q               q                                       q
                                           q
                                           q                        q
                                                q       q       q
                                       0                        q

                                     150
                                                            q                                       q
                                                                                                    q                   q                   q
                                                                                                q   q                                       q
                                           q            q   q                                                           q               q
                                     100   q    q
                                                                                q   q
                                                                                        q
                                                                                                q   q   q
                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                    q           q
                                                        q   q                           q       q       q           q   q                   q
                                                                            q   q                                   q           q
                                                                                q                                               q       q
                                                q       q                                       q                           q           q
                                                                    q                                                       q   q
                                      50                        q
                                                                    q
                                                                                        q
                                                                                        q                           q   q               q
                                                                q   q       q
                                                                            q   q
                                           q    q               q                   q                   q   q
                                           q                                                                                q
                                                                q                                                           q
                                       0
                                     150                    q                                                                               q
                                                                                q                   q                   q
                                                            q
           assumed.carbon.price.sd




                                                            q                   q                                       q                   q
                                                            q                   q                                       q                   q
                                                                                                    q                                       q
                                     100                    q                   q                   q                   q
                                                                                q                   q                   q                   q
                                                            q                                                           q                   q
                                                            q                                       q                                       q
                                                                                                                        q
                                      50                                        q                                                           q

                                                                                                    q                   q
                                       0
                                     150




                                                                                                                                                carbon_tax_I
                                     100

                                      50                                                        q   q
                                                                q   q       q           q                           q
                                                        q   q                   q                       q               q
                                                            q       q       q   q       q       q           q       q   q       q       q   q
                                           q
                                           q    q
                                                q       q   q   q   q       q       q
                                                                                    q               q   q   q       q   q   q   q       q   q
                                       0        q       q   q       q       q       q   q       q   q   q           q       q           q

                                     150

                                                                                                                                                carbon_tax_II
                                     100

                                      50
                                                            q                                       q
                                                q       q                       q
                                           q    q       q   q   q   q       q
                                                                            q   q
                                                                                q       q       q   q   q   q       q   q                   q
                                       0                            q               q   q           q               q   q   q   q       q   q

                                     150
                                                                                                                                                carbon_tax_III




                                     100                                        q



                                      50                                        q                   q
                                                                                q                   q                   q
                                                            q
                                                            q                   q                                       q
                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                    q                                       q
                                                                                                                                            q
                                                            q
                                                            q                   q
                                                                                q                   q                   q
                                                                                                                        q                   q
                                       0                    q                                       q

                                           1    2       3   4 1     2       3   4 1     2       3   4 1     2       3   4 1     2       3   4
                                                                                        period


Note: Within-period standard deviations in assumed carbon price by treatment, period (1-4), and game
round (1-5). Data for periods 1-3 was not recorded for the Cap III and Tax III treatments.




                                                                                        60
Figure 14: Simulated effect of carbon price disagreement on generation costs in our four-
period cap-and-trade game

                     2.0e-06
                     1.5e-06




                                                                                                           cp0
                     1.0e-06
                     5.0e-07
                     0.0e+00
                     2.0e-06
                     1.5e-06




                                                                                                           sd0
                     1.0e-06
                     5.0e-07
                     0.0e+00
                     2.0e-06
                     1.5e-06




                                                                                                           sd10
                     1.0e-06
                     5.0e-07
                     0.0e+00
                     2.0e-06
                     1.5e-06
           density




                                                                                                           sd20
                     1.0e-06
                     5.0e-07
                     0.0e+00
                     2.0e-06
                     1.5e-06




                                                                                                           sd30
                     1.0e-06
                     5.0e-07
                     0.0e+00
                     2.0e-06
                     1.5e-06
                     1.0e-06                                                                               sd40
                     5.0e-07
                     0.0e+00
                     2.0e-06
                     1.5e-06
                                                                                                           sd50




                     1.0e-06
                     5.0e-07
                     0.0e+00
                               $1,500,000               $2,000,000             $2,500,000     $3,000,000
                                            generation costs including $120 carbon cost ($)


Note: The top chart ("cp0") shows the probability density function for absolute generation costs in simu-
lated game runs assuming a carbon price of $0, marginal cost pricing, and 16 wind generation units. The
other charts ("sd0"-"sd50") show probability density functions for the generation costs in simulated game
runs (assuming marginal cost pricing and 16 wind generation units) as the variance in assumed carbon prices
between players is increased from a standard deviation of $0/tonne CO2 to $50/tonne CO2 .




                                                              61
Figure 15: Within-period means of assumed carbon price by treatment, period (1-4), and
game round (1-5)


                                             Assumed carbon price means (within a game period)
                                                     1                   2                   3                   4                   5




                                                                                                                                                 cap_and_trade_I cap_and_trade_II cap_and_trade_III
                                                                                                     q
                                       300                   q
                                                             q               q
                                                                                 q
                                                                                                 q                               q       q
                                                                                                                                             q
                                                         q                       q                   q                                       q
                                                                                                                                             q
                                       250       q           q
                                                                     q
                                                                     q
                                                                             q
                                                                                         q       q
                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                         q   q           q   q   q           q
                                                         q                       q               q       q           q
                                                                                                                     q           q
                                                                                     q   q                                       q
                                       200                       q
                                                                                 q
                                                                                     q   q                   q
                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                         q
                                                 q       q                   q       q   q                   q               q
                                                 q           q                       q                   q           q   q   q
                                       150   q
                                             q
                                             q   q       q       q
                                                                 q   q
                                                                     q                                   q           q   q
                                                                                                                         q

                                       100
                                                                                 q
                                                                                                     q
                                                             q
                                       300                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                     q       q
                                                         q   q                   q               q                       q
                                       250                   q               q                   q   q               q
                                                                                                                     q           q           q
                                                                                                 q       q           q                       q
                                             q   q       q           q                   q                               q       q
                                                             q               q                                       q   q               q
                                                                                                         q   q
                                       200   q   q       q       q   q       q
                                                                                 q   q   q
                                                                                         q
                                                                                                 q       q               q
                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                 q       q
                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                 q   q       q   q                       q
                                             q   q               q   q               q
                                       150   q                   q                                                           q

                                       100
           assumed.carbon.price.mean




                                                                                 q
                                       300                   q
                                                             q                   q                   q
                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                     q                                       q
                                       250                   q                                       q
                                                                                                                         q                   q
                                       200                   q                   q                                       q
                                                             q                   q
                                                                                 q                                                           q
                                                             q                   q
                                                                                 q                   q
                                                             q                                       q
                                                                                                     q                                       q
                                       150                                       q
                                                                                                                         q                   q
                                                                                                     q                   q
                                                                                                                         q                   q
                                       100




                                                                                                                                                 carbon_tax_I
                                       300
                                       250
                                       200
                                       150   q   q       q   q   q
                                                                 q   q       q
                                                                             q
                                                                             q   q   q   q       q   q   q   q
                                                                                                             q       q   q   q   q
                                                                                                                                 q       q   q
                                                 q                   q           q   q   q
                                                                                         q       q
                                                                                                 q   q               q
                                       100

                                       300                                                                                                       carbon_tax_II
                                       250
                                       200
                                       150   q   q
                                                 q
                                                         q
                                                         q
                                                             q
                                                             q   q   q       q   q
                                                                                 q   q   q       q   q
                                                                                                     q   q   q       q   q   q   q       q   q

                                       100
                                                                                                                                                 carbon_tax_III




                                       300
                                       250
                                       200
                                                                                 q
                                       150                   q                   q
                                                                                 q
                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                         q
                                                             q                   q                   q
                                                                                                     q                   q                   q
                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                 q                                       q
                                       100
                                             1   2       3   4 1     2       3   4 1     2       3   4 1     2       3   4 1     2       3   4
                                                                                         period


Note: These are the prices that were factored into players' wholesale electricity market price offers. Data
for periods 1-3 was not recorded for the Cap III and Tax III treatments.




                                                                                         62
Figure 16: Volume-weighted average traded carbon prices by period in each cap-and-trade
game


                             cap_and_trade_I           cap_and_trade_II           cap_and_trade_III
                   400

                   300




                                                                                                          1
                   200

                   100

                     0
                   400

                   300




                                                                                                          2
                   200

                   100

                     0
                   400

                   300
           price




                                                                                                          3
                   200

                   100

                     0
                   400

                   300


                                                                                                          4
                   200

                   100

                     0
                   400

                   300
                                                                                                          5




                   200

                   100

                    0
                         0   1     2       3   4   0   1      2      3    4   0   1      2       3    4
                                                           period


Note: Periods 1-4 are the trading periods before the respective electricity market periods; period 5 is the
final trading period before assessment of any non-compliance penalties.




                                                           63
Figure 17: Within-period values of assumed carbon price for each player by treatment, period
(1-4), and game round (1-5)


                                                1                   2                   3                   4                   5
                                  400       q       q   q   q   q       q   q   q   q       q   q   q   q       q   q   q   q       q   q




                                                                                                                                            cap_and_trade_I cap_and_trade_II cap_and_trade_III
                                                        q                   q   q   q       q   q                       q   q
                                                                            q               q   q
                                                                        q   q                   q                   q
                                                        q                                   q           q                   q           q
                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                q       q                   q
                                  300               q   q               q
                                                                        q   q
                                                                            q
                                                                            q
                                                                                q   q
                                                                                    q
                                                                                            q
                                                                                            q   q
                                                                                                    q   q
                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                q   q   q   q
                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                        q
                                            q       q   q
                                                        q       q       q
                                                                        q   q   q   q
                                                                                    q       q   q   q   q       q
                                                                                                                q           q       q
                                                                                                                                    q   q
                                                                                                                                        q
                                                    q
                                                    q   q       q
                                                                q           q
                                                                            q   q           q   q
                                                                                                q   q   q
                                                                                                        q       q   q   q
                                                                                                                        q   q
                                                                                                                            q       q
                                                                                                                                    q
                                            q       q   q       q       q   q   q   q       q   q   q   q       q   q
                                                                                                                    q               q
                                  200       q       q   q
                                                        q   q   q       q
                                                                        q   q   q
                                                                                q   q       q
                                                                                            q   q
                                                                                                q   q
                                                                                                    q   q       q
                                                                                                                q   q   q
                                                                                                                        q   q       q
                                                                                                                                    q   q
                                                                                                                                        q
                                        q   q
                                            q       q   q   q           q   q   q                               q   q   q   q
                                        q
                                        q   q       q       q   q       q       q
                                                                                q   q       q       q   q
                                                                                                        q       q
                                                                                                                q   q   q           q
                                        q
                                        q   q
                                            q       q
                                                    q   q   q
                                                            q   q
                                                                q       q
                                                                        q   q
                                                                            q   q   q
                                                                                    q       q   q   q
                                                                                                    q   q       q
                                                                                                                q   q   q
                                                                                                                        q   q
                                                                                                                            q       q
                                                                                                                                    q   q
                                        q                                                                       q
                                                                                                                q   q
                                  100                                           q   q       q   q                   q
                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                    q

                                                                                                                    q
                                    0
                                  400   q   q       q
                                                    q
                                                        q
                                                        q
                                                                            q
                                                                            q
                                                                                q   q       q
                                                                                            q
                                                                                            q
                                                                                                q
                                                                                                q
                                                                                                q
                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                    q   q
                                                                                                        q       q
                                                                                                                q   q       q       q   q
                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                        q
                                            q       q
                                                    q   q                                   q   q                   q
                                        q   q                           q                   q           q           q       q
                                                                                                                            q
                                                        q                   q
                                                                            q                                                       q
                                  300   q   q       q
                                                    q
                                                        q
                                                        q
                                                            q   q       q
                                                                        q   q
                                                                            q
                                                                            q
                                                                                    q
                                                                                    q
                                                                                    q
                                                                                            q
                                                                                            q
                                                                                                q
                                                                                                q
                                                                                                q   q
                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                        q
                                                    q   q       q       q   q   q   q               q   q
                                                                                                        q       q
                                                                                                                q           q       q
                                                                                                                                    q   q
                                            q       q   q
                                                        q       q       q   q       q
                                                                                    q       q
                                                                                            q       q   q       q
                                                                                                                q   q
                                                                                                                    q   q
                                        q   q
                                            q       q   q
                                                        q   q   q
                                                                q       q
                                                                        q   q   q   q               q   q       q
                                                                                                                q   q   q   q       q   q
                                  200   q
                                        q   q
                                            q
                                            q
                                                    q
                                                    q
                                                    q
                                                        q
                                                        q
                                                            q
                                                            q
                                                            q
                                                                q
                                                                q
                                                                q
                                                                q
                                                                        q
                                                                        q
                                                                        q
                                                                            q
                                                                            q
                                                                                q
                                                                                q
                                                                                q
                                                                                    q       q
                                                                                            q       q
                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                    q   q
                                        q
                                        q   q
                                            q       q
                                                    q
                                                    q   q
                                                        q   q               q   q
                                                                                q   q               q               q   q   q           q
                                        q   q       q   q   q   q       q   q       q       q   q   q   q       q   q   q   q       q
                                                                                                                                    q   q
                                                    q           q
                                  100   q   q       q   q                                                                           q   q
                                                                                                                    q
                                    0                                                                               q

                                  400                   q                   q
                                                                            q
                                                                                                q
                                                                                                q
                                                                                                q
                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                            q                   q
                                                                                                q                   q
                                                                                                                    q                   q
                                                        q                                       q                   q                   q
                                  300                   q
                                                        q                   q                   q                   q                   q
           assumed.carbon.price




                                                        q                                       q                   q                   q
                                                        q                   q                   q
                                                                                                q                   q
                                                                                                                    q                   q
                                                                                                                                        q
                                                        q                   q                   q                   q
                                                                                                                    q                   q
                                                                                                q
                                                                                                q                   q                   q
                                  200                   q
                                                        q                   q
                                                                            q
                                                                                                q
                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                        q
                                                        q
                                                        q
                                                        q                   q                   q                   q                   q
                                                        q                                       q
                                                                                                q
                                                        q                   q                   q                   q
                                                                                                                    q                   q
                                  100                   q
                                                                            q
                                                                                                q                   q
                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                        q
                                                        q                                                           q                   q
                                    0                                       q                   q                   q                   q

                                  400




                                                                                                                                            carbon_tax_I
                                  300
                                  200                       q   q       q
                                                                                                    q
                                            q       q   q       q       q
                                                                        q   q
                                                                            q       q                   q       q   q       q
                                                                                                                            q       q   q
                                        q
                                        q   q
                                            q       q
                                                    q   q
                                                        q   q
                                                            q   q       q
                                                                        q   q
                                                                            q   q
                                                                                q   q
                                                                                    q       q
                                                                                            q   q
                                                                                                q   q
                                                                                                    q   q
                                                                                                        q       q
                                                                                                                q   q
                                                                                                                    q   q
                                                                                                                        q   q
                                                                                                                            q       q
                                                                                                                                    q   q
                                                                                                                                        q
                                            q                                   q
                                  100               q   q
                                                                            q                                   q   q
                                                                                    q                           q
                                    0                                                       q   q

                                  400
                                  300                                                                                                       carbon_tax_II

                                  200                   q
                                                        q
                                                                                                q
                                            q       q
                                                    q   q       q       q   q       q       q   q                   q                   q
                                        q
                                        q   q
                                            q       q   q   q
                                                            q   q
                                                                q       q
                                                                        q   q
                                                                            q   q   q
                                                                                    q       q   q   q
                                                                                                    q   q
                                                                                                        q       q
                                                                                                                q   q   q   q       q   q
                                                                                                                                        q
                                            q           q                                                       q
                                  100                                       q


                                    0
                                  400                                       q
                                                                                                                                            carbon_tax_III




                                  300
                                                                                                q
                                  200                   q
                                                                            q
                                                                            q                                       q
                                                        q
                                                        q
                                                        q                   q                   q                   q
                                                                                                                    q                   q
                                                        q                   q                   q
                                                                                                q                   q
                                                                                                                    q                   q
                                                                                                                                        q
                                                        q                   q
                                                                            q                   q
                                                                                                q                   q
                                                                                                                    q                   q
                                  100                   q                                       q
                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                    q
                                   0                                        q

                                        1   2       3   4 1     2       3   4 1     2       3   4 1     2       3   4 1     2       3   4
                                                                                    period


Note: Data for periods 1-3 was not recorded for the Cap III and Tax III treatments.




                                                                                    64
