                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         SUBJECTIVE EXPECTATIONS AND DEMAND FOR CONTRACEPTION

                                          Grant Miller
                                         Áureo de Paula
                                        Christine Valente

                                      Working Paper 27271
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27271


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2020




Funding from the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation is gratefully acknowledged (Grant number
OPP1171956). IRB Number 59/CNBS/2017 approved by the Mozambican Health Ministry's
National Bioethics Committee (CNBS) on September 22 2017, updated December 14 2017. We
thank Sergio Chicumbe and Acácio Sabonete at the Instituto Nacional de Sáude, Páscoa Wate at
the Ministry of Health, the district health authorities of Maputo City, Maputo Province, and Gaza
Province as well as Marina Bassi, Humberto Cossa, and Peter Holland at the Human
Development division of the Maputo World Bank office for their support. Thanks go to Yolanda
Chongo, Andreas Kokott, Gisela Lourenço, Duelo Macia, and Alfredo Matusse at Intercampus
for excellent fieldwork. Manuel Antonio Sanchez Garcia provided outstanding research
assistance. For their useful comments, we thank Adeline Delavande and Matthew Wiswall and
audiences at the World Bank Maputo Office, University of Bristol, and ECARES. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Grant Miller, Áureo de Paula, and Christine Valente. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Subjective Expectations and Demand for Contraception
Grant Miller, Áureo de Paula, and Christine Valente
NBER Working Paper No. 27271
May 2020
JEL No. D83,J13,J16

                                         ABSTRACT

Nearly one-quarter of married, fertile-age women in Sub-Saharan Africa say that they want to
avoid pregnancy but are not using contraceptives. To the best of our knowledge, this paper is the
first to study this puzzle in a developing country using detailed data on women's subjective
probabilistic beliefs about contraception and contraceptive attributes. Policy counterfactuals
based on a structural model suggest that costly interventions such as eliminating supply
constraints would only have modest effects on contraceptive use. Alternatively, increasing
partners' approval of methods, aligning partners' fertility preferences with women's, and
correcting women's expectations about pregnancy risk absent contraception have the potential to
increase use considerably. We provide additional empirical support for this last result through a
before/after experiment in which we find that simply (and effectively) informing women about
underlying pregnancy risk increases stated intentions to use contraception substantially, in line
with our initial estimates.

Grant Miller                                    Christine Valente
CHP/PCOR                                        University of Bristol
Stanford University                             Department of Economics
117 Encina Commons                              Priory road complex
Stanford, CA 94305-6019                         Priory road
and NBER                                        Bristol, BS8 1TU
ngmiller@stanford.edu                           United Kingdom
                                                christine.valente@bristol.ac.uk
Áureo de Paula
University College London
Department of Economics
Gower Street
WC1E 6BT
United Kingdom
and Institute for Fiscal Studies
a.paula@ucl.ac.uk
1     Introduction
    Total fertility rates in low-income countries remain high, averaging 4.6 children
per woman (as of 2017, World Development Indicators, 2019). Importantly, these
appear markedly higher than desired by women: in nationally representative sur-
veys, about one quarter of married, fertile-age women in these countries state that
they do not wish to become pregnant, but they are not using contraceptives either
-- a phenomenon commonly referred to as "unmet need for family planning". This
results in over 52 million unwanted pregnancies and about 70,000 maternal deaths
due to, e.g., unsafe abortions each year (Singh et al., 2014). In response, intensive
policy efforts and growing amounts of international aid focus on family planning
programs (from under $400M prior to 2008 to $886M in 2013 according to Groll-
man et al., 2018). However, there is surprisingly little systematic evidence about
why this so-called "unmet need" persists.
    There are a variety of potential explanations. Perhaps the most obvious lies on
the supply-side, the primary policy focus:1 modern contraceptives may simply not
be readily available. Notably, however, fewer than 10% of married women with
"unmet need for family planning" across 52 low-income countries cite high cost or
inadequate supply as the primary reason for not using contraceptives (Sedgh et al.,
2016).2 On the demand side, high fertility is strongly correlated with high desired
fertility (Pritchett, 1994), but very little is known in quantitative terms about the
causes of the gap between women's fertility intentions and contraceptive use. The
four main reasons given by women with an "unmet need" for not using contracep-
tives are: side effects (26%), infrequent sex (24%), "opposition" by themselves,
their partner, or others close to them (23%), and breastfeeding/amenorrhea (20%)
(Sedgh et al., 2016). The question of male involvement in family planning de-
cisions has received attention in the public health literature (e.g. Shattuck et al.,
2011; Vouking et al., 2014; Raj et al., 2016; Doyle et al., 2018) and in a small num-
ber of carefully designed experimental economic studies. Ashraf et al. (2014) and
Ashraf et al. (2018) demonstrate that men's higher fertility preferences and/or disap-
    1 See,   e.g., Blumenthal et al. (2010); Zakiyah et al. (2016); United Nations (2019).
    2 There    are a few exceptions to this rule in Central and Western Africa.



                                                    2
proval of contraceptive injections contribute substantially to low contraceptive use
in Zambia, and Cassidy et al. (2020) find that introducing female condoms, which
are preferred by men, increases the ability of women with low bargaining power to
use condoms in a Mozambican slum.3,4 But no study of which we are aware aims
to rigorously quantify the role of specific barriers to contraceptive use other than
male opposition, providing little guidance on what strategies to prioritize.
    Given this, there may be neglected `low-hanging fruits' in addressing "unmet
need" for family planning (FP) through empirically-informed strategies targeting
specific obstacles that inhibit contraceptive demand. For example, nearly half
(44%) of the women not using contraceptives despite desiring to avoid pregnancy
either cite breastfeeding/amenorrhea or infrequent sex as the primary reason for not
using contraception, and may therefore incorrectly believe that they face a low risk
of pregnancy (Sedgh et al., 2016).5 If women systematically underestimate preg-
nancy risk absent contraception, then simply recalibrating their beliefs may increase
contraceptive use.
    In this paper, we collect detailed data on the subjective expectations and prob-
abilistic beliefs of women in Mozambique to study the role of both supply- and
demand-side determinants of contraceptive choice among women not wishing to
become pregnant. Our rich data allow us to estimate a structural model quantify-
ing women's preferences over a broad set of contraceptive choices and attributes.
These estimates, in turn, allow us to predict how contraceptive use would respond
    3 The  public health literature tends to support the conclusion that involving men is effective
in increasing contraceptive use, but the holistic nature of the interventions studied makes it diffi-
cult to pinpoint the reason for the change. In the intervention evaluated by Shattuck et al. (2011),
for instance, male peers are trained to target men with messages encompassing the financial and
health-related benefits of limiting fertility, information about contraceptive methods, and to carry
out activities aimed at changing gender norms and improving spousal communication.
     4 Studying an intensive 2-year radio campaign promoting family planning in Burkina Faso and

also giving women radios, Glennerster et al. (2019) find that contraceptive use increases by 5.3
percentage points, and they suggest that this was primarily due to improved knowledge about the side
effects of modern contraceptives (and ending the myth that modern contraceptives cause sterility).
     5 Nearly half (47%) of women reporting infrequent sex as a reason for not using contraception

report having sex in the preceding three months. Most women reporting breastfeeding or post-
partum amenorrhea as the main reason for not using contraception do not meet the World Health
Organization (WHO) criteria for lactational amenorrhea as protection against pregnancy (Sedgh
et al., 2016).



                                                 3
to a wide range of potential technologies and FP program strategies. Finally, as
part of our survey we conduct a before/after experiment informing women about
the average risk of pregnancy in the population absent contraception, allowing us
both to estimate the effect of this information on beliefs about pregnancy risk and
intentions to use contraception in the future and to assess the validity of our model
predictions.
    In doing so, we make three key contributions to existing literature. First, to the
best of our knowledge, our study is the first to collect data from women in a de-
veloping country on their probabilistic beliefs about contraception and pregnancy
(including the efficacy, availability, attributes, and side-effects of specific contra-
ceptive methods as well as beliefs about their partners' preferences).6 Importantly,
our setting is one in which beliefs, preferences, and both economic and societal con-
straints are likely to differ substantially from those previously studied (Delavande
(2008) studying the United States and Nakamura (2016) studying Japan).7 Be-
liefs data, when available, allow preferences to be disentangled from expectations
without assumptions about these expectations -- e.g., that the subjective expecta-
tion used by the individual when making decisions is equal to the average outcome
observed in the population. Despite their potential advantages, economic studies
incorporating beliefs data remain scarce.8 Our data indicate that women generally
hold accurate (or plausible) beliefs along many dimensions, but they systematically
underestimate both the probability of pregnancy absent contraception and the ef-
ficacy of hormonal contraceptives (in the latter case, by as much as 3-5 times the
true efficacy for injections and implants, respectively). This suggests that correcting
mistaken beliefs may be an effective strategy for increasing contraceptive use.
    6 Beliefsabout contraception are discussed extensively in the literature (Williamson et al., 2009;
WHO/RHR and CCP, Knowledge for Health Project, 2018; Adelekan et al., 2014), but they are
not generally numerically quantified. In high-income countries, Delavande (2008) and Nakamura
(2016) study subjective beliefs on contraception for women in the US and Japan, respectively.
    7 Mumah et al. (2018) also estimates the effect of binary beliefs about contraceptive methods

-- e.g., whether the respondent believes the pill to be "effective" or "not effective" in preventing
pregnancy -- on intended use of these methods among slum dwellers in Nairobi.
                                                                        ´
    8 Other studies complementing choice data with beliefs include Alvarez      and Vera-Hern´   andez
(2013), Bennear et al. (2013) and Delavande and Kohler (2015) on health; Wiswall and Zafar (2015),
Boneva and Rauh (2019) and Delavande and Zafar (forthcoming) on education; Van der Klaauw and
Wolpin (2008) on savings and retirement; and Van der Klaauw (2012) on teachers career decisions.


                                                  4
    Second, using our data on subjective expectations, we develop a tractable struc-
tural model of contraceptive decision-making in which we incorporate women's be-
liefs in a consistent and transparent manner into an expected utility decision model.
Specifically, we estimate a random utility model of the choice between no contra-
ception, male condoms, injections, implants, and oral contraceptives. In doing so,
we quantify the role of each option's attributes (including among others protection
against pregnancy, probability of side effects, probability of approval by partners)
on women's choices among these five alternatives. Then, focusing on the main
reasons that women explicitly report in international surveys for not using contra-
ception (despite not wanting to become pregnant), we predict the impact of a variety
of potential strategies for promoting contraceptive use.
    Our results are striking. We find that more-of-the-same supply-side interven-
tions are unlikely to effectively increase use: even the most dramatic (and costly)
increase in supply, removing all direct and indirect monetary costs of contracep-
tives, eliminating waiting times, and removing uncertainty about availability in-
creases contraceptive prevalence by only 1.1 percentage points. Similarly, new
technologies with no side effects (and accurate beliefs among women about the
absence of side effects) increases contraceptive prevalence by about 0.3 percent-
age points. Alternatively, changing men's fertility preferences and their `approval'
of contraceptives is more effective. Aligning fertility preferences between women
and their partners increases contraceptive prevalence by 2.4 percentage points, and
increasing women's expectations that their partners will approve available forms
of contraception by 25 percentage points raises contraceptive prevalence by 3.6
percentage points.9 Finally, correcting beliefs about pregnancy risk absent contra-
ception by 25 percentage points among women who underestimate this risk raises
contraceptive use by about 4.9 percentage points among this group and by 1.9 per-
centage points overall. Importantly, while these latter increases may seem small,
they represent substantial progress compared to the current slow pace of change.
    9 Studying  Zambian women receiving vouchers for contraceptive injections either alone or in
the presence of their husband, Ashraf et al. (2014) find that women are 25% less likely to use
concealable contraceptives and more likely to give birth if their husbands know that they received
a voucher, demonstrating that men's higher fertility preferences and/or disapproval of injections
contribute to low contraceptive use.



                                                5
As a point of comparison, the increase in contraceptive prevalence among married
women observed in Mozambique between 2003 and 2015 was only 4 percentage
points (MISAU, INE and ICF, 2016).
    Our third contribution is then to build on and validate the results from our struc-
tural model by providing experimental evidence. Because changing men's fertility
preferences or approval of contraceptive methods may be difficult in practice, we
instead focus on correcting women's mistaken beliefs about the probability of preg-
nancy absent contraception. In doing so, we experimentally test an implication of
our model, and we also provide further evidence on the impact of a novel, readily
scalable, low-cost information intervention which simply provides information to
women about the WHO reference risk of pregnancy within 12 months when not us-
ing contraception (85%, communicated as "17 out of 20 women"). We find that in
response, women realign their probabilistic beliefs with this population statistic and
increase their stated intention to use contraceptives in the future.10 Among women
not using contraceptives at the time of interview, this effect is large, raising inten-
tions to use contraceptives by 8.2 percentage points. Although stated intentions
may not reflect revealed preferences, we conduct a validation exercise comparing
our experimental estimates with our model predictions and find remarkably consis-
tent estimates.
    As noted by Todd and Wolpin (2006), no single randomized controlled trial is
likely to be able to determine which of many alternative policies would be the most
effective or cost-effective. This seems especially true when there are many possible
alternative policies with no clear a priori ranking, which is the case here given the
dearth of quantitative evidence on the causes of low contraceptive prevalence in
developing countries. In this context, the key advantage of our structural exercise
   10 Wiswall   and Zafar (2015) also carry out an informational experiment providing detailed popu-
lation statistics -- to a sample of undergraduate students on labor market outcomes by major -- and
exploit the before-after treatment change in beliefs. Contrary to beliefs about the returns to major
choice studied in Wiswall and Zafar (2015), however, we find that, for pregnancy risk, women have
a very large elasticity of beliefs to population-level information. Also departing from Wiswall and
Zafar (2015), we do not use the panel variation in beliefs in our structural estimation. This is not
problematic here since our model exploiting cross-sectional variation in beliefs does not appear to
be affected by a concerning degree of omitted variable bias -- to the extent that the effect of the
change in beliefs observed experimentally on contraceptive use as predicted by the model is of a
similar size to the effect on intended contraceptive use observed in the experiment.


                                                 6
is that it enables us to shed light on the effect of many more potential policies than
only the particular one we experiment with, and hence guide ours as well as future
research in the area. In the spirit of, e.g., Todd and Wolpin (2006); Attanasio et al.
(2011); Duflo et al. (2012); Lise et al. (2015), we appraise the validity of our model
assumptions using experimental data, which bolsters our confidence in the policy
counterfactuals based on our model.
     Our work is also related to the broader literature on the effect of providing in-
formation on beliefs and behaviors. A rich body of work has produced mixed ex-
perimental evidence of the effect of providing information on health and education
beliefs and behaviors in developing countries (as recently reviewed by Dupas and
Miguel, 2017; Muralidharan, 2017). While there is no simple answer to the question
of why information provision has an effect on behavior in some cases but not others,
three key considerations are whether: (i) baseline beliefs depart from the informa-
tion provided, (ii) this information is trusted and relevant, and (iii) other constraints
need to be lifted for individuals to act upon their revised beliefs (e.g., by decreas-
ing monetary costs).11 Our beliefs data show that baseline beliefs do depart from
population statistics, while our results indicate that women trust the information
provided in our experiment and find it relevant.12 In addition, we ask respondents
the extent to which they would trust a message about pregnancy risk coming from a
variety of sources, and answers suggest a high degree of trust in health profession-
als (and, to a lesser extent, in the media). There is therefore reason to believe that
making the pregnancy risk information salient within the context of health counsel-
ing and/or TV or radio programs could be effective ways of scaling up our proposed
intervention. Finally, we conclude from both our structural estimates -- which take
a rich set of other constraints into account -- and our experimental findings that,
in our context, providing pregnancy risk information has the potential to increase
contraceptive use independently of other interventions targeting additional barriers
   11 For recent evidence on the effect of mistrust in the health system on health-seeking behaviors,
see Martinez-Bravo and Stegmann (2019); Alsan and Wanamaker (2017).
   12 Women not only increase their intentions to use contraception after receiving our information

message, in the case of women who hold baseline beliefs below the WHO benchmark their intentions
to use contraception also respond to the same extent to their baseline beliefs and to their beliefs
revisions (see p. 33).



                                                 7
to use.
    In the rest of the paper, we provide details about the context, data collection and
surveyed women's characteristics (Section 2), describe the beliefs data (Section 3)
and present the model and estimation approach (Section 4), before reporting our
model estimates and policy counterfactuals (Section 5) and experimental results
(Section 6). Section 7 concludes.


2      Context, Data Collection and Respondents'
       Characteristics

2.1      Context
    With a GDP per capita of only US $426 per capita in 2017, Mozambique re-
mains one of the poorest countries in the world despite recently experiencing 20
years of rapid economic growth (1996-2015). Fertility is just above the average in
Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) (of 4.8 children per woman), and has been decreasing
only slowly: the total fertility rate (TFR) was 5.9 in 1996, and it had only declined
to 5.2 by 2017. As of 2015, 23.1% of married Mozambican women aged 15-49 had
an "unmet need for contraception" (SSA average: 24.1% in 2014), and 25.3% used
a modern contraceptive method compared to a SSA average of 26.3% (in 2014).13
    Within Mozambique, there is substantial heterogeneity in the TFR across
provinces, which mirrors economic inequalities. In the three provinces in the south
of the country in which we collected the data used in this paper, it ranges from
2.5 children per woman in the capital city Maputo to 3.4 in Maputo Province, and
4.7 in Gaza. In the Northern province of Niassa, it is as high as 6.6. Contracep-
tive prevalence is about twice as high in the south as in the north -- ranging from
42% to 47% in the three provinces that we study in the south (similar to Kenya or
Malawi in 2010) to only 18-22% in the northern provinces. Nonetheless, the share
of married women aged 15-49 with an unmet need is still between 17% (Maputo
    13 Allfigures reported in this section up to this point are taken from World Development Indi-
cators (2019). SSA refers to SSA excluding high-income countries. The figures for Mozambique
reported in the rest of this subsection are taken from MISAU, INE and ICF (2016).


                                                8
City) and 25% (Maputo Province) in the south, roughly comparable to rates in the
north (19% in Nampula and 30% in Zamb´  ezia).


2.2     Data Collection
    In keeping with the focus of our research -- namely the causes of the gap be-
tween women's fertility intentions and contraceptive use -- we only collected data
from women who state that they do not want to become pregnant at least in the
coming two years (following the Demographic and Health Surveys' cutoff) and
who were likely to need contraception to achieve their fertility intention.
    More specifically, we used a screening questionnaire to identify women who:
(1) were between 18 and 49, (2) were currently married or living maritally, (3)
whose husband or partner, if working away, normally returned home at least once
per month, (4) did not identify as infecund when asked about their pregnancy inten-
tions, (5) were not pregnant, (6) did not want any more children or wanted more but
did not want to become pregnant in the coming two years and (7) when asked how
likely they would be to state the same fertility intentions if the enumerator came
one month later and asked them the same question, answered that they would either
"certainly" or "probably" give the same answers.14
    The survey collected data across nine districts of three provinces in Southern
Mozambique (Maputo city, Maputo province and Gaza province). In order to en-
sure a fairly representative mix of socioeconomic categories, we selected districts
of different socioeconomic levels and the door-to-door recruitment of respondents
was guided by targets for the distribution of women's level of education based on
the proportions of women with an "unmet need" for FP found in each province
in the latest available Demographic and Health Survey (DHS) at the time of field-
work (DHS 2011) -- the targeted proportions were achieved within a maximum 3
percentage points (%-points) margin of error.
    Fieldwork took place between January 18 and February 16, 2018. The prob-
abilistic beliefs survey instrument followed best practices in the area (Delavande
et al., 2011; Delavande and Kohler, 2012). In particular, we used visual aids, so that
   14 86%  (14%) of women selected for the full interview answered that they would certainly (prob-
ably) state the same fertility intentions.

                                                9
respondents are asked to express their probabilistic beliefs by choosing the number
of dried beans to be placed on a grid of 20 cells, where 0 means that the respondent
is certain that an event will not occur while 20 beans mean that the respondent is
certain that the event will occur.15 We started with a short training module based on
Delavande and Kohler (2012), in which respondents were introduced to the visual
aids and asked a few training questions about events they are familiar with such as
the probability that they will go to the market in the coming 2 days/2 weeks, creat-
ing opportunities for the respondents to receive feedback on the consistency of their
responses. After these training questions, the respondent was given a chance to ask
questions if she had any. After answering these, the enumerator started the module
about beliefs related to contraception, and from then on did not comment anymore
on the respondent's answers.
    We first asked women about their demographic characteristics, socioeconomic
status (SES), fertility history, and about the contraceptive methods they knew of,
using the same wording as in the DHS wherever possible.16 For all the methods
(modern or "traditional") that the respondent said they knew of, as well as for the
"no method" alternative, we elicited women's probabilistic beliefs about all the
main factors which previous literature has suggested may matter in the decision to
use a contraceptive method. We asked about the expected direct costs and indirect
costs (e.g., transport costs) of using each method they knew of, as well as about
their expected chance of: pregnancy within 12 months, contracting an STD within
12 months, experiencing nausea or headaches, experiencing menstrual irregulari-
ties or vaginal infections, experiencing "other" side effects, alteration of (their or
their partner's) libido or sexual pleasure or interference with romance, getting preg-
nant within 12 months of discontinuation if wanting to get pregnant, obtaining the
method when needed, approval by their partner, their partner finding out that they
are using the method -- or not using the method in the case of the "no method"
method.17
   15 Based   on evidence presented in Delavande et al. (2011), we asked respondents to express their
answers out of 20 rather than out of 10 to improve precision.
    16 In particular, we followed the DHS tried and tested method to identify women's knowledge of

contraceptive methods, prompting women with a brief description whenever they did not immedi-
ately said they knew of a method.
    17 We also asked about the mode of administration of each method, but this question does not



                                                10
     After eliciting women's probabilistic beliefs about contraception, we also asked,
among others, about their intentions to use contraception in the future (following
the DHS wording of "Do you intend to use a method to postpone or prevent getting
pregnant, at some point in the future? Yes/No/Don't know"), about their partner's
desired fertility, and about their sexual activity in the previous- and previous three
months.
     We obtained data from 651 women. Of these women, 20 are not sexually active
(i.e., report not having had sex in the previous three months) and 24 qualify as
infecund based on the DHS definition, and so we drop them from the sample.18
We also drop 23 women who say they use FP strategies other than the five main
options we consider: injections, no family planning, contraceptive pill, implants
and male condoms.19 Out of the 584 women in the resulting analytical sample,
14 women use a combination of methods (i.e., some combination of condom and
hormonal method, except for one case combining the pill and implants). In the 13
cases combining a hormonal method with male condoms, we assign the woman to
the hormonal method under the assumption that, in these cases, condoms are used
mainly for protection against STDs rather than family planning. In the remaining
case in which the pill and implants are combined, we assign the woman to implants
as it is the most effective of the two methods and it seems likely that the pill was
prescribed in order to combat the implants' side effects such as to regulate bleeding.


2.3     Respondents' Characteristics
    In Panel A of Table 1, we report demographic and socioeconomic characteristics
of the women in our analytical sample. These women have, on average, 2.6 children
appear to have been well understood by respondents, e.g., with a number of women saying that the
mode of administration of male condoms is "oral". We also asked about the expected probability of
weight changes if switching to each method from the woman's current method. But since we do not
model method changes, answers to these questions may be misleading and so we do not use these
variables.
    18 I.e., they started living maritally five or more years before the interview, are not currently

using and have never used contraception, but have not had a child in the past five years and are not
pregnant.
    19 This amounts to dropping 3 women using non-modern methods (periodical abstinence and

coitus interruptus), 10 women using an intrauterine device and 7 women who are sterilized. The
number of women using each of these methods is too limited to allow estimation.

                                                11
and are 29.1 years old, and in most cases either have some primary schooling (44%)
or some secondary schooling (42%).
    In Panel B, we report key descriptive statistics regarding contraception. On av-
erage, women know about more than four contraceptive methods, and nearly three
(2.73) out of the four main methods analysed here (injections, implants, pill and
male condoms). While all the women in our sample say -- as per our sample se-
lection criteria -- that they do not want to get pregnant (at least in the coming two
years), 30% are not using any contraceptive method. The most popular contracep-
tive method is injections, followed by the pill, implants and male condoms.
    Among the 30% who are not using contraceptives, 6 percentage points are due
to women whose period has not returned yet since their last child was born. These
women do not, however, report using lactational amenorrhea (LAM) as a contra-
ceptive method, and so we classify them as choosing the "no method" alternative.
Somewhat surprisingly, there is a general lack of knowledge about LAM in the
study area. Only 6 out of the 584 women in the sample say that they have heard of
LAM as having a protective effect against pregnancy (even after it was explained
to them in plain terms using the DHS descriptor).20 This lack of knowledge about
LAM was confirmed in focus group interviews carried out with women outside our
survey sample who also want to limit or delay fertility.21
    In 30% of cases, women report that their partners have higher fertility prefer-
ences than them.22 There is however only limited correlation between not using a
method and having a partner who has higher fertility preferences. Table A-1 splits
   20 The  DHS description for LAM is: "After giving birth, you would be protected from getting
pregnant as long as you breastfeed frequently until your menstruation returns.".
    21 Out of 10 focus groups, the probability of pregnancy whilst breastfeeding was discussed 8

times. In each case, it was spontaneously mentioned by women in the context of being at risk of
unintended pregnancy (almost immediately after birth) if not using another contraceptive method.
Only one woman across all focus groups mentioned that breastfeeding might reduce the risk of
pregnancy. In the two focus groups in which the moderator directly asked women whether they
knew of LAM (using the DHS descriptor), the response was that they did not know, and women
expressed surprise at the idea that breastfeeding, even in the first six months, may protect against
pregnancy.
    22 More precisely, 30% of respondents answer "yes" when asked, towards the end of the inter-

view, whether her partner wants to have more children (if the respondent said she did not want
anymore) or whether her partner wants to have a child sooner than her (if she said that she wanted
to have another child, but wanted to wait at least 2 years).


                                                12
the sample according to whether the woman's partner has higher fertility prefer-
ences, and shows that a larger share of women are not using contraception when
their partners have higher fertility preferences (37%), but that the rate of women
not using FP is still high among women whose partners have similar fertility pref-
erences (27%).
    In Table A-2, we compare key characteristics of women in our sample (Col. 1)
with two representative samples. Col. 2 reports summary statistics for cohabiting
women age 18 and above who say they do not want to get pregnant in the coming
two years interviewed in the 2015 AIDS Indicator Survey (AIS) in the same three
provinces, while Col. 3 reports summary statistics for women with the same char-
acteristics for the whole AIS 2015 survey. The women in our sample tend to be
younger. At least in part because of this, on average they have fewer children than
their counterparts in the AIS and are also more likely to have secondary education
and above. They are less likely to report not using contraception (30% vs. 38%
in the same three provinces in the 2015 AIS), and more likely to use long acting
reversible contraceptives ("LARC", here specifically injections and implants). A
comparison of Columns (2) and (3) confirms that the three provinces we targeted
have higher levels of economic development than the rest of country as well as lower
levels of unmet need for contraception conditional on not wanting to get pregnant
within two years.


3     Beliefs Data

3.1    Data Validity
    In order to check the extent to which respondents understand the concept of
probability -- although the word "probability" was not used in the interviews, we
asked respondents to show the enumerator the number of dried beans (out of 20)
that best reflected their probability of getting pregnant in the coming year, and then
in the coming 5 years. Under 8% of women responded a larger probability in the
coming year than in the coming 5 years at their first attempt. After the enumerator
explained to these women that she expected a response indicating a larger probabil-


                                         13
ity in the coming 5 years than in the coming year as she would have 4 more years,
5% of women still give a lower probability of getting pregnant within 5 than within
1 year. In a robustness check, we exclude these women from the sample and find
similar results.
     We also asked women to tell us, for four different months in the calendar year
(April 2018, July 2018, October 2018, and January 2019), the number of beans
which best reflected the probability that it would rain in any given day during this
month. While in the years prior to the survey there was much year-on-year variabil-
ity in the number of rainy days in April and July, women should know that January
is the peak of the rainy season while October is a reliably mostly dry month.23
     Figure A-1 shows the distribution of the difference between the expected prob-
ability of rain in any given day in January and October. The average difference in
answers for the two months is 3.6 beans, compared to an actual difference -- ex-
pressed in 5-percentage point beans -- of 6.2 (3.7) between 2015 and 2017 (2009
and 2018). This suggests that women understood the survey instruments well and
that we were able to elicit their probabilistic beliefs reliably.


3.2    Descriptive Statistics
    Table 2 reports selected probabilistic beliefs statistics where answers out of 20
dried beans are converted in probabilities (out of 1) for convenience.24
    The women in our sample appear to have a very good knowledge of the risk of
pregnancy when using condoms. They report this risk to be 17% on average, which
is nearly identical to the 18% pregnancy risk under typical use reported by the
WHO.25 Their average expected probability of pregnancy when using no method
is high (78%), but it is lower than the risk in the general population of sexually
active women according to the WHO (85%). While it is not possible to say exactly
what the true risk of pregnancy is for the women in our sample under each method,
   23 The number of rainy days by month between 2015 and 2017 is:                           9 to
16 in April, 2 to 13 in July, 16 to 19 in January and 7 to 8 in October
(https://www.worldweatheronline.com/maputo-weather-averages/maputo/mz.aspx).
   24 Descriptive statistics for the other probabilistic beliefs can be found in Table A-3.
   25 See WHO/RHR and CCP, Knowledge for Health Project (2018).




                                              14
the risk incurred when using methods such as injections and implants, for which
there is no variability coming from user's adherence to instructions, should be close
to the WHO guidelines. Given this, they appear to vastly overestimate the risk of
contraceptive failure associated with hormonal methods, from a factor of 3.1 for
injections to as much as 4.9 for implants (and 3.9 for the pill).
    Respondents have a very high expected unprotected probability of contracting
an STD in the coming 12 months, and a good understanding of the fact that con-
doms, and condoms only, protect against STDs.
    As in many other developing countries today, family planning is available free
of charge in government facilities in Mozambique, and are also available at a cost
from private providers. Consistent with the fact that, except for male condoms, at
least 85% of users in the last DHS (2011) obtained their contraceptives from public
providers, expected costs are low (from 14 to 27 Meticais per month or an annual
cost of no more than 1% of GDP per capita).
    Monthly indirect costs such as transport costs associated with each method
vary from 23 (condom) and 37 (injections) Meticais per month, and the ranking
of method by costs reflects what would be expected given the accessibility and fre-
quency of administration of each method.26
    Other variables related to supply also reflect the relative ease with which mod-
ern FP methods can be obtained, with an average expected waiting time of 19 (con-
doms) to 23 (injections and implants) minutes and an expected probability of being
able to obtain the method when needed of 82% (implants) to 90% (condoms).
    The women interviewed hold plausible beliefs regarding the probability of side
effects. First, they understand that the risk of side effects is very low with con-
doms, but that hormonal methods come with a risk of nausea/vomiting, menstrual
irregularities, and other side effects. It is difficult to compare the reported probabil-
ities with an "objective" measure, but the range of values appears reasonable (from
around 20% for nausea (injections) to 58% for menstrual irregularities (injections))
   26 In particular, the indirect cost of the pill and condoms, which are obtained from a range of
providers including pharmacies, is lower than that of injections, which are overwhelmingly obtained
from public health posts (MISAU, INE and ICF, 2013) and the indirect cost of obtaining implants,
which are also obtained from a restricted range of providers, is lower than the indirect cost of ob-
taining injections, as would be expected by the difference in frequency of application.



                                                15
in light of reliable information stating that these and other side effects are "com-
mon to very common" for each of the three hormonal methods covered here (e.g.,
https://bnf.nice.org.uk).
    Interestingly, on average women also hold reasonable beliefs about the effect of
contraceptive methods on the ability to conceive after discontinuation. The average
expected probability of managing to conceive in the 12 months following discon-
tinuation if they decided that they wanted to get pregnant is 69% for implants and
injections, 73% for the pill and 81% for condoms, compared to a 75% expected
probability of managing to conceive within the coming 12 months if they decided
that they wanted to get pregnant and were not currently using any contraceptive.
In this sample, there is therefore no evidence of the mistaken belief that modern
contraception has long-term effects on the ability to conceive.
    We also elicited women's expected probability of approval of each alternative
contraceptive method by their coreligionists (i.e., those in the same religion), as well
as their parents, friends and partner. The women's expected probability of approval
by others is generally low (60% or less), especially in the case of coreligionists. It
is important to note, however, that the women's expected probability of approval
by partners if they did not use any method is even lower -- 40% on average. This
suggests caution in interpreting the low levels of expected approval of use of con-
traceptives as a sign of disapproval of contraceptive methods rather than a sign that
the women's social circle is not very supportive in general. As would be expected,
women who say that their partners want more children or want them earlier than
them have a lower expected probability that their partners would approve of them
using a method relative to not using a method.27
    Women's answers to questions about the probability of being able to hide from
their partner the use of each method or non-use of any method are also plausible.
Reassuringly, the vast majority of respondents do not think they would be able to
use male condoms without the knowledge of their partners. For the other methods
and for using no method, the expected probability of being able to hide use or
    27 For instance, the expected probability of approval if using injections minus the expected prob-

ability of approval if not using any method is 25 (2) %-points on average among women whose
partners have similar (higher) fertility preferences.



                                                 16
non-use from partners varies between 32% (implants and doing nothing) and 42%
(injections). This suggests that women took into consideration the fact that men can
infer the use or non-use of contraception based not only on the direct observation
of use of the method but also from side effects such as menstrual irregularities and
pregnancy (non-)occurrences.
    In summary, women in our sample are, on average, well informed about the
failure rate of the male condom method, but underestimate somewhat the probabil-
ity of pregnancy when not using any contraception and vastly overestimate (by a
factor of between about 3 and 5) the probability of pregnancy when using hormonal
methods -- resulting in a large underestimation of the ability of hormonal methods
to protect women against pregnancy relative to using no method. Women also un-
derstand perfectly well that only condoms protect against STDs, and have a high
expected risk of contracting STDs when using no protection. Expected monthly
costs, waiting times and other issues with supply are low. The expected probability
of side effects is high (and within a reasonable range). Finally, expected rates of ap-
proval by others are low for any action that the women could take including using
no method.
    Another important characteristic of these subjective beliefs data is their disper-
sion, even within groups defined by socioeconomic status and demographic char-
acteristics. If every woman with similar observable characteristics held the same
beliefs, then there would be no need to collect subjective beliefs data in order to
identify their preferences for different aspects of family planning -- population av-
erages (e.g., on the chance of pregnancy within 12 months for given observable
characteristics) would suffice. This is however not the case. There is indeed much
variation in beliefs, as illustrated by the standard deviations reported in Table A-3.
This is true even within demographic/SES group. For instance, the expected prob-
ability of pregnancy within 12 months varies much within age group, as shown in
Figure A-2.
    In the next section, we use our rare beliefs data in order to identify women's
preferences regarding the wide range of contraceptive characteristics about which
we elicited beliefs and predict the effect of several candidate policies on contracep-
tive use.


                                          17
4    Model and Estimation
    The idea of our modelling exercise is that women choose the alternative (no
method, injections, pill, condoms or implants) associated with the highest utility
when taking into account all the expected consequences of choosing each method
in their choice set. The combination of the contraceptive choice they make and their
beliefs about the consequences of this choice provides information about how much
they care about each of the perceived characteristics of each method.
    For illustration, consider the distribution of beliefs for each potential method
(rows) by method used (columns) (Table 3). Except for women using no method,
for whom the highest expected level of partner approval would be achieved by using
condoms, the method chosen is the one with the highest average expected rate of
approval by partners. There is therefore a strong correlation between the perceived
likelihood of partner approval and a woman's current method. If confirmed af-
ter controlling for women's method-invariant characteristics -- including whether
their partner wants more children or wants them earlier -- and beliefs about the
many other aspects of contraceptive methods, this would indicate that women have
a strong preference for method approval by their partners.
    Similarly, we can compare, for each method used, women's expected risk of
pregnancy within 12 months (Table 4). On average, women do not systematically
choose the method they believe to have the lowest pregnancy risk. On the other
hand, compared to women using contraceptive methods, women who do not use
any method also have the lowest expected risk of pregnancy when not using any
method. Without controlling for other women's characteristics and perceived meth-
ods attributes, however, it is difficult to say how much utility women derive from a
reduction in the risk of pregnancy.
    In order to shed light on women's preferences, we estimate an additive random
utility model (ARUM) consistent with utility maximization. Formally, we start by
modeling women as maximizing the following utility function:

                     J
             max          u j (e j , zi )dPim (e j ) + m zi + Ei (cm ) + im ,
            mMi     j=1




                                          18
where m corresponds to the contraception method and the index set Mi is woman
i's choice set (i.e., the methods they know of). The index j corresponds to the
events for which we elicited beliefs in our survey (e.g., pregnancy within 12 months,
contracting an STD within 12 months, . . . , listed p. 10). Each one of these possible
events is represented by a binary random variable e j , j = 1, . . . , J , recording whether
the woman gets pregnant within 12 months, contracts an STD within 12 months, etc.
The function u j is the utility or disutility derived from event j happening and may
also depend on zi , a set of woman characteristics that do not vary by method. The
perceived probability that the event j happens depends in turn on the contraception
method adopted and is denoted by Pim . The method invariant characteristics zi ,
encompassing, for example, age, education, . . . , may also affect the utility for the
method differentially through m . Finally, Ei (cm ) is the subjective expected cost of
using method m by woman i and im is an idiosyncratic method×individual-specific
random component of utility.
    With binary events e j and data on the expected probability of event e j happening
and on the expected cost of each method, the probability of choosing method m          ¯ can
be written as:

                                            Mi
            ¯ |zi , {Pim (e j ), Ei (cm )}m
         Pr(m                             j1,...,n , Mi )
                    J
          = Pr      [u j (zi)Pim
                               ¯ (e j = 1)] + m
                                              ¯ zi + Ei (cm
                                                          ¯ ) + im
                                                                 ¯ >
                   j=1
           J
           [u j (zi)Pim(e j = 1)] + m zi - Ei(cm) + im, m  Mi, m = m
                                                                   ¯                         (1)
          j=1


where u j (zi ) = u j (e j = 1, zi ) - u j (e j = 0, zi ) is the difference in utility levels re-
sulting from event j happening rather than not happening. In the empirical im-
plementation we model these u j (zi ) as j-specific parameters allowing for (linear)
dependence on zi (namely, individual- and partner fertility preference measures)
for specific js. Given data on woman i's subjective beliefs Pim (e j = 1) for every
event category j and each method m in their choice set, expected methods costs
Ei (cm ) (e.g., waiting time, direct and other monetary costs) for every method and
a distributional assumption on im , we can estimate Equation (1) and thus identify


                                                  19
women's preferences (u j and ).28
    If we assume that the im are independent Type I extreme value random vari-
ables, then the probability of choosing m  ¯ can be modeled as a logit. A limitation
of the resulting conditional logit model is its implied independence of irrelevant
alternatives (IIA): the relative choice probabilities for any two alternatives does not
depend on characteristics of other methods. This assumption is unlikely to be satis-
fied for methods which share many similarities, which is the case for the three hor-
monal methods. We relax the IIA assumption by adopting instead a nested logit, in
which women are thought of choosing between three independent top-level limbs
(no method, condoms, or hormonal methods) as well as choosing between three
bottom-level branches (injections, implants, or the pill) within hormonal methods
as depicted in Figure 1. Consequently the random shocks affecting the choice be-
tween no method, condoms, or hormonal methods are assumed to be independent,
but random shocks affecting the choice between different hormonal methods are al-
lowed to be correlated Type I extreme value random variables (see Cardell, 1997).
    In this nested logit model, we estimate (i) the effect of method-invariant vari-
ables on the choice of broad type of method (no method, condoms, or hormonal
methods) using the variation between women in these variables (e.g., education
level, desire to limit vs. desire to space fertility) and (ii) the effect of method-
specific variables (e.g., expected monetary cost) using only the variation in beliefs
within woman between methods. The logit specification implies that any woman-
specific additive "fixed effect" affecting beliefs over a given characteristic of meth-
ods (e.g., over a given e j = 1 and/or over Ei (cm )) is "factored-out" as long as it
applies to all methods.29 For instance, if a woman systematically overestimates
or overstates her expected monetary cost irrespective of the method used, this ten-
   28 We  use a subjective expected utility maximization approach, assuming that the precision of
beliefs does not affect the decision process. Taking the precision of beliefs into account would
require data on the dispersion of beliefs and thus add substantially to an already long survey. It
would also require making assumptions about how this precision enters the utility function. While
we did not collect these data, the good level of understanding of the beliefs survey instruments
by respondents suggests that it would be feasible, in future work, to elicit more complex beliefs
potentially involving uncertainty or ambiguity regarding the beliefs.
    29 More specifically, denoting P
                                    i1m the subjective probability which woman i associates with event
e1 = 1 when using method m, then adding i to Pi1m for all methods m is cancelled out in pairwise
comparisons.


                                                 20
dency to overestimate expected monetary cost could be systematically correlated
with the choice of method without leading to bias in our estimates.


5     Estimation Results and Policy Counterfactuals

5.1     Estimation Results
     In Table 5, we report nested logit estimates for coefficients on some of our main
variables. Full results are reported in Table A-4.
     The models in Columns (1) to (4) include all the method-invariant variables such
as woman's age group and method-specific variables -- e.g., perceived probability
of pregnancy with the index method -- listed in Tables 1 (Panel A) and A-3 re-
spectively. As explained below, we allow for heterogeneity in preferences for three
method-specific variables by interacting them with individual- and partner fertility
preference variables.
     Our sample comprises two groups: women who simply want to space fertility
-- i.e., they want to have a(nother) child after two years -- and those who want to
limit fertility -- i.e., they do not want another child in the future. Women who want
to limit fertility may care more about the ability of a method to protect them against
pregnancy than women who simply want to space fertility. Similarly, women who
want to have children in the future may care more about the ability to resume fer-
tility after discontinuation of the method. We therefore model u j (zi ) as a linear
function of zi where j is, in turn: (1) the pregnancy risk and (2) the probability of
managing to get pregnant within 12 months of discontinuation and zi is, in turn, an
indicator for having (i) a "need for spacing" or (ii) a "need for limiting" fertility.30
     Women may also value more the ability to conceal the use of a method from
their partner if their partners disagree with their fertility intentions. Thus we also
interact the subjective probability of being able to hide the use of the method from
her partner with whether the woman's partner has or not higher fertility prefer-
ences.31 In other words, we also model u j (zi ) as a linear function of zi where j is
   30 Note that we do not include a constant in this linear function as the two categories "need for

spacing" and "need for limiting" exhaust all the possibilities given our sample selection criteria.
   31 I.e., whether she thinks or not that her partner wants more children (if she does not want to



                                                21
the "probability of hiding the method" and zi is, in turn, an indicator for having a
partner who (i) has or (ii) does not have higher fertility preferences.
     The difference between the first four columns of Table 5 stems from the sample
used. In Column (1), missing values about method-specific characteristics are set
to zero and we include one binary variable per method-specific belief indicating
missing values. In Column (2), we repeat the same specification on the sample of
observations for which women did not answer, at most, three out of the 16 questions
used to create the method-specific variables. While we only elicited beliefs about
methods which the respondent reported knowledge of, the aim of this exercise is to
address the possibility that women may know of methods that are not genuinely in
their consideration set and for which they therefore only have limited information.
In Column (3), we repeat the same specification as in Column (1), dropping this
time the 28 women who answered a higher probability of getting pregnant within
the next 12 months than within the next 5 years in the training questionnaire module.
In Column (4), we do not impute missing values.
     Starting with Columns (1) to (3), we find that women who want to limit fertility
are marginally less likely to choose an alternative associated with a higher risk of
pregnancy (p-value: 0.105 in Column (1)), but that this is not the case for women
who simply want to delay their next pregnancy.
     Women also respond to their expected probability of experiencing side-effects:
they are less likely to use methods associated with higher risks of nausea/vomiting,
less likely to use methods associated with side effects not listed in our questions
("other negative effects"), but more likely to choose methods associated with men-
strual irregularities -- presumably because they value not having their periods or
having lighter periods.
     The strongest explanatory factor in choosing an alternative is however a
woman's expected probability that her partner would approve of the alternative.
Recall that these estimates are net of the effect of the method-invariant variables
listed in Table 1 (Panel A) including whether the woman's partner has higher fertil-
ity preferences than her. Therefore, here we find that a woman's expected approval
have any more) or wants another child sooner than her (if she simply wants to delay for at least 2
years).



                                               22
by her partner is a key factor in her choice of FP strategy even after conditioning on
disagreement between partners about fertility targets. Interestingly, women whose
partners have similar fertility desires to themselves are significantly less likely to
opt for more concealable FP approaches, whereas concealability has no effect on
method choice for women whose partners have higher fertility desires. This sug-
gests that women have a distaste for concealability -- consistent with Ashraf et al.
(2014)'s finding that using concealable methods has a psychological cost -- but that
they are willing to incur this utility cost when their partners do not want them to use
contraception.
     There is also much to learn from characteristics which do not appear to mat-
ter in women's choices. Strikingly, women do not choose methods associated with
a lower risk of contracting STDs, suggesting that the decision to use protection
against STDs studied, e.g., in Cassidy et al. (2020), may be largely independent
from that of using contraception in the setting we examine.32 The expected proba-
bility of reduced libido and/or sexual pleasure of either partner and/or interference
with romance does not appear to affect contraceptive choices.
     In stark contrast with expected approval by her partner, expected approval by
coreligionists, parents, or friends do not have any significant effect on the woman's
choice of method, which points towards the importance of communication and/or
bargaining between partners as opposed to fundamental religious or cultural barriers
to contraceptive use.
     None of the supply-side factors are consistently statistically significant except
for expected costs of travel and other indirect costs, which have a negative effect on
demand. When we drop the 28 women who understood less well our beliefs training
questions, a higher probability of obtaining the method when needed significantly
increases demand while women appear significantly more likely to use methods
associated with a higher direct expected cost of obtaining the method. We cannot
   32 Cassidy et al. (2020) analyse the effect of introducing an additional condom technology --
female condoms -- on the couple's bargaining over condom use. To do so, they randomize the
timing of exposure to an intensive intervention carried out in a Maputo slum in which (just under
300) enrolled women took part, over a period of 3 months, in fortnightly meetings promoting the
use of female condoms through discussions about a range of sexual and reproductive issues, from
HIV to consent, negotiation of contraceptive use, intimate partner violence and womens rights.



                                               23
rule out that contraception is a Giffen good, but given evidence of the high elasticity
of demand for preventive health products in Sub-Saharan Africa (Dupas, 2011) a
more plausible explanation may be that, despite our comprehensive data collection
exercise, this variable proxies for some unobservable attributes of contraceptive
methods that increase the utility women derive from methods that they expect to
obtain from the private sector -- and therefore pay for -- such as the cleanliness
of the facilities or the quality of the staff or more flexibility in the appointment
schedule.
    Turning now to the effect of method-invariant variables, we find that older
women, women whose partners have higher fertility preferences, atheists and, in
the case of Column (3), protestants, are more likely to use no method relative to
their likelihood of using a hormonal method, while women who do not want any
more children are less likely to use no method. Women who have more children are
less likely to use condoms relative to their likelihood of using hormonal methods.
Belonging to a small religious category (accounting for 3% of the sample or less)
also affects the probability of using condoms: women who say they "do not know"
what their religion is or refuse to answer the question about religious affiliation are
more likely to use condoms while Protestants are less likely to.
    As can be seen by comparing the first three columns of Table 5, other than
for the effect of expected costs, results are robust to (i) excluding methods which
may not genuinely belong to the woman's consideration set, operationalized here as
methods for which a woman answered fewer than 13 out of the 16 questions used
to construct our method-specific variables (Column 2) and (ii) excluding the 28
women who are likely to have provided less reliable answers to our beliefs questions
given their inconsistency when answering the training questions about the chance
that they would get pregnant within 12 months and 5 years of the interview (Column
3).
    In Column (4), we show estimates obtained when using only the
woman×method observations for which there is no missing answer to any of the
16 method-specific questions we used to create the method-specific dependent vari-
ables.33 Doing so results in losing 993 woman×method observations relative to
  33 Results   obtained when excluding cases (women) with any missing value for any variable in-


                                               24
the baseline model of Column (1). The pattern of non-response also appears to
be non-random, with younger, better educated women and women whose partners
have higher fertility preferences than themselves being significantly more likely to
answer all the questions.
     Results using the sample of observations without any missing values are qual-
itatively largely similar to those obtained in Columns (1) to (3), but they are less
precisely estimated and some estimated effects are also smaller in magnitude and
become insignificant.34 This is, for instance, the case for the effect of the expected
probability of getting pregnant within 12 months for women who do not want any
more children. In the baseline model of Column (1), the effect is equal to -0.013
with a standard deviation of 0.0079. In Column (4), the effect (SD) becomes -0.008
(0.0083). In order to shed light on the extent to which this difference is due to
sample selection, we compare two sets of estimates from a model controlling only
for method-invariant characteristics and the method-specific expected probability
of pregnancy variables and which we can therefore estimate both on the full sample
of women answering the pregnancy risk question (Column 5) and on the sample
of women answering all method-specific questions (Column 6). The results indeed
suggest sample selection on preferences for a method's efficacy in preventing preg-
nancy in the restricted sample results of Column (4), since the magnitude of the
coefficient is reduced by 39% when going from Column (5) to Column (6), which
is very similar to the 44% decrease in the magnitude of this coefficient when going
from Column (1) to Column (4).
     Finally, we explore the possibility that the perceived risks of pregnancy and
of contracting an STD matter in a woman's FP decisions specifically when choos-
ing between the top branches of her decision tree -- i.e., when choosing between
stead of deleting only the alternatives (woman×method observations) with missing values are qual-
itatively similar. Two differences in significance levels are that, as in Column (3), the effect of
expected probability of obtaining the method when needed and the expected direct costs of the
method have significant (positive) effects on method choice.
    34 In the linear regression model, there is a trade-off between potential biases arising from the use

of indicators to account for missing values when missingness is related to covariates as suggested
above and the loss of precision resulting from the exclusion of observations with missing values
(see Jones, 1996). Reassuringly, the experimental findings reported in Section 6 corroborate our
estimates, which suggests that these biases are small in the present analysis.



                                                  25
using no method at all or a hormonal method or condoms. In Column (7), we con-
trol for beliefs about fecundity -- i.e., the woman's expected probability of getting
pregnant within 12 months when using no contraception -- and beliefs about ex-
posure to STDs -- i.e., the woman's expected probability of contracting an STD
within 12 months when using no contraception. In doing so, we exploit the varia-
tion between women in beliefs about fecundity without contraception and exposure
to STDs rather than variation within woman between methods. We find that women
who believe to be at a higher risk of pregnancy when using no contraception are
very significantly less likely to use no contraception (and somewhat less likely to
use condoms relative to hormonal methods) but that perceived exposure to STDs
has no impact.35
    The signs of the nested logit coefficients show the direction of their effect on
the probability of choosing each alternative. And provided the regressors are mea-
sured in the same unit (e.g., probability of pregnancy out of 20 and probability of
nausea/vomiting out of 20), the magnitude of the coefficients reflects the relative
importance of each method characteristic in the choice of method. Selected aver-
age partial effects are reported in Table A-5 to illustrate the economic significance
of the point estimates. We report own- and cross-partial effects on the probabili-
ties of choosing no method and choosing the most popular method (injections) for
a range of variables. Expressing the effects of small deviations in terms of a one-
unit change, a one-bean (5%-point) increase in the probability of pregnancy absent
contraception corresponds to a negative average partial effect on the probability
of choosing no method of 1.1%-points, and about half of this decrease translates
into a positive average partial effect on the use of injections. Even considering the
type of side effect with the largest nested logit coefficient ("other negative effects"),
a one-bean (5%-point) decrease in the probability of injections side effects only
produces a negative 0.1%-point partial effect on non-use. A one-bean (5%-point)
increase in the probability of the partner approving of injections leads to a 3.4%-
point partial effect on the use of injections, but most of this increase comes from
    35 When estimating separately the effect of beliefs about fecundity for women with a need for

spacing- and a need for limiting fertility, we find negative and significant effects on the probability
of not using contraception for both groups, and these are larger for women with a need for limiting-
(-0.091, standard error: 0.035) than for spacing pregnancy (-0.053, standard error: 0.028).


                                                 26
substitution away from other methods, with a negative partial effect on non-use of
only 0.43%-point. The effect of increasing the indirect cost of using injections by
one unit (Metical) is small, as the partial effect on the demand for injections is only
negative 0.04%-point. If we went from none- to all the women's partners having
higher fertility desires than them, non-use would increase by 8.8%-points and de-
mand for injections would decrease by 3.6%-points. This is not dissimilar to the
effect of going from all women wanting to limit fertility to simply wanting to space
it (11%-points and 3.2%-points, respectively).
     In Section 5.2, we present a number of policy counterfactuals which illustrate
further the absolute- and relative importance of different barriers to contraceptive
use.


5.2      Policy Counterfactuals
    We now turn to predicting the effect of alternative interventions on the method
mix using estimates from our preferred specification (Column 7 of Table 5).36
    We consider the effect of seven alternative interventions on the predicted proba-
bilities of using each of the five FP strategies considered in our estimation. Results
are reported in Table 6. For conciseness, here we only discuss the effect on the
predicted probability of not using any method.
    First, we estimate the effect of increasing by 25%-pts the expected risk of preg-
nancy absent contraception for women who have a baseline expected probability
under 85% (the WHO reference). This is estimated to increase contraceptive use
by 4.9%-points among this group of women or 1.9%-pts overall. If instead we fully
recalibrate the beliefs of women who expect a risk of pregnancy of under 85% in the
                                                                                           Mi
   36 The                                                  ¯ |zi , {Pim (e j ), Ei (cm )}m
                                          ¯ is given by Pr(m
            choice probability for option m                                              j1,...,n , Mi ) =
exp(Vm¯ /(m¯ )) exp((m
                     ¯ )IV(m
                           ¯ ))                          J
 exp(IV(m¯ )) n exp(n IVn ) .
                            The variable Vm ¯ denotes  j=1 [u j (zi )Pim               ¯ zi - Ei (cm
                                                                        ¯ (e j = 1)] + m           ¯ ). IVn
denotes the "inclusive value" (i.e., expected utility) for nest n and is given by ln mBn exp(Vm /n ) ,
where Bn is the set of alternatives in nest n and 1 - 2 n is the correlation among alternatives in nest n.
For limbs with only one alternative, like those for condoms and no method,  is one. We estimate 
in the hormonal nest to be between 0.2 and 0.5 depending on our specification (see Table A-4). The
notation IV(m¯ ) and (m ¯ ) corresponds to the inclusive value and  for the nest to which alternative m   ¯
belongs. These expressions are used to generate the predicted choice probabilities in our different
counterfactual scenarios.



                                                   27
absence of contraception to match the WHO reference rate of 85%, contraceptive
use would increase by about 2.7%-points overall.
    Increasing by 25%-points the expected rate of approval by partners of all mod-
ern methods would increase contraceptive use by 3.6%-points, while increasing this
expected rate of approval to 100% would increase contraceptive use by 7.6%-pts.
    A major scientific breakthrough removing all side effects accompanied by a
successful campaign convincing women of this progress would only increase con-
traceptive use by 0.3%-points.
    Removing all supply-side constraints -- i.e., setting the expected probability of
obtaining the method when needed to 100% and setting all costs and waiting times
to zero -- would reduce unmet need by 1.1%-points.
    These counterfactual scenarios broadly match the main reasons generally self-
reported for not using any contraception despite not wanting to get pregnant (low
perceived risk of pregnancy, side effects, disapproval by the women themselves or
those close to them), and additionally consider the effect of removing all supply-
side barriers.
    Of these four approaches to reducing "unmet need" for family planning, two
would likely be very costly (removing side effects and removing supply-side con-
straints). Our predictions indicate that they would also not be particularly effective,
suggesting low cost-effectiveness.
    Much more encouragingly, increasing perceived method approval by partners
would be a powerful tool to decrease unmet need, thus suggesting a fruitful di-
rection for future work. Similarly, we find that aligning the woman's partner's
preferences for fertility with the woman's would increase contraceptive uptake by
2.4%-points. The cost of increasing the rate of method approval by partners is how-
ever unclear a priori and may be very high if it is due to aversion to contraceptive
methods deep-rooted in patriarchal social norms. Although decreasing men's fertil-
ity preferences is possible (see, e.g., Ashraf et al., 2018), doing so to the extent that
they would match the women's is likely to be costly too.
    Our policy counterfactuals however suggest that sizeable increases in contra-
ceptive uptake would result from a potentially low-cost recalibration of women's
beliefs about the risk of pregnancy absent contraception. In Section 6, we further


                                           28
investigate this possibility through an information experiment carried out at the end
of the survey described in Section 2.


5.3     Ex-post Rationalization
    One limitation of the policy counterfactuals of the previous section, as with
any modelling exercise relying on observational data, is that confounding factors
might bias estimates -- although this risk is mitigated here by the collection of data
covering a large array of factors that may influence contraceptive decisions and
which would normally fall in the "unobservables" category.
    In particular, one concern may be that women systematically report more favor-
able beliefs about the alternative they are currently using in order to justify their
choices -- i.e., they may practice "ex-post rationalization".37 If this were the case,
then this may bias the nested logit estimates so that our model predictions may not
be informative regarding the effect of changing beliefs. Ex-post rationalization does
not, however, seem likely to be an important issue in our data for two reasons.
    First, women do not systematically report more favorable beliefs about the
method they are currently using. For instance, women do not report a systemat-
ically lower risk of pregnancy for the contraceptive method they are currently using
(Table 4).
    Second, there is no evidence that women who have been using a contracep-
tive method for a longer period of time are more likely to report favorable beliefs
about this method. As noted by Delavande and Zafar (forthcoming), ex-post ra-
tionalization should arguably be stronger among individuals who have been with
their current alternative for a longer period of time -- i.e., their chosen university in
the case of Delavande and Zafar (forthcoming). However, in our data as in theirs,
there is no indication that individuals who have been with their current alternative
for a longer period of time report more favorable beliefs. Table A-6 reports esti-
mates obtained when regressing each belief variable in turn on the year the woman
   37 Ex-post    rationalization bias has previously been discussed in the context of fertility intentions
-- an area in which women may be thought to be particularly prone to ex-post rationalization since
admitting that a child was unwanted may bear a high psychological cost. Pritchett (1994), how-
ever, finds that actual fertility is equally correlated with different measures of self-reported desired
fertility, irrespective of whether the measure is retrospective, suggesting very low bias.

                                                   29
started using the contraceptive method she is currently using, a constant, and all the
method-invariant characteristics included in Panel A of Table 1. Only 2 out of 16
coefficients are statistically significant, and only marginally so. In one case (women
who have started using the method more recently report higher probabilities of men-
strual irregularities), the sign of the significant coefficient does not suggest ex-post
rationalization.38 In the other (women who have started using the method more
recently report higher expected waiting times), the magnitude of the effect is very
small -- starting use one year later increases the expected waiting time by less than
30 seconds.
    More generally, the weakness of the correlation between stated beliefs and the
duration of use of contraceptive methods also suggests that learning from use --
which could bias our estimates -- is limited.
    In the next section, we present experimental findings that corroborate our model
estimates and hence bolster our confidence in these estimates.


6      Experiment
    In order to test the plausibility of our model predictions, we created an experi-
mental "shock" to beliefs about the probability of pregnancy absent contraception
towards the end of the survey interviews. This allows us to evaluate -- without
making any modelling assumptions including the absence of ex-post rationaliza-
tion or learning -- the effect of a simple, easily-scalable information message on
the perceived risk of pregnancy absent contraception and its effect on intentions to
use contraception in the future. In addition, we compare the observed effect on in-
tentions to use contraception in the future to the effect on contraceptive use which
is predicted by our model based on the observed change in beliefs following our
information message.
    38 Recall
            that the estimates reported in Table 5 indicate that women prefer methods associated
with menstrual irregularities (e.g., because this generally means light or no periods).




                                              30
6.1     Measurement and Information Treatment
    After eliciting the woman's beliefs about contraceptive methods, we asked her
whether she intended to use contraception in the future (for the exact wording of
the question, see p. 11).
    We then asked a number of questions about the woman's (un-incentivized) will-
ingness to pay for changes in four methods characteristics (efficacy in preventing
pregnancy, observability by partner, reduction of side effects, and return to fecun-
dity after discontinuation) and their level of trust in health information messages
obtained from (nine) different potential sources.39 , 40
    Next, we proceeded to our experiment. We selected a random subsample of
women whom the enumerator informed that:

           "Studies show that, on average, out of 20 sexually active women of
       reproductive age who do not use any contraception, 17 will get pregnant
       within the next 12 months"

The enumerator then asked the respondent again about their intention to use con-
traceptives in the future, as well as asking them again about the average expected
probability of pregnancy within 12 months if not using any contraceptive for (i)
women like her and then (ii) for herself.
    We did not treat all the women in our sample to allow the possibility of mea-
suring additional outcomes in follow-up surveys.41 The experimental variation ex-
ploited in the present analysis is the difference between answers given by the same
    39 More precisely, we asked the woman about her willingness to pay (WTP) for a method associ-

ated with a "zero bean" versus a "three bean" chance of, in turn: getting pregnant, being discovered
by her partner, experiencing side effects, being unable to conceive within 12 months of discontinua-
tion. The median WTP is 100 Meticais for all questions except the one about the partner finding out
that she is using the method, for which the median answer is 70 Meticais. But there is little variation
within woman in their self-reported WTP for the four methods' characteristics we asked about --
the two-by-two correlation coefficients between answers is between 0.7 and 0.85.
    40 We found that there was a high level of trust in health professionals, especially in govern-

ment facilities: 80.6% (93.9%) of respondents said that they would certainly trust a message about
pregnancy risks if it came from a nurse (doctor) in a government facility compared to 70% if this
information came from a radio or TV program, 63.9% if it came from a pharmacist or 47% if it came
from a school teacher, for instance.
    41 This, however, was not possible given funding limitations and the IRB requirement to destroy

the respondents' contact details within 12 months.

                                                 31
women before and after they received our information message.42
     In the case of "intention to use contraception in the future", in addition to a t-
test, we carry out a McNemar test, which is a popular test for before-after treatment
comparisons of binary outcomes (Fagerland et al., 2013).43
     After being given the "17 out of 20 women" information message, treated
respondents are asked for the second time -- 40 or so minutes after being first
asked -- to "Choose the number of beans which best reflects the probability that
you would get pregnant in the coming 12 months if not using any contraceptive
method". To avoid social desirability bias in answers to this question, we do not
immediately ask this question but instead follow the information message by a ques-
tion formulated closely to the wording of the message, namely: "Suppose there are
20 women exactly like you (...). Choose the number of beans which best reflects
the number of women who, among these 20, would get pregnant in the coming 12
months if they did not use any contraceptive method." This offered respondents an
opportunity to "please" the interviewer if they wished to do so. They should then
have felt under no pressure to apply the newly acquired information to the more per-
sonal question of what they thought was their own probability of pregnancy absent
contraception. If social desirability was an important driver of revisions to stated
beliefs, then we would expect answers closer to the information provided (17) in the
first question (about "20 women like you") than the second (about the respondent
herself), but this is not the case. In fact, we can reject that the average answer to the
first question is 17 (p-value of less than 0.0001), but not that the average answer to
the second question is 17 (p-value: 0.12).
   42 The  randomization however ensures that the average treatment effect on the treated should be
equal to the average treatment effect on the non treated. A logit regression of selection into the sub-
sample of women who received the information message on all the woman-invariant characteristics
listed in Panel A of Table 1, four binary indicators for method used, baseline beliefs regarding the
probability of pregnancy absent contraception, and a binary indicator for whether the woman says
she intends to use contraception in the future before receiving the information message results in a
p-value of 0.30 for the null hypothesis that the independent variables do not predict the outcome.
See Table A-7 for a comparison of characteristics of women who received- and did not receive our
information message.
    43 We follow Fagerland et al. (2013)'s recommendation and use the "mid-p" version of the test.

The mid-p test avoids the loss of power associated with the exact test version while not violating the
nominal level of the test in any of Fagerland et al. (2013)'s simulations, and it is well-suited to cases
where the binary indicator has a small number of "zeroes" as we have here.


                                                  32
6.2     Results
    In Table 7, we report, for three samples of treated women, changes in average
beliefs about the risk of pregnancy absent contraception, changes in intentions to
use contraception in the future, and the p-values corresponding to two tests: a t-
test of differences in the before- and after-information answers and, for the binary
outcome, also a McNemar mid-p test.
    We find that women update their stated expected chance of pregnancy in line
with the new information (from 15.8 to 16.7 out of 20, on average, Table 7 Panel
A) and these updates are statistically significant. As can be seen in Panel B, as
expected a much larger upwards beliefs revision is observed among women who
expected a risk of pregnancy absent contraception below 17 at baseline. The extent
of the recalibration is striking, as it nearly fully realigns the women's beliefs with
the information provided: women who expected a risk lower than 17 increase their
belief by 0.90 (standard error: 0.08) bean for each bean below 17 at baseline. Con-
versely, women who at baseline expected a risk equal to 17 or larger reduce their
belief of the risk of pregnancy by 0.98 (standard error: 0.23) bean for each bean
above 17 at baseline.44
    We also analyze the extent to which women internalize their beliefs updates, i.e.,
how changes in beliefs induced by our information message are reflected in their
intentions to use contraception in the future compared to their baseline beliefs about
the risk of pregnancy when not using contraception. This is useful for at least two
reasons. First, it is informative in terms of the level of trust that women have about
the information message. For instance, women may attribute more variance to be-
liefs updates than to their long-held beliefs, in which case the response to beliefs
updates could be much lower than the response to baseline beliefs. Second, this ex-
ercise helps evaluate the plausibility of an interpretation of our experimental results
as simply a reflection of social desirability. If respondents did not genuinely up-
date their beliefs and reported an increased probability of pregnancy and increased
intention to use simply to please the enumerator, then we would be unlikely to ob-
    44 Figures based on a regression of the before-after change in beliefs on the difference between

the respondent's baseline belief and the reference risk of 17 out of 20, separately for women with a
baseline risk of 17 and above and those with a baseline risk below 17.


                                                33
serve a similar marginal effect of long-held beliefs and beliefs updates on intention
to use.
    In order to shed light on the extent of internalisation of beliefs updates, we
estimate a logit model explaining future contraceptive intentions as a function of: all
the women's characteristics listed in Panel A of Table 1, whether they are currently
using contraception, their baseline beliefs about the risk of pregnancy when not
using contraception, and their before-after treatment change in beliefs about the
risk of pregnancy absent contraception -- allowing for a different effect depending
on whether women have a baseline expected risk below the reference figure of 17
(85%) or equal to 17 and above.
    We find that an increase of 5%-points in the baseline expected probability of
pregnancy absent contraception increases the intention to use contraception in the
future by about 1%-point (an average marginal effect of 0.0097, standard error:
0.0038). For women with a baseline risk under the WHO reference rate of 85%,
an increase of 5%-points in the beliefs update (before-after change) leads to an al-
most identical increase in intentions to use (an average marginal effect of 0.0095,
standard error: 0.0048). For women with a baseline risk of 85% and above, be-
liefs updates have no effect on intentions to use contraception in the future -- the
marginal effect is -0.0005 (standard error: 0.0039).
    While the extent to which women revise their beliefs in response to the informa-
tion received is not exogenous, the estimated effects of belief revisions on intention
to use contraception suggest that women fully internalize perceived increases in the
risk of pregnancy, but do not respond to reductions in the perceived risk of preg-
nancy. The asymmetric responses to "good" and "bad" news are consistent with
women preferring to err on the side of caution. Importantly, it seems difficult to
rationalize the similarity between marginal responses to old- and newly increased
beliefs by an explanation relying on social desirability as explained above.
    Finally, we investigate the effect of our information message on intention to use
contraception in the future and compare these experimental estimates to our model
estimates.
    One limitation of any policy counterfactual exercise is that the marginal re-
sponse to a change in the value of a variable within the sample is used to predict the


                                          34
response to changes in the value of a variable coming from an external intervention.
In particular, the counterfactual exercise uses the same estimated marginal effect to
predict the effect of a change in beliefs irrespective of its direction. While not
causal, our estimates above of the relationship between beliefs revisions and inten-
tion to use contraception suggest that only women with beliefs below the reference
risk introduced in our experiment take their beliefs update into account.
    Among women with baseline beliefs about the risk of pregnancy without con-
traception below 17 (Panel B), the average increase in the expected probability of
pregnancy without protection is 4.7 beans out of 20 (and the p-value of a t-test
comparing before- and after- treatment beliefs is < 0.001). A policy counterfac-
tual increasing beliefs among women who expect a risk below 17 at baseline by the
average change observed in the data and thus matching this increase in beliefs on
average predicts an increase by 4.8%-points in contraceptive use among this group
(based on the model in Table 5 Column (7)).45 While budget restrictions prevented
us from following women up to check the extent to which changes in their intended
use of contraception translated into actual take-up, we find that intention to use
among this group increases by 4.4%-points in the experiment. Although less statis-
tically significant than the effect observed in the (much larger) full sample (Panel
A), this figure is close to our model prediction of 4.8%-points, which is reassuring
from the point of the reliability of our structural model estimates.
    Women who are not currently using contraception are likely to be more respon-
sive to new information about the risk of pregnancy absent contraception, although
we cannot account for this heterogeneity when modeling contraceptive choices.46
Among women who are not using contraception, our treatment increases intention
to use contraception by as much as 8.2%-points (p-value of McNemar test: 0.03).
Unsurprisingly, this is much larger than the predicted effect using the coefficients
obtained when estimating the demand model on the whole sample -- namely a
   45 For   36 women, this leads to beliefs of 20.7 out of 20. If we cap beliefs at 20, the policy
counterfactual predicts an increase by 4.7%-points. If instead we restrict the sample to treated
women only and predict the change in contraceptive use based on their revised individual beliefs,
the model predicts an increase in contraceptive use of 5.3%-points among this group.
    46 In a model where using no contraception is an outcome, one cannot allow for heterogeneous

responses to explanatory variables such as beliefs about pregnancy risk according to whether the
respondent is using contraception.


                                               35
1.6%-point increase in actual use.47


7      Conclusion
    Many women in low-income countries are not using contraception despite want-
ing to avoid pregnancy. This is especially puzzling given policy efforts to ensure
that modern contraceptives are readily available at low- or no cost to the user.
    In this paper we document, in a Mozambican setting, the subjective beliefs re-
garding contraception of women who wish to avoid pregnancy. We find that they
hold plausible beliefs overall, except that they tend to underestimate the risk of
pregnancy absent contraception and overestimate the risk of failure associated with
hormonal methods.
    Using these data to estimate a structural model of the choice between the main
alternatives adopted by women in this country (including using no contraception),
we find that supply issues and side-effects do not contribute much to low take-
up, which calls for interventions beyond the current policy focus of improving the
quantity and quality of contraceptive supply.
    Our structural estimates also point at the importance of partners' preferences
for contraceptive methods -- as well as- and independently to partners' fertility
preferences. Our findings therefore highlight the importance of involving men in
interventions aimed at increasing contraceptive take-up. The extent to which men's
preferences are amenable to change may however be limited in the short run.
    Finally, we identify a new, promising avenue for immediate change, namely
recalibrating beliefs about the risk of pregnancy absent contraception. We find
support for this intervention via two independent exercises: first, in our structural
model -- identified from variation in beliefs and actual contraceptive use in our
observational data -- and second, through an experiment comparing women's be-
liefs and intentions to use contraception before- and after we inform them of the
pregnancy risk absent contraception in the general population.
    47 This
          is the predicted effect on contraceptive use when increasing beliefs by the 1.5 beans aver-
age increase in the expected probability of pregnancy absent contraception observed in the sample
of women who are currently not using contraception (see Table 7 Panel C).



                                                36
    More precisely, our structural estimates indicate that increasing by 23.5%-points
the expected pregnancy risk absent contraception among the women who underes-
timate this risk would increase contraceptive take-up by about 4.8%-points among
this group (1.9%-points overall). Among this group of women, our experiment in-
creases the expected risk of pregnancy absent contraception by 23.5%-points and
intention to use contraceptives in the future by 4.4%-points, which is close to our
structural estimate of 4.8%-points.
    Among women not currently using contraception, intention to use contracep-
tives increases by as much as 8.2%-points after informing them of the pregnancy
risk absent contraception in the general population.
    In Mozambique, modern contraceptive use (unmet need for contraception) went
from 20.8% (18.9%) in 2003 to 25.3% (23.1%) in 2015. In Sub-Saharan Africa as
a whole, contraceptive use (unmet need for contraception) went from 16% (25.6%)
in 2000 to 26.3% (24%) in 2014 (all figures taken from World Development In-
dicators, 2019). Given this slow pace of progress -- and even negative trend in
the case of unmet need for contraception in Mozambique, the targeted information
message we propose here appears to be a valuable low-cost instrument to increase
contraceptive take-up in the short run.




                                         37
References
A DELEKAN , A., P. O MOREGIE , AND E. E DONI (2014): "Male Involvement in
  Family Planning: Challenges and Way Forward," International Journal of Popu-
  lation Research, 2014.

A LSAN , M. AND M. WANAMAKER (2017): "Tuskegee and the Health of Black
  Men," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133, 407­455.

´ LVAREZ , B. AND M. V ERA -H ERN ANDEZ
A                                 ´      (2013): "Exploiting Subjective Infor-
  mation to Understand Impoverished Children's Use of Health Care," Journal of
  Health Economics, 32, 1194­1204.

A SHRAF, N., E. F IELD , AND J. L EE (2014): "Household Bargaining and Excess
  Fertility: An Experimental Study in Zambia," American Economic Review, 104,
  2210­37.

A SHRAF, N., E. F IELD , A. VOENA , AND R. Z IPARO (2018): "Maternal Mortality
  Risk and the Gender Gap in Desired Fertility," Unpublished Manuscript.

ATTANASIO , O. P., C. M EGHIR , AND A. S ANTIAGO (2011): "Education Choices
  in Mexico: Using a Structural Model and a Randomized Experiment to Evaluate
  Progresa," The Review of Economic Studies, 79, 37­66.

B ENNEAR , L., A. TAROZZI , A. P FAFF , S. BALASUBRAMANYA , K. M. A HMED ,
   AND A. VAN G EEN (2013): "Impact of a Randomized Controlled Trial in Ar-
  senic Risk Communication on Household Water-Source Choices in Bangladesh,"
  Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 65, 225­240.

B LUMENTHAL , P., A. VOEDISCH , AND K. G EMZELL -DANIELSSON (2010):
  "Strategies to Prevent Unintended Pregnancy: Increasing Use of Long-Acting
  Reversible Contraception," Human Reproduction Update, 17, 121­137.

B ONEVA , T. AND C. R AUH (2019): "Socio-Economic Gaps in University Enroll-
  ment: The Role of Perceived Pecuniary and Non-Pecuniary Returns," Unpub-
  lished manuscript.

                                     38
C ARDELL , N. S. (1997): "Variance Components Structures for the Extreme-
  Value and Logistic Distributions with Application to Models with Heterogene-
  ity," Econometric Theory, 13, 185­213.

C ASSIDY, R., M. G ROOT B RUINDERINK , W. JANSSENS , AND K. M ORSINK
  (2020): "The Power to Protect: Household Bargaining and Female Condom
  Use," Unpublished Manuscript.

D ELAVANDE , A. (2008): "Pill, Patch, or Shot? Subjective Expectations and Birth
  Control Choice," International Economic Review, 49, 999­1042.

D ELAVANDE , A., X. G IN E ´ , AND D. M C K ENZIE (2011): "Eliciting Probabilistic
  Expectations with Visual Aids in Developing Countries: How Sensitive Are An-
  swers to Variations in Elicitation Design?" Journal of Applied Econometrics, 3,
  479­497.

D ELAVANDE , A. AND H.-P. KOHLER (2012): "The Impact of HIV Testing on Sub-
  jective Expectations and Risky Behavior in Malawi," Demography, 49, 1011­
  1036.

------ (2015): "HIV/AIDS-Related Expectations and Risky Sexual Behaviour in
  Malawi," The Review of Economic Studies, 83, 118­164.

D ELAVANDE , A. AND B. Z AFAR (forthcoming): "University Choice: The Role of
  Expected Earnings, Non-pecuniary Outcomes and Financial Constraints," Jour-
  nal of Political Economy.

D OWD , B. E., W. H. G REENE , AND E. C. N ORTON (2014): "Computation of
  Standard Errors," Health Services Research, 49, 731­750.

D OYLE , K., R. G. L EVTOV, G. BARKER , G. G. BASTIAN , J. B. B INGEN -
  HEIMER , S. K AZIMBAYA , A. N ZABONIMPA , J. P ULERWITZ , F. S AYINZOGA ,
  V. S HARMA , ET AL . (2018): "Gender-Transformative Bandebereho Couples In-
  tervention to Promote Male Engagement in Reproductive and Maternal Health
  and Violence Prevention in Rwanda: Findings from a Randomized Controlled
  Trial," PLoS One, 13.

                                       39
D UFLO , E., R. H ANNA , AND S. P. RYAN (2012): "Incentives Work: Getting
  Teachers to Come to School," American Economic Review, 102, 1241­78.

D UPAS , P. (2011): "Health Behavior in Developing Countries," Annual Review of
  Economics, 3, 425­449.

D UPAS , P. AND E. M IGUEL (2017): "Impacts and Determinants of Health Levels
  in Low-Income Countries," in Handbook of Economic Field Experiments, Else-
  vier, vol. 2, 3­93.

FAGERLAND , M. W., S. LYDERSEN , AND P. L AAKE (2013): "The McNemar Test
  for Binary Matched-Pairs Data: Mid-P and Asymptotic Are Better than Exact
  Conditional," BMC Medical Research Methodology, 13, 91.

G LENNERSTER , R., J. M URRAY, AND V. P OULIQUEN (2019): "Mass Media and
  Modern Contraception Uptake: Experimental Evidence from Burkina Faso," Un-
  published Manuscript.

G ROLLMAN , C., F. L. C AVALLARO , D. D UCLOS , V. BAKARE ,
  M. M ART´ I NEZ A´ LVAREZ , AND J. B ORGHI (2018): "Donor Funding for
  Family Planning: Levels and Trends Between 2003 and 2013," Health Policy
  and Planning, 33, 574­582.

J ONES , M. P. (1996): "Indicator and Stratification Methods for Missing Explana-
   tory Variables in Multiple Linear Regression," Journal of the American Statistical
   Association, 91, 222­230.

K RINSKY, I. AND A. L. ROBB (1986): "On Approximating the Statistical Proper-
  ties of Elasticities," The Review of Economics and Statistics, 715­719.

K RINSKY, I., A. L. ROBB , ET AL . (1990): "On Approximating the Statistical
  Properties of Elasticities: A Correction," The Review of Economics and Statistics,
  72, 189­190.

L ISE , J., S. S EITZ , AND J. S MITH (2015): "Evaluating Search and Matching Mod-
   els Using Experimental Data," IZA Journal of Labor Economics, 4, 16.


                                         40
M ARTINEZ -B RAVO , M. AND A. S TEGMANN (2019): "In Vaccines we Trust? The
  Effects of CIAs Vaccine Ruse on Immunization in Pakistan," CEMFI Working
  Paper No. 1713.

MISAU, INE AND ICF (2013): Moc ¸ ambique Inqu´
                                             erito Demogr´afico e de Sa´
                                                                       ude
 2011, Maputo/Moc
                ¸ ambique: MISAU/Moc ¸ ambique, INE, and ICF.

------ (2016): Inqu´erito de Indicadores de Imunizac ¸a
                                                      ~ o, Mal´
                                                              aria e HIV/SIDA
  em Moc ¸ ambique (IMASIDA) 2015: Relat´      orio de Indicadores B´  asicos,
  Maputo/Moc ¸ ambique: MISAU/Moc  ¸ ambique, INE, and ICF.

M UMAH , J. N., J. B. C ASTERLINE , K. M ACHIYAMA , M. WAMUKOYA , C. W.
  K ABIRU , AND J. C LELAND (2018): "Method-Specific Attributes that Influence
  Choice of Future Contraception Among Married Women in Nairobi's Informal
  Settlements," Studies in Family Planning, 49, 279­292.

M URALIDHARAN , K. (2017): "Field Experiments in Education in Developing
  Countries," in Handbook of Economic Field Experiments, Elsevier, vol. 2, 323­
  385.

NAKAMURA , S. (2016): "Determinants of Contraceptive Choice Among Japanese
 Women: Ten Years After the Pill Approval," Review of Economics of the House-
 hold, 14, 553­575.

P RITCHETT, L. H. (1994): "Desired Fertility and the Impact of Population Poli-
   cies," Population and Development Review, 20, 1­55.

R AJ , A., M. G HULE , J. R ITTER , M. BATTALA , V. G AJANAN , S. NAIR , A. DAS -
  GUPTA , J. G. S ILVERMAN , D. BALAIAH , AND N. S AGGURTI (2016): "Cluster
  Randomized Controlled Trial Evaluation of a Gender Equity and Family Plan-
  ning Intervention for Married Men and Couples in Rural India," PloS one, 11.

S EDGH , G., L. S. A SHFORD , AND R. H USSAIN (2016): Unmet Need for Contra-
   ception in Developing Countries: Examining Women's Reasons for Not Using a
   Method, New York: Guttmacher Institute.



                                       41
S HATTUCK , D., B. K ERNER , K. G ILLES , M. H ARTMANN , T. N G ' OMBE , AND
   G. G UEST (2011): "Encouraging Contraceptive Uptake by Motivating Men to
   Communicate About Family Planning: The Malawi Male Motivator Project,"
   American Journal of Public Health, 101, 1089­1095.

S INGH , S., J. E. DARROCH , AND L. S. A SHFORD (2014): Adding It Up: The
   Costs and Benefits of Investing in Sexual and Reproductive Health 2014, New
   York New York Guttmacher Institute 2014.

T ODD , P. E. AND K. I. W OLPIN (2006): "Assessing the Impact of a School Sub-
   sidy Program in Mexico: Using a Social Experiment to Validate a Dynamic Be-
   havioral Model of Child Schooling and Fertility," American Economic Review,
   96, 1384­1417.

U NITED NATIONS (2019): "Sustainable Development Goal 3: Ensuring Healthy
  Lives and Promote Well-Being for All at All Ages, Progress of Goal 3 in
  2019," https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/SDG3, [Online; accessed
  9-September-2019].

VAN DER K LAAUW, W. (2012): "On the Use of Expectations Data in Estimating
  Structural Dynamic Choice Models," Journal of Labor Economics, 30, 521­554.

VAN DER K LAAUW, W. AND K. I. W OLPIN (2008): "Social Security and the Re-
  tirement and Savings Behavior of Low-Income Households," Journal of Econo-
  metrics, 145, 21­42.

VOUKING , M. Z., C. D. E VINA , AND C. N. TADENFOK (2014): "Male Involve-
 ment in Family Planning Decision Making in Sub-Saharan Africa: What the
 Evidence Suggests," The Pan African Medical Journal, 19.

WHO/RHR AND CCP, K NOWLEDGE FOR H EALTH P ROJECT (2018): Family
 Planning: A Global Handbook for Providers (2018 update), Baltimore and
 Geneva: CCP and WHO.

W ILLIAMSON , L. M., A. PARKES , D. W IGHT, M. P ETTICREW, AND G. J. H ART
  (2009): "Limits to Modern Contraceptive Use Among Young Women in Devel-

                                     42
  oping Countries: A Systematic Review of Qualitative Research," Reproductive
  Health, 6, 3.

W ISWALL , M. AND B. Z AFAR (2015): "Determinants of College Major Choice:
  Identification Using an Information Experiment," The Review of Economic Stud-
  ies, 82, 791­824.

W ORLD D EVELOPMENT I NDICATORS (2019): World Development Indicators,
  The World Bank.

Z AKIYAH , N., A. D. VAN A SSELT, F. ROIJMANS , AND M. J. P OSTMA (2016):
   "Economic Evaluation of Family Planning Interventions in Low and Middle In-
   come Countries; A Systematic Review," PloS one, 11, e0168447.




                                      43
                  Table 1: Summary Statistics for Method-Invariant Variables

                                                                           Mean SD               Count
Panel A
Age 18-24                                                                  0.32                   584
Age 25-34                                                                  0.43                   584
Age 35-44                                                                  0.22                   584
Age 45-49                                                                  0.03                   584
# Children                                                                 2.61 1.72              584
No Schooling                                                               0.14                   584
Some Primary Schooling                                                     0.44                   584
Some Secondary Schooling                                                   0.42                   584
Urban                                                                      0.47                   584
Maputo City                                                                0.22                   584
Maputo Province                                                            0.38                   584
Gaza Province                                                              0.39                   584
Partner Wants More Children                                                0.30                   584
or Wants them Earlier
Muslim                                                                     0.03                   584
Christian                                                                  0.47                   584
Catholic                                                                   0.13                   584
Protestant                                                                 0.03                   584
Other Religion                                                             0.30                   584
No Religion                                                                0.04                   584
Doesn't Know Religion                                                      0.01                   584
Panel B
No Method                                                                  0.30                   584
Injections                                                                 0.32                   556
Pill                                                                       0.21                   557
Implants                                                                   0.11                   502
Male Condom                                                                0.10                   562
"Unmet Need"a                                                              0.23                   584
"Met Need"a                                                                0.70                   584
Postpartum Amenorrheic After Wanted Child But Not FP Methoda               0.06                   584
Need Unknowna                                                              0.01                   584
Sex Last Month                                                             0.88                   584
Sex Last Quarter                                                           0.11                   584
Sex Activity Missing                                                       0.01                   584
# Methods Known                                                            4.40 1.63              584
# Methods Known (Main Four)                                                2.73 0.60              584
N                                                                                                 584
Source: Survey described in Section 2.2. Panel B reports the share of women who are using each
method among the sample of those who know about this method. The number of observations
reported in the last column is less than 584 for modern methods because not all women in our
sample know every method. a Unless specified otherwise, in this paper we refer to all women using
no method as having an unmet need since all the women in our sample state that they do not want
to get pregnant in the coming two years, are sexually active, and are not infecund. We also report
descriptive statistics for a widely used DHS definition (e.g., in Sedgh et al., 2016), in which fecund,
non-pregnant women who say they do not want to get pregnant in the coming two years can fall in
one of four categories: (1) postpartum amenorrheic after wanted child, i.e. their menstruation has
not returned since the birth of their last child within the last two years and this child was wanted at
the time of the pregnancy, (2) unmet need, i.e. they are not using contraception and their period has
returned since the birth of their last child or their period has not returned but their last child was not
wanted, (3) met need, i.e. they are using contraception and (4) need unknown, i.e., the woman did
not respond to all the questions required to establish her status.


                                                   44
                   Table 2: Summary Statistics for Selected Method-Specific Variables

                       If using:           Condoms        Implants      Injections     No Method            Pill
P(Pregnancy)           Mean                  0.17           0.25           0.19           0.78             0.35
                       SD                    0.27           0.25           0.23           0.26              0.3
                       Obs.                  553            469            537            579               540
P(STD)                 Mean                  0.14           0.79           0.78           0.75             0.78
                       SD                    0.27           0.24           0.24           0.27             0.24
                       Obs.                  557            494            550            566               549
E(Method Cost)         Mean                 22.47          25.64          27.03             0             14.07
                       SD                   130.85         190.58         196.86            0              99.16
                       Obs.                  554            498            549            584               545
E(Other Costs)         Mean                 22.58          27.37          36.55             0             24.07
                       SD                   171.70         194.50         249.78            0             208.58
                       Obs.                  554            498            550            584               547
P(Menstrual Irreg.     Mean                  0.06           0.52           0.58             0              0.46
or Vaginal Infections) SD                    0.18           0.26           0.30             0              0.31
                       Obs.                  540            430            529            584               517
P(Altered Libido,      Mean                  0.26           0.15           0.19             0              0.14
Pleasure or Romance) SD                      0.32           0.22           0.27             0              0.24
                       Obs.                  533            418            513            584               497
P(Other Negative       Mean                  0.06           0.33           0.31             0              0.31
Effects)               SD                   0.164          0.266          0.296             0             0.272
                       Obs.                  539            440            523            584               516
P(Pregnancy after      Mean                  0.81           0.69           0.69           0.73             0.75
Discontinuation)       SD                   0.293           0.24           0.25           0.29             0.23
                       Obs.                  552            462            534            575               539
P(Partner Approval)    Mean                  0.55           0.54           0.58            0.4              0.6
                       SD                    0.32           0.30           0.32           0.34             0.31
                       Obs.                  554            491            550            574               549
P(Hide from Partner) Mean                    0.05           0.32           0.42           0.32             0.38
                       SD                    0.18           0.30           0.34           0.33             0.32
                       Obs.                  558            487            550            573               551
Source: Survey described in Section 2.2. P(·) stands for "probability of event happening" and E(·) is the expectation
operator. "Pregnancy" and "STD" refer to the perceived probability of pregnancy occurring or of contracting an
STD, respectively, within 12 months. Costs are expected monthly costs. When the number of observations is less
than 584, this is due to either some women not knowing of the relevant method (see the last column of Panel B
of Table 1 for the number of women who know of each method), or to women not answering a question about a
method. Waiting time corresponds to the middle of the interval chosen by respondents and is expressed in minutes.
Top 1% in terms of costs and waiting times removed.




                                                    45
               Table 3: Perceived Probabilities of Approval by Partner

                                             Current users of:
                    No Method        Injections Pill Implants             Male Condom
Male Condom            0.53             0.52     0.56     0.51                0.72
Implants               0.49             0.54     0.53     0.65                0.56
Injections             0.49             0.70     0.56     0.49                0.58
No Method              0.46             0.38     0.37     0.37                0.41
Pill                   0.52             0.61     0.70     0.56                0.63
Source: Survey described in Section 2.2. Average perceived probabilities that the respon-
dents' partners would approve of the partner choosing the alternative appearing in the row
heading, by current method.




          Table 4: Perceived Probabilities of Pregnancy within 12 Months

                                             Current users of:
                    No Method        Injections Pill Implants             Male Condom
Male Condom            0.15             0.16     0.15     0.20                0.22
Implants               0.25             0.25     0.25     0.23                0.22
Injections             0.20             0.18     0.21     0.20                0.17
No Method              0.71             0.82     0.84     0.77                0.76
Pill                   0.35             0.38     0.32     0.38                0.36
Source: Survey described in Section 2.2. Average perceived probabilities that the respondent
would get pregnant within 12 months if she used the alternative appearing in the row heading,
by current method.




                                            46
                                  Table 5: Selected Nested Logit Estimates

                               (1)        (2)         (3)          (4)        (5)        (6)         (7)
Effect of method-specific variables:
Spacing × P(pregnancy)       -0.002     -0.002      -0.003        0.008     -0.013      0.009       0.001
                            (0.006)    (0.006)     (0.006)      (0.008)    (0.013)    (0.011)     (0.006)
Limiting × P(pregnancy)      -0.013     -0.012     -0.017*       -0.008   -0.033**     -0.019      -0.009
                            (0.008)    (0.008)     (0.009)      (0.008)    (0.016)    (0.014)     (0.007)
P(STD)                        0.009      0.009      0.008         0.010                             0.003
                            (0.011)    (0.011)     (0.012)      (0.015)                           (0.010)
P(nausea)                   -0.009*    -0.009*     -0.008*       -0.010                           -0.009*
                            (0.005)    (0.005)     (0.005)      (0.006)                           (0.004)
P(menstrual irreg.)         0.011**    0.011**    0.011**         0.008                          0.010**
                            (0.005)    (0.005)     (0.005)      (0.007)                           (0.005)
P(other neg. effect)       -0.015** -0.015**      -0.015**      -0.017*                          -0.014**
                            (0.007)    (0.007)     (0.007)      (0.009)                           (0.006)
P(partner's approval)      0.060*** 0.060*** 0.062*** 0.058***                                  0.061***
                            (0.011)    (0.011)     (0.012)      (0.018)                           (0.012)
Partner wants the same     -0.013** -0.013**      -0.014**       -0.009                          -0.013**
  × P(hide method)          (0.006)    (0.006)     (0.006)      (0.007)                           (0.006)
Partner wants more           -0.003     -0.003      -0.005       -0.008                            -0.002
  kids × P(hide method)     (0.011)    (0.011)     (0.011)      (0.012)                           (0.011)
P(obtain when needed)         0.011      0.012     0.018*         0.015                            0.011
                            (0.009)    (0.009)     (0.009)      (0.010)                           (0.009)
E(direct costs)               0.001      0.001   0.003***         0.000                            0.001
                            (0.001)    (0.001)     (0.001)      (0.001)                           (0.001)
E(other costs)              -0.001*    -0.001*   -0.004***       -0.000                           -0.001*
                            (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.001)      (0.000)                           (0.000)
Effect of method-invariant variables on the probability of using no method rather than a hormonal method:
Partner wants more kids      0.468*     0.441*     0.464*        0.518*  0.665*** 0.769***        0.531**
                            (0.240)    (0.242)     (0.254)      (0.288)    (0.219)    (0.274)     (0.246)
Limiting                    -0.525*    -0.506*      -0.447       -0.212     -0.246     -0.120     -0.523*
                            (0.301)    (0.300)     (0.310)      (0.362)    (0.304)    (0.365)     (0.302)
P(pregnancy)                                                                                    -0.068***
absent contraception                                                                              (0.022)
P(STD) absent                                                                                      0.027
contraception                                                                                     (0.022)

Effect of method-invariant variables on the probability of using condoms rather than a hormonal method:
Partner wants more kids     0.186       0.211       0.064        0.157     0.292       0.278       0.216
                           (0.359)     (0.360)    (0.380)       (0.388)   (0.343)     (0.362)    (0.353)
Limiting                    0.634       0.641       0.659       0.916*     0.660      0.880*       0.572
                           (0.429)     (0.426)    (0.452)       (0.471)   (0.428)     (0.458)    (0.421)
P(pregnancy)                                                                                     -0.055*
absent contraception                                                                             (0.033)
P(STD) absent                                                                                     -0.039
contraception                                                                                    (0.034)

N                              2761        2588       2638           1768        2650        1768          2761
Source: Estimates of Equation (1) using own survey data described in Section 2.2. Robust standard errors in
parentheses, * p<0.10 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01. Full results reported in Table A-4. Missing values set to zero
and indicators for missing values included in Columns (1), (2), (3) and (7). Column (2) includes only alternatives
for whom women answered at least 13 out of 16 method-specific questions. Column (3) excludes women who
answered a higher probability of pregnancy within 1 year than within 5 years. Columns (4) and (6) exclude
alternatives with missing values.


                                                  47
                                                               Table 6: Policy Counterfactuals

                                                                                           Condom        Implants      Injections     No method         Pill
     Baseline predicted share using among those who know the method:                        0.098         0.109          0.318          0.301          0.218
     Change in predicted share if:
     Increase by 25%-pts the expected risk of pregnancy                                      -0.005        0.005         0.012          -0.019         0.009
     when using no method for those who expect risk below 17a
     Increase to 85% expected risk of pregnancy                                              -0.005        0.007         0.016          -0.027         0.011
     when using no method for those who expect risk below 17
     Increase by 25% expected probability of partner approval                                0.007         0.007         0.018          -0.036         0.006
     of all modern methods
     Increase to 100% expected probability of partner approval                               0.015         0.013         0.053          -0.076        -0.001
     of all modern methods
     Remove all side effects of modern methods                                               -0.001       -0.003         -0.020         -0.003         0.027
     Remove all supply constraints of modern methods                                         -0.001        0.002          0.009         -0.011         0.000




48
     Align partner's fertility preferences with the woman's                                  0.001         0.007          0.010         -0.024         0.009
     Predicted changes in the probability of choosing each alternative based on the model reported in Column (7) of Table A-4. Beliefs are capped at 20
     where an increase by 25%-pts would lead to beliefs above 20 out of 20. Side effects are defined as nausea or headaches, menstrual irregularities or
     vaginal infections, and "other" side effects. Supply barriers refer to direct and indirect monetary costs as well as waiting times and the inability to
     obtain the method when needed.
                                                               Table 7: Experimental Results

                                                                                    Before     After     #Obs      Difference      P-value P-value of
                                                                                                                                   of T-test McNemar
                                                                                                                                             Mid-P test
     Panel A: Whole sample receiving the information message
     Expected probability of pregnancy within 12 months      15.84                             16.68     287       0.85            0.010
     (out of 20 beans)
     Intends to use contraception in the future              0.88                              0.91      288       0.035           0.007         0.007

     Panel B: Sample of women with baseline beliefs <17
     Expected probability of pregnancy within 12 months                             11.20      15.92     113       4.73            0.000
     (out of 20 beans)
     Intends to use contraception in the future                                     0.85       0.89      113       0.044           0.058         0.070




49
     Panel C: Sample of women not using contraception
     Expected probability of pregnancy within 12 months                             15.07      16.56     84        1.49            0.020
     (out of 20 beans)
     Intends to use contraception in the future                                     0.64       0.72      85        0.082           0.019         0.021
     Details of the experiment are provided in Section 6. As in the t-test, the null hypothesis of the McNemar test is that the treatment has no effect.
Figure 1: Nested Logit Tree




            50
A-1     Appendix Tables

                Table A-1: Summary Statistics by Partner's Fertility Preferences

 Partner Fertility Preferences:                      Wants The Same                   Wants More
                                                    Mean SD Count              Mean    SD      Count
 Panel A
 Age 18-24                                             0.32             411     0.32                173
 Age 25-34                                             0.40             411     0.49                173
 Age 35-44                                             0.24             411     0.17                173
 Age 45-49                                             0.04             411     0.02                173
 # Children                                            2.73 1.75        411     2.31 1.62           173
 No Schooling                                          0.13             411     0.17                173
 Some Primary Schooling                                0.47             411     0.37                173
 Some Secondary Schooling                              0.40             411     0.46                173
 Urban                                                 0.44             411     0.56                173
 Maputo City                                           0.22             411     0.24                173
 Maputo Province                                       0.42             411     0.30                173
 Gaza Province                                         0.37             411     0.46                173
 Partner Wants More Children                           0.00             411     1.00                173
 or Wants them Earlier
 Muslim                                                0.02             411     0.04                173
 Christian                                             0.47             411     0.45                173
 Catholic                                              0.13             411     0.13                173
 Protestant                                            0.04             411     0.01                173
 Other Religion                                        0.30             411     0.30                173
 No Religion                                           0.03             411     0.05                173
 Doesn't Know Religion                                 0.01             411     0.02                173
 Panel B
 No Method                                             0.27             411     0.37                173
 Injections                                            0.35             396     0.26                160
 Pill                                                  0.23             395     0.19                162
 Implants                                              0.11             354     0.12                148
 Male Condom                                           0.09             395     0.12                167
 Unmet Needa                                           0.21             411     0.28                173
 Met Needa                                             0.73             411     0.63                173
 Postpartum Amenorrheic After Wanted Child 0.06                         411     0.08                173
 But Not Reported as FP Methoda
 Need Unknowna                                         0.00             411     0.01                173
 Sex Last Month                                        0.87             411     0.89                173
 Sex Last Quarter                                      0.12             411     0.10                173
 Sex Activity Missing                                  0.01             411     0.01                173
 # Methods Known                                       4.40 1.59        411     4.39 1.74           173
 # Methods Known                                       2.75 0.57        411     2.68 0.68           173
 N                                                                      411                         173
                                                  a
 Source: Survey described in Section 2.2. Following commonly used definitions, fecund, non-
 pregnant women who say they do not want to get pregnant in the coming two years can fall in one
 of four categories: (1) postpartum amenorrheic after wanted child, i.e. their menstruation has not
 returned since the birth of their last child within the last two years and this child was wanted at the
 time of the pregnancy, (2) unmet need, i.e. they are not using contraception and their period has
 returned since the birth of their last child or their period has not returned but their last child was not
 wanted, (3) met need, i.e. they are using contraception and (4) need unknown, i.e., the woman did
 not respond to all the questions required to establish her status.


                                                    51
         Table A-2: Comparison Between Sample and Population Characteristics

                                  Dataset    AIS 2015 (3 Provinces)        AIS 2015 (All)
Panel A
Age 18-24                          0.32                 0.23                      0.28
Age 25-34                          0.43                 0.36                      0.33
Age 35-44                          0.22                 0.30                      0.29
Age 45-49                          0.03                 0.11                      0.10
# Children                         2.61                  3.8                       4.2
No Schooling                       0.14                 0.11                      0.25
Some Primary Schooling             0.44                 0.61                      0.53
Some Secondary Schooling           0.42                 0.29                      0.22
Panel B
No Method                          0.30                 0.38                     0.57
Injections                         0.32                 0.23                     0.20
Pill                               0.21                 0.20                     0.11
Implants                           0.11                 0.04                     0.03
Male Condom                        0.10                 0.08                     0.03
# Methods Known                     4.4                                          4.6*
N                                  584                  624                      2178
Sources: Survey described in Section 2.2 (Column 1); Maputo City, Maputo Province and Gaza
Province samples of the 2015 AIDS Indicators Survey (MISAU, INE and ICF, 2016) (Column 2);
All women interviewed for the 2015 AIDS Indicators Survey (MISAU, INE and ICF, 2016) (Column
3). *Refers to all women married or in union in the 2011 Demographic and Health Survey (MISAU,
INE and ICF, 2013), since this question was not asked in the AIDS Indicators Survey.




                                             52
                  Table A-3: Summary Statistics for All Method-Specific Variables

                            If using:   Condoms    Implants   Injections   No Method     Pill
P(Pregnancy)                Mean           0.17       0.25      0.19          0.78       0.35
                            SD           0.268      0.252      0.231         0.258        0.3
                            Obs.           553        469       537           579        540
P(STD)                      Mean           0.14       0.79      0.78          0.75       0.78
                            SD           0.267      0.235      0.238         0.269       0.24
                            Obs.           557        494       550           566        549
E(Method Cost)              Mean          22.47      25.64     27.03            0       14.07
                            SD          130.848    190.582    196.857           0      99.159
                            Obs.           554        498       549           584        545
E(Other Costs)              Mean          22.58      27.37     36.55            0       24.07
                            SD          171.702    194.499    249.779           0      208.577
                            Obs.           554        498       550           584        547
P(Obtaining on Time)        Mean           0.9        0.82      0.84            1        0.86
                            SD           0.169      0.223      0.224            0       0.201
                            Obs.           554        486       551           584        549
E(Waiting Time)             Mean          18.75      23.34     23.46            0       21.56
                            SD           12.716     19.625    19.714            0      16.747
                            Obs.           536        464       525           584        535
P(Nausea or Headache)       Mean           0.03       0.24      0.21            0        0.44
                            SD           0.116      0.265      0.258            0       0.319
                            Obs.           539        414       507           584        503
P(Menstrual Irreg.          Mean          0.06        0.52      0.58            0        0.46
or Vaginal Infections)      SD            0.175      0.259     0.296            0       0.306
                            Obs.           540        430       529           584        517
P(Altered Libido,           Mean          0.26        0.15      0.19            0        0.14
Pleasure or Romance)        SD            0.323      0.219     0.271            0       0.235
                            Obs.           533        418       513           584        497
P(Other Negative Effects)   Mean           0.06      0.33       0.31            0        0.31
                            SD           0.164      0.266      0.296            0       0.272
                            Obs.           539        440       523           584        516
P(Pregnancy after           Mean           0.81       0.69      0.69          0.73       0.75
Discontinuation)            SD            0.293       0.24     0.245         0.291       0.23
                            Obs.           552        462       534           575        539
P(Parents Approval)         Mean           0.61        0.5      0.53          0.28       0.54
                            SD            0.31      0.304      0.311         0.278      0.313
                            Obs.           529        465       516           532        522
P(Relig. Approval)          Mean           0.49       0.39      0.39           0.3       0.39
                            SD            0.35      0.309      0.307         0.299      0.317
                            Obs.           488        435       470           490        479
P(Partner Approval)         Mean           0.55       0.54      0.58           0.4        0.6
                            SD            0.32      0.303      0.324         0.335       0.31
                            Obs.           554        491       550           574        549


                                                  53
P(Friends Approval)         Mean          0.56          0.49       0.51         0.27           0.54
                            SD           0.321         0.312      0.315         0.27           0.317
                            Obs.          535           471        529          544             526
P(Hide from Partner)        Mean          0.05          0.32       0.42         0.32           0.38
                            SD           0.177         0.298      0.343         0.33           0.316
                            Obs.          558           487        550          573             551
Source: Survey described in Section 2.2. P(.) stands for "probability of event happening" and E(.) is the
expectation operator. "Pregnancy" and "STD" refer to the perceived probability of pregnancy occurring or
of contracting an STD, respectively, within 12 months. Costs are expected monthly costs. When the number
of observations is less than 584, this is due to either some women not knowing of the relevant method (see
the last column of Panel B of Table 1 for the number of women who know of each method), or to women
not answering a question about a method. Waiting time corresponds to the middle of the interval chosen by
respondents and is expressed in minutes. Top 1% in terms of costs and waiting times removed.




                                                  54
                                                  Table A-4: Full Nested Logit Estimates

                                            (1)           (2)          (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)       (7)
     Effect of method-specific variables:
     Spacing × P(pregnancy)                 -0.002        -0.002       -0.003      0.008      -0.013     0.009     0.001
                                            (0.006)       (0.006)      (0.006)     (0.008)    (0.013)    (0.011)   (0.006)
     Limiting × P(pregnancy)                -0.013        -0.012       -0.017*     -0.008     -0.033**   -0.019    -0.009
                                            (0.008)       (0.008)      (0.009)     (0.008)    (0.016)    (0.014)   (0.007)
     P(STD)                                 0.009         0.009        0.008       0.010                           0.003
                                            (0.011)       (0.011)      (0.012)     (0.015)                         (0.010)
     P(nausea)                              -0.009*       -0.009*      -0.008*     -0.010                          -0.009*
                                            (0.005)       (0.005)      (0.005)     (0.006)                         (0.004)
     P(menstrual irreg.)                    0.011**       0.011**      0.011**     0.008                           0.010**
                                            (0.005)       (0.005)      (0.005)     (0.007)                         (0.005)
     P(affect libido romance)               0.006         0.006        0.005       0.002                           0.006




55
                                            (0.006)       (0.006)      (0.007)     (0.008)                         (0.006)
     P(other neg. effect)                   -0.015**      -0.015**     -0.015**    -0.017*                         -0.014**
                                            (0.007)       (0.007)      (0.007)     (0.009)                         (0.006)
     Spacing × P(pregnancy after disc.)     0.018*        0.018**      0.016*      0.027**                         0.019**
                                            (0.009)       (0.009)      (0.010)     (0.013)                         (0.009)
     Limiting × P(pregnancy after disc.)    0.025**       0.025**      0.027***    0.008                           0.024**
                                            (0.010)       (0.010)      (0.010)     (0.013)                         (0.010)
     P(parents approval)                    0.010         0.010        0.011       0.002                           0.011
                                            (0.008)       (0.008)      (0.008)     (0.010)                         (0.008)
     P(coreligionists approval)             0.004         0.004        0.001       0.009                           0.004
                                            (0.009)       (0.009)      (0.009)     (0.010)                         (0.009)
     P(partner's approval)                  0.060***      0.060***     0.062***    0.058***                        0.061***
                                            (0.011)       (0.011)      (0.012)     (0.018)                         (0.012)
     P(friends' approval)                   0.008         0.009        0.008       0.006                           0.007
                                                (0.009)     (0.009)      (0.010)      (0.010)                              (0.009)
     Partner wants the same × P(hide method)    -0.013**    -0.013**     -0.014**     -0.009                               -0.013**
                                                (0.006)     (0.006)      (0.006)      (0.007)                              (0.006)
     Partner wants more kids × P(hide method)   -0.003      -0.003       -0.005       -0.008                               -0.002
                                                (0.011)     (0.011)      (0.011)      (0.012)                              (0.011)
     P(obtain when needed)                      0.011       0.012        0.018*       0.015                                0.011
                                                (0.009)     (0.009)      (0.009)      (0.010)                              (0.009)
     E(waiting time)                            -0.002      -0.002       -0.003       -0.003                               -0.002
                                                (0.002)     (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.002)                              (0.002)
     E(direct costs)                            0.001       0.001        0.003***     0.000                                0.001
                                                (0.001)     (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)                              (0.001)
     E(other costs)                             -0.001*     -0.001*      -0.004***    -0.000                               -0.001*
                                                (0.000)     (0.000)      (0.001)      (0.000)                              (0.000)
     Effect of method-invariant variables on the probability of using no method rather than a hormonal method:




56
     Age 25-34                                  0.115         0.091        0.117         -0.279     0.123        -0.150    0.069
                                                (0.276)       (0.277)      (0.285)       (0.338)    (0.251)      (0.329)   (0.279)
     Age 35-44                                  1.090***      1.036***     1.181***      0.430      0.937***     0.504     0.954**
                                                (0.399)       (0.401)      (0.414)       (0.479)    (0.350)      (0.444)   (0.402)
     Age 45-49                                  1.687**       1.686**      1.623**       1.481*     1.705**      1.459*    1.680**
                                                (0.708)       (0.695)      (0.715)       (0.799)    (0.688)      (0.806)   (0.718)
     Some primary schooling                     0.289         0.277        0.376         0.426      0.270        0.296     0.343
                                                (0.340)       (0.342)      (0.347)       (0.490)    (0.301)      (0.439)   (0.353)
     Secondary schooling and above              -0.324        -0.387       -0.392        -0.503     -0.503       -0.553    -0.235
                                                (0.389)       (0.391)      (0.398)       (0.521)    (0.344)      (0.478)   (0.399)
     Urban                                      -0.037        -0.054       -0.027        0.098      0.196        0.365     -0.049
                                                (0.281)       (0.283)      (0.287)       (0.340)    (0.253)      (0.317)   (0.286)
     Maputo Province                            0.170         0.144        0.066         0.302      0.430        0.506     0.109
                                                (0.361)       (0.360)      (0.374)       (0.415)    (0.335)      (0.399)   (0.373)
     Gaza Province                              0.358         0.345        0.257         0.478      0.169        0.370     0.349
                                              (0.351)       (0.351)      (0.366)      (0.399)      (0.316)     (0.381)      (0.362)
     Partner wants more kids                  0.468*        0.441*       0.464*       0.518*       0.665***    0.769***     0.531**
                                              (0.240)       (0.242)      (0.254)      (0.288)      (0.219)     (0.274)      (0.246)
     No. of children                          -0.018        -0.026       -0.011       -0.028       -0.108      -0.024       -0.011
                                              (0.084)       (0.084)      (0.085)      (0.099)      (0.082)     (0.099)      (0.085)
     Limiting                                 -0.525*       -0.506*      -0.447       -0.212       -0.246      -0.120       -0.523*
                                              (0.301)       (0.300)      (0.310)      (0.362)      (0.304)     (0.365)      (0.302)
     Catholic                                 -0.383        -0.368       -0.330       -0.461       -0.288      -0.330       -0.221
                                              (0.343)       (0.347)      (0.349)      (0.414)      (0.335)     (0.415)      (0.347)
     Muslim                                   0.307         0.311        0.295        0.132        0.283       0.006        0.385
                                              (0.629)       (0.628)      (0.689)      (0.720)      (0.589)     (0.683)      (0.649)
     Protestant                               0.859         0.863        0.996*       0.646        0.756       0.607        0.888
                                              (0.591)       (0.586)      (0.597)      (0.713)      (0.528)     (0.680)      (0.582)
     Other religion                           -0.129        -0.170       -0.060       -0.400       0.023       -0.231       0.001




57
                                              (0.251)       (0.255)      (0.256)      (0.345)      (0.231)     (0.319)      (0.257)
     Atheist                                  0.954**       0.910*       1.027**      0.977*       0.845*      1.174*       1.101**
                                              (0.473)       (0.477)      (0.480)      (0.592)      (0.485)     (0.634)      (0.487)
     Doesn't know religion                    1.167         1.117        1.293        0.562        0.893       0.909        0.278
                                              (1.517)       (1.509)      (1.509)      (1.526)      (1.276)     (1.254)      (1.842)
     P(pregnancy) absent contraception                                                                                      -0.068***
                                                                                                                            (0.022)
     P(STD) absent contraception                                                                                            0.027
                                                                                                                            (0.022)
     Effect of method-invariant variables on the probability of using condoms rather than a hormonal method:
     Age 25-34                                  0.347         0.319        0.448        0.092        0.196     0.236        0.368
                                                (0.367)       (0.364)      (0.381)      (0.410)      (0.366)   (0.418)      (0.374)
     Age 35-44                                  0.891         0.873        0.959*       0.530        0.732     0.601        0.943
                                                (0.558)       (0.553)      (0.574)      (0.658)      (0.540)   (0.645)      (0.582)
     Age 45-49                                  0.275         0.322        0.371        -14.603*** 0.445       -14.603***   0.296
                                     (1.048)      (1.042)      (1.062)      (0.771)      (1.161)      (0.860)      (1.025)
     Some primary schooling          0.277        0.268        0.186        0.312        0.676        0.490        0.271
                                     (0.585)      (0.587)      (0.593)      (0.667)      (0.661)      (0.727)      (0.569)
     Secondary schooling and above   0.260        0.260        0.320        0.039        0.678        0.352        0.270
                                     (0.612)      (0.614)      (0.616)      (0.682)      (0.669)      (0.743)      (0.594)
     Urban                           0.397        0.354        0.484        0.023        0.369        0.041        0.367
                                     (0.396)      (0.397)      (0.406)      (0.457)      (0.404)      (0.446)      (0.402)
     Maputo Province                 0.765        0.761        0.839        0.483        0.685        0.409        0.829*
                                     (0.482)      (0.481)      (0.512)      (0.548)      (0.494)      (0.540)      (0.481)
     Gaza Province                   0.330        0.333        0.648        0.305        0.481        0.494        0.511
                                     (0.417)      (0.417)      (0.430)      (0.440)      (0.432)      (0.450)      (0.406)
     Partner wants more kids         0.186        0.211        0.064        0.157        0.292        0.278        0.216
                                     (0.359)      (0.360)      (0.380)      (0.388)      (0.343)      (0.362)      (0.353)
     No. of children                 -0.487***    -0.497***    -0.493***    -0.460***    -0.469***    -0.494***    -0.496***




58
                                     (0.149)      (0.149)      (0.157)      (0.174)      (0.154)      (0.182)      (0.155)
     Limiting                        0.634        0.641        0.659        0.916*       0.660        0.880*       0.572
                                     (0.429)      (0.426)      (0.452)      (0.471)      (0.428)      (0.458)      (0.421)
     Catholic                        -0.127       -0.139       -0.327       0.016        0.207        0.159        -0.058
                                     (0.468)      (0.470)      (0.498)      (0.466)      (0.451)      (0.464)      (0.465)
     Muslim                          1.016        1.005        0.933        0.703        0.937        0.516        0.995
                                     (0.737)      (0.735)      (0.802)      (0.855)      (0.726)      (0.887)      (0.764)
     Protestant                      -13.398***   -14.399***   -13.908***   -14.732***   -13.617***   -14.732***   -14.615***
                                     (0.488)      (0.481)      (0.487)      (0.716)      (0.427)      (0.563)      (0.502)
     Other religion                  -0.142       -0.123       -0.214       0.090        0.023        0.175        -0.156
                                     (0.369)      (0.368)      (0.397)      (0.427)      (0.375)      (0.420)      (0.370)
     Atheist                         -0.214       -0.239       -0.357       -14.615***   -0.218       -14.615***   -0.324
                                     (1.154)      (1.158)      (1.297)      (0.662)      (1.111)      (0.603)      (1.281)
     Doesn't know religion           2.969**      2.925**      3.066**      1.809        2.496*       1.825        2.932**
                                     (1.370)      (1.365)      (1.367)      (1.338)      (1.388)      (1.328)      (1.262)
     P(pregnancy) absent contraception                                                                                                 -0.055*
                                                                                                                                       (0.033)
     P(STD) absent contraception                                                                                                       -0.039
                                                                                                                                       (0.034)
     Method-specific intercepts:
     Condoms                                      -1.216        -1.278        -1.398*       -0.622         -1.702**      -0.543        -0.389
                                                  (0.813)       (0.813)       (0.843)       (0.905)        (0.826)       (0.869)       (0.987)
     Implants                                     0.745         0.634         0.801         0.839          0.253         0.893         0.244
                                                  (0.585)       (0.583)       (0.608)       (0.751)        (0.647)       (0.866)       (0.731)
     Injections                                   0.945         0.831         1.008*        1.040          0.716         1.268*        0.438
                                                  (0.579)       (0.578)       (0.601)       (0.743)        (0.544)       (0.702)       (0.731)
     Pill                                         0.847         0.733         0.904         0.951          0.585         1.154         0.334
                                                  (0.579)       (0.578)       (0.601)       (0.743)        (0.564)       (0.737)       (0.730)
     Correlation among alternatives in nest:




59
     No method                                    1.000         1.000         1.000         1.000          1.000         1.000         1.000
     Condoms                                      1.000         1.000         1.000         1.000          1.000         1.000         1.000
     Hormonal methods                             0.196***      0.194***      0.201***      0.208**        0.463**       0.436         0.189***
                                                  (0.051)       (0.050)       (0.052)       (0.081)        (0.216)       (0.448)       (0.047)
     Missing Value Indicators                     Yes           Yes           Yes           No             Yes           No            Yes
     N                                            2761          2588          2638          1768           2650          1768          2761
     Source: Estimates of Equation (1) using own survey data described in Section 2.2. Robust standard errors in parentheses, * p<0.10 ** p<0.05
     *** p<0.01. Missing values set to zero and indicators for missing values included in Columns (1), (2), (3) and (7). Column (2) includes only
     alternatives for whom women answered at least 13 out of 16 method-specific questions. Column (3) excludes women who answered a higher
     probability of pregnancy within 1 year than within 5 years. Columns (4) and (6) exclude alternatives with missing values.
                       Table A-5: Selected Average Partial Effects Estimates

Average Partial Effect on the Probability of Choosing :                  No Method                 Injections
Probability of Pregnancy Absent Contraception                              -0.011                     0.005
                                                                           (0.003)                   (0.001)
Probability of Other Negative Effect of Injections                          0.001                     -0.008
                                                                       (0.004 ×10-1 )                (0.003)
Probability of Partner Approving of Injections                              -0.004                     0.034
                                                                           (0.001)                   (0.008)
Indirect Cost of Injections                                             0.005 ×10-2              -0.004 ×10-1
                                                                       (0.002 ×10-2 )           (0.002 ×10-1 )
Partner Wants More Kids                                                     0.088                    -0.036
                                                                           (0.039)                   (0.020)
Woman Wants to Limit- Rather than Space Fertility                            -0.11                    0.032
                                                                           (0.043)                   (0.027)
Sample size                                                                   584                       556
Authors' calculations based on the results reported in Column (7) of Table A-4, where probabilities can take values
from 0 to 20 beans and the cost is expressed in Meticais. Standard errors obtained by the Krinsky-Robb method
in parentheses (Krinsky and Robb, 1986; Krinsky et al., 1990; Dowd et al., 2014). Point estimates in the first four
rows are obtained by taking the relevant derivative of the choice probabilities reported in footnote 36, evaluating it
at the values of the regressors for each observation, and then averaging over the sample. For the binary indicators
corresponding to the last two rows, point estimates are obtained by taking the difference in the choice probabilities
when the binary indicator is equal to one and when it is equal to zero, for each observation, and then averaging
over the sample.




                                                    60
                 Table A-6: Beliefs and Duration of Use

                                 Effect of Year Started
                                     Using Method
                                  Coef.        S.E.           Observations
P(pregnancy)                      0.104      (0.074)              393
P(STD)                            0.045      (0.087)              394
P(nausea)                        -0.024      (0.083)              391
P(menstrual irreg.)              0.163*      (0.093)              393
P(other neg. effect)             -0.035      (0.076)              392
P(affect libido romance)          0.083      (0.079)              390
P(pregnancy after disc.)          0.040      (0.064)              386
P(parents approval)               0.035      (0.083)              374
P(coreligionists approval)        0.083      (0.091)              334
P(partner's approval)            -0.062      (0.077)              395
P(friends' approval)             -0.022      (0.082)              383
P(hide method)                   -0.001      (0.095)              395
P(obtain when needed)            -0.069      (0.053)              396
E(waiting time)                  0.416*      (0.245)              379
E(direct costs)                   1.337      (2.392)              390
E(other costs)                    0.535      (2.519)              390
Each row corresponds to estimates obtained when regressing beliefs on the
year the woman started using the contraceptive method she is currently using,
a constant, and all the method-invariant characteristics included in n Panel A
of Table 1. Standard errors in parentheses, * p<0.10 ** p<0.05 ***.




                                     61
              Table A-7: Characteristics of Treated and Untreated Samples

                                          Untreated    Treated               T-test
                                           Mean         Mean    Difference  P-value
Age 25-34                                   0.39         0.46     -0.07      0.09
Age 35-44                                   0.26         0.18      0.08      0.03
Age 45-49                                   0.03         0.03      0.01      0.68
Some primary schooling                      0.47         0.42      0.05      0.23
Secondary schooling and above               0.38         0.45     -0.08      0.06
Urban                                       0.47         0.48     -0.02      0.69
Maputo Province                             0.40        0.37       0.03      0.50
Gaza Province                               0.40         0.39      0.01      0.81
Partner wants more kids                     0.29         0.30     -0.00      0.90
No. of children                             2.76         2.45      0.32      0.03
Limiting                                    0.39         0.36      0.02      0.55
Catholic                                    0.16         0.09      0.07      0.02
Muslim                                      0.02         0.04     -0.02      0.12
Protestant                                  0.03         0.03     -0.00      0.95
Other religion                              0.30         0.30      0.01      0.89
Atheist                                     0.02         0.05     -0.03      0.04
Doesn't know religion                       0.01        0.01      -0.00      0.97
Not Using                                   0.31         0.30      0.01      0.75
Injections User                             0.30         0.31     -0.00      0.97
Implant User                                0.10         0.09      0.00      0.86
Pill User                                   0.20         0.20     -0.00      0.95
Condoms User                                0.09         0.10     -0.01      0.60
(Before-treatment) Intention to Use         0.86        0.88      -0.02      0.47
Baseline Beliefs about Pregnancy Risk      15.44        15.84     -0.40      0.35
Absent Contraception
Source: Survey described in Section 2.2. Treated women are women randomly
selected to receive the pregnancy risk information message described in Section 6.
Total sample size: 584, including 296 untreated and 288 treated women.




                                          62
A-1     Appendix Figures




                                     Figure A-1

Sources: https://weather-and-climate.com/average-monthly-Rainy-days,maputo,Mozambique
("Actual") and survey described in Section 2.2 ("Data").




                                         63
                                           Figure A-2

Source: Survey described in Section 2.2.




                                              64
