                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            THE WELFARE COST OF A CURRENT ACCOUNT IMBALANCE:
                             A "CLEAN" EFFECT

                                           Jungho Lee
                                         Shang-Jin Wei
                                          Jianhuan Xu

                                      Working Paper 27276
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27276


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2020




No relevant information to disclose. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Jungho Lee, Shang-Jin Wei, and Jianhuan Xu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Welfare Cost of a Current Account Imbalance: A "Clean" Effect
Jungho Lee, Shang-Jin Wei, and Jianhuan Xu
NBER Working Paper No. 27276
May 2020
JEL No. F3,Q52

                                          ABSTRACT

According to the existing open-economy macroeconomics literature, a current account surplus is
associated with a welfare loss only when distortions exist in either savings or investment, and
bilateral imbalances do not matter when holding a country's overall imbalance constant. We
propose a new welfare effect even in the absence of such distortions. We also show that the
patterns of bilateral imbalances matter for welfare. In our theory, a trade imbalance -- the largest
component of a current account imbalance -- interacts with a country's pollution control
("cleanness") regime to generate welfare effects outside the standard channels. In particular, a
trade surplus alters the shipping costs and the composition of a country's imports in ways that
increase the disutility of pollution.


Jungho Lee                                       Jianhuan Xu
School of Economics                              School of Economics
Singapore Management University                  Singapore Management University
90 Stamford Road, Singapore 178903               90 Stamford Road, Singapore
jungholee@smu.edu.sg                             xujh03@gmail.com

Shang-Jin Wei
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
Uris Hall 619
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027-6902
and NBER
shangjin.wei@columbia.edu
1         Introduction

A current account imbalance is both common in the data and often a source of international

frictions. Because it reflects a gap between a country's savings and investment, a welfare loss

occurs in the standard open-economy macroeconomics only if distortions exist in either savings

or investments. In this paper, we propose a new welfare channel of a current account imbalance

by connecting microeconomic variables that have not been previously connected. A welfare

loss occurs even if there are no distortions associated with savings or investment per se.

        The basic mechanism can be summarized in two steps. First, we recognize that for a ma-

jority of countries, the merchandise-trade imbalance is a quantitatively important component

of the current account imbalance. More precisely, across countries, the trade imbalance co-

moves strongly with the current account imbalance. In fact, using data from 2015, a regression

of trade imbalance (as a share of GDP) on current account imbalance (as a share of GDP)

produces a slope coefficient that is essentially one.1 For this reason, the welfare effect of a

country's trade imbalance is a major element of the welfare effect of its current account im-

balance. Second, a trade surplus affects the unit shipping cost and alters the composition of

a country's imports in a way that tends to lead to more pollution in the country, especially

if its pollution tax is low. This suggests a novel channel for welfare loss from a large current

account surplus in countries such as China, Russia, and Malaysia.

        Using our calibrated model, we show that as a country's trade surplus becomes greater,

the welfare loss also becomes greater when the shipping cost is endogenous than when it is

exogenous.2 In other words, this interaction among a trade surplus, endogenous shipping

costs, and the pollution control regime, with the last two objects normally being of interest
    1
     In Figure 1, we plot the trade imbalance-GDP ratio against the current account imbalance-GDP ratio
across countries in 2015. The correlation is 0.6. When we regress the trade surplus-GDP ratio on the current
account-GDP ratio, the slope coefficient is 0.941, but not statistically different from 1, with the R-square of
0.63.
   2
     Our calculation controls for the direct effect on the welfare from the shock to the trade balance.



                                                      2
to two separate microeconomic fields, has a consequence that is important to open-economy

macroeconomics.

       As a novel and significant implication, patterns of bilateral imbalances matter for welfare

even after holding a country's overall imbalance constant. If the country has a weaker en-

vironmental standard than the rest of the world, an increase in its bilateral surplus with a

partner country, even if it is simultaneously offset by a corresponding increase in the deficit

with another country would still lead to a greater welfare loss for the country. To the best of

our knowledge, this is the first paper that suggests bilateral imbalances matter for welfare.

       As another byproduct of our mechanism, we also provide a new explanation for why certain

countries with a large trade surplus, such as China, import so many heavy goods (i.e., goods

with a high weight-to-value ratio) or so much industrial waste. Whereas the weight-to-value

ratio for import bundles for the world as a whole is 0.22 kg per dollar, the ratio for China is

more than twice as high, at 0.46 kg per dollar. Relatively heavy products include industrial

scraps and waste, such as scrap metal and discarded glass. Indeed, China was the largest

importer of waste products in the world (until its government banned waste imports in 2018).3

In 2016, waste-products imports included 45 million tons of scrap metals, used textile and

fibers, waste paper, and used plastics worth over 18 billion USD.4 Our mechanism suggests

that the fact that China simultaneously runs the largest trade surplus in the world and is the

most voracious importer of industrial scrap is not a coincidence.5

       This paper is divided into three parts. In the first part, we study how a country's trade

surplus reduces the unit shipping cost of inbound trade, and how that reduction in turn alters
   3
     Incidentally, the Chinese ban on imports of many industrial waste products since early 2018 has generated
a mini-crisis in many countries that had previously grown accustomed to shipping industrial scraps and waste
to China.
   4
     We define the waste products as HS 6-digit product lines that contain either "scrap" or "waste" in their
descriptions.
   5
     Kellenberg (2010) also relates the endogenous transport cost to Chinese waste import, but is silent about
the mechanism behind the phenomenon. We provide a broader picture behind Chinese waste import, and
develop a quantitative model for policy and welfare evaluation.




                                                      3
the composition of the country's imports. We provide both a simple model and statistical

evidence. A key observation is that a country's trade surplus increases the likelihood that ships

returning to the country will be under their full carrying capacity (De Palma et al. (2011);

De Oliveira (2014)). This imbalance reduces the unit shipping cost for the country's imports,

making it cost effective to import more relatively heavy goods. Conversely, deficit countries

have a comparative advantage in exporting relatively heavy goods. By our estimation, if a

good's weight-to-value ratio is higher by 10%, its elasticity of imports to trade surplus increases

by 0.12%. Besides the evidence from cross-country data, we also examine data across port cities

within China and find qualitatively the same pattern. That is, those ports with a greater trade

surplus also import more heavy goods as a share of their total imports. This within-country

evidence strengthens our confidence that the key data patterns from the international data are

not affected by unmeasured time-varying country-pair features that may be correlated with

the unit shipping cost.

   In the second part of the paper, we explore some novel implications of this insight. In

particular, we show that polluting industries (e.g., ceramics, cement, copper wire production)

tend to use more heavy inputs (including but not restricted to recycled scrap metals and other

industrial waste). As a result, by making the inputs cheaper for the polluting industries,

a greater trade surplus alters a country's comparative advantage toward a more polluting

production structure. Therefore, the overall "cleanness" of the economy is affected by the size

of the trade imbalance.

   In the third part, we construct a quantitative model to evaluate the welfare effect of a

current account imbalance (which is driven by a trade surplus in our model as in the data).

The model features an endogenous response of the unit shipping cost to a trade surplus, which

lowers the input costs of the relatively polluting industry and ultimately increases the overall

consumption relative to a world in which the shipping cost does not respond to a trade surplus.



                                                4
The gain in utility from more consumption, however, is more than offset by a reduction in utility

due to the additional pollution. The net effect of allowing the shipping cost to respond to a

trade surplus is a welfare loss of around 2.4%.

   We also use the quantitative model to perform policy experiments. We find that a ban

on the imports of foreign scraps - a policy experiment that is similar to an actual Chinese

policy change that took place in 2018 - could increase welfare by making the inputs to the

production of pollution more expensive, hence reducing the level of production in that sector.

However, a direct increase of the pollution tax is far superior to an import ban on foreign

scraps. The reason is intuitive and holds important implications for policy designs: If the only

market failure is a negative externality in pollution, an optimal tax on pollution can directly

close the gap between the social and private costs of pollution. By contrast, banning imported

scraps, such as what China has done, is less effective, partly because imported industrial scrap

can be substituted by both domestic industrial scrap and imported non-scrap heavy inputs.

   This paper makes five contributions to the literature. First, we demonstrate a novel channel

for a current account surplus to be socially inefficient. In particular, a trade surplus, by altering

the unit shipping costs, induces additional imports of heavy products and lowers the input costs

for the polluting industries. This mechanism tends to lead to more pollution in the trade-

surplus country, especially if it has a low environmental standard or weak enforcement. By

contrast, the existing literature on the efficiency consequences of the trade imbalance focuses

on the terms-of-trade channel (Dekle et al. (2007); Epifani and Gancia (2017)). The welfare

effect of the trade surplus comes from frictions either on the capital market or in the savings

decision. In this paper, however, a trade surplus magnifies a negative externality in pollution

through an endogenous response of the shipping cost and the import composition to a trade

surplus. Distortions in the level of saving or investment are not necessary for a trade surplus

to generate a welfare loss.



                                                  5
      As a second contribution, we show that bilateral trade patterns matter for welfare in our

context. In comparison, the standard view in the literature is that bilateral imbalances would

not matter when holding a country's overall imbalance constant.

      The third contribution of the paper is to provide a framework to evaluate various corrective

policies in this context. In particular, we find that the dramatic policy we observe in practice -

a ban on imports of industrial scraps implemented by China - is inferior to increasing domestic

pollution taxes. The reason for the shortcoming of the Chinese policy is also transparent in

the model - not accounting for substitution between domestic and imported industrial scraps

and substitution between non-scrap heavy material and imported scraps.

      Fourth, while a large literature has studied interactions between trade and environment,6 it

does not make a connection between a trade imbalance, shipping costs, and the environment.

We address this gap by proposing a new chain of linkages from a trade imbalance to a worse

environmental outcome. In other words, a trade surplus alters the comparative advantage of

importing dirty inputs. Those developing countries that simultaneously have a weak pollution-

control regime and a trade surplus may experience an especially serious deterioration of the

pollution problem.

      Finally, our paper enriches the literature on endogenous transportation costs. Hummels

and Skiba (2004) and Lashkaripour (2015) emphasize that unit weight is an important feature

in international shipping, whereas Djankov et al. (2010) and Hummels and Schaur (2013)

study the effect of shipping time on trade cost. However, these papers do not consider a trade

imbalance to be a determinant of the shipping cost or a source of comparative advantage.

Behrens and Picard (2011), Friedt and Wilson (2015), Jonkeren et al. (2010), Wong (2019), and

Brancaccio et al. (2019) relate shipping cost to trade balance. Building on and going beyond

this insight, we show, both analytically and empirically, that this change in the shipping cost

disproportionately favors heavy products. In addition, as far as we know, we are the first to
  6
      See surveys by Frankel (2009), Kellenberg (2009), Kellenberg (2012), and Lan et al. (2012), respectively.


                                                        6
build a connection between the endogenous shipping-cost channel and the welfare consequences

for the importing country via a new pollution channel.

    The paper is hereafter structured in three parts. In the first part, we aim to establish

empirically a relationship between a country's trade imbalance and import composition. In

the second part, we show that a country with a trade surplus tends to generate more pollution.

In the third part, we develop a model and discuss welfare and policy implications.



2     Trade Imbalance and Import Composition

In this section, we show that if the shipping cost depends on a good's weight, a modified

gravity equation predicts that the import composition systematically depends on the trade

imbalance. This is borne out strongly in the data.



2.1    The logic

The reasoning can be explained via two equations. We use i to denote goods, and n and d to

denote the origin and destination country, respectively. We start from the following gravity

equation at the sector (or product) level:


                                             (i,nd pi,n )1-
                                 Xi,nd =                    i,d Ed .
                                                  An


Xi,nd is the amount of import of good i from country n by country d. pi,n is the free-on-board

(FOB) price of good i from country n, and i,nd is the corresponding trade cost per value of

good i from country n to country d. Hence, i,nd pi,n is the price per unit of good i paid by a

consumer in the destination country. The demand elasticity with respect to price is captured

by 1 -  . Ed is the total expenditure of destination country d, and i,d is the share of the

expenditure on good i in country d. An captures "capabilities" of exporters from country n as


                                                  7
a supplier to all destinations.

       The trade cost per value i,nd is assumed to have two components: an iceberg component

gi,nd , which is the per-value cost, such as the trade tariff, and a non-iceberg cost ci,nd , which

is the per-unit cost. Then, the trade cost per value i,nd can be written as


                                                             ci,nd
                                            i,nd = gi,nd +         .
                                                             pi,n


We assume

                                               ci,nd = nd wi,n ,


where wi,n is the weight per unit of good i produced by country n, and nd is the shipping cost

per unit of weight when delivering a good from n to d.7 Notice we assume the shipping firm

does not distinguish the goods it delivers but only charges a shipping fee by the weight of the

goods. We then get
                                                               wi,n
                                         i,nd = gi,nd + nd          .                                       (1)
                                                               pi,n

       The iceberg portion of the shipping cost is standard in the literature. The second compo-

nent in the shipping cost says that the per-value shipping cost equals the per-weight shipping

cost times the weight-to-value ratio. Although the last component is somewhat non-standard,

it has an intuitive explanation: If the cargo is heavier, it would use more fuel in transporta-

tion, and a profit-maximizing shipping company would naturally charge a higher shipping fee.8

We assume the weight-to-value ratio is an exogenous property of the goods. We discuss and

justify this assumption when we introduce our empirical measure of the weight-to-value ratio

by product.
   7
    Hummels and Skiba (2004) point out that the shipping cost is correlated with the goods weight per unit.
   8
    From speaking to some firms that engage in trading in heavy goods, we learn that shipping companies
usually put a weight limit per container. For example, if a company ships scrap copper, which is relatively
heavy, each container is only about one third full to satisfy the weight restriction. This weight restriction is
approximately the same as charging a shipping fee in proportion to the weight of the cargo.



                                                       8
       From equation (1) and the gravity equation, we can see that if nd decreases, the import

of heavy goods (those with a high weight-to-value ratio) will increase relatively more than the

import of light goods (those with a low weight-to-value ratio) because heavy goods enjoy a

disproportionately larger decline in the trade cost. We summarize our finding in the following

proposition:

Proposition 1. If nd decreases, the import of heavy goods will increase relatively more than

the import of light goods, because the heavy goods enjoy a disproportionately larger decline in

the trade cost.

       To relate Proposition 1 with the trade surplus, we make the following assumption.

Assumption 1. A larger trade surplus tends to lead to a lower import shipping cost per weight.

       Assumption 1 is motivated by the"backhaul problem," well known in the transportation

literature. Given that ships must come back after unloading their original cargo at the destina-

tion country, an opportunity cost is associated with the backhaul trip with cargo that is under

capacity. In response to this problem, the shipping company would adjust the freight rates in

both directions. Behrens and Picard (2011) formalize this idea by endogenizing transportation

costs through a market mechanism in a model of trade and geography. Their model predicts

that the growing trade surplus of China against the US will lead to a reduction in the shipping

cost from the US to China.9 Empirically, a causal effect of trade surplus on the inbound ship-

ping cost is estimated by Jonkeren et al. (2010) (for northwestern European inland waterways)

and Wong (2019) (for containerized US trade). In section 2.3.1, we additionally document a

causal effect of trade surplus on the inbound shipping cost across the world.

       Combining Proposition 1 with Assumption 1, we have the following proposition.

Proposition 2. A country tends to import more heavy goods if it runs a larger trade surplus.
   9
    Ishikawa and Tarui (2018) investigate the implication of the asymmetric shipping costs that are induced
by the backhaul problem on industrial policies such as tariff.

                                                    9
2.2       Data

The Weight-to-Value Ratio

We wish to extract information on the weight-to-value ratio for each HS 6-digit product from

customs data. However, most countries do not report product-level weight information, making

computation of the weight-to-value ratio impossible. Fortunately, the National Tax Agency of

Colombia does report both the weight and FOB value of imports by product. Using these data,

for each HS6 product, we compute the average weight-to-value ratio.10 To give some concrete

examples, we list the top five and bottom five products in terms of the weight-to-value ratio

in Table 1.

      Note we assume the weight-to-value ratio is an exogenous characteristic of the goods. To

investigate the validity of this assumption, we look at the Chinese customs data. In the Chinese

customs data, the weight-to-value ratio can be computed for 3,349 goods (about 60% of all

HS6 goods). For these products, we find the correlation in the weight-to-value ratios computed

from the Colombian and Chinese data is 0.75. Furthermore, we find the weight-to-value ratio is

highly persistent over time in both datasets. For example, the auto-correlation in the weight-

to-value ratio between two adjacent years is 0.98 in the Chinese customs data. Based on these

findings, we believe the assumption that the weight-to-value ratio is an exogenous characteristic

of goods is justified. In any case, in all subsequent regression analysis, to further enhance the

credibility of the exogeneity assumption, we use the weight-to-value ratio extracted from the

Colombian data but exclude from the regression sample all country pairs that involve Colombia

as either an exporter or an importer.
 10
      We thank Ahmad Lashkaripour for sharing these data.




                                                   10
Shipping Costs

We obtain port-to-port 20-foot dry-container freight rates over 2010-2017 for 128 major routes

(64 country pairs in two directions) from Drewry, which is a shipping consulting firm. A 20-

foot dry container has a cubic capacity of 33.2 m3 and a payload (weight) capacity of 25,000kg

per container.11

       For all countries except three (US, China, and Canada), the Drewry covers one major port.

For the US, China, and Canada, where two ports are available, we use Los Angeles, Shanghai,

and Vancouver, respectively. For the shipping rate from Port A to Port B in a given year, we

use the container freight rate in July of that year.12


Trade Data

We employ two datasets on trade. First, the bilateral trade data at the HS 6-digit level

between 64 country-pairs (in both directions) from 2010-2017 are obtained from the UN Com-

trade Database. Second, the data on exports and imports at the HS 6-digit product level for

individual Chinese ports during 2000-2006 are obtained from the Chinese customs database.



2.3       Empirical Evidence

We test the theoretical prediction in section 2.1 in two steps. First, we check whether the data

support a negative relationship between a country's trade surplus and the back-haul shipping
  11
     Source: DSV Global Transport and Logistics. Although the Drewry data are a small part of our overall
data, they are the most expensive part. For a detailed discussion of Drewry data, see Wong (2019).
  12
     The first year for which the freight rate information is available differs across routes. The ISO country
codes for the 64 country-pairs are as follows: ARE-CHN, CAN-AUS, AUS-CHN, AUS-GBR, AUS-JPN, AUS-
KOR, AUS-USA, BRA-CAN, BRA-CHN, BRA-GBR, BRA-IND, BRA-JPN, BRA-KOR, BRA-USA, BRA-
ZAF, CAN-CHN, CAN-GBR, CAN-IND, CAN-KOR, CAN-ZAF, CHN-CHL, CHL-GBR, CHN-COL, CHN-
EGY, CHN-GBR, CHN-IND, CHN-IDN, CHN-JPN, CHN-KOR, CHN-MYS, CHN-NZL, CHN-PHL, CHN-
RUS, CHN-SAU, CHN-THA, CHN-TUR, CHN-USA, CHN-VNM, CHN-ZAF, GBR-COL, CBR-IND, GBR-
JPN, GBR-KOR, GBR-TUR, GBR-USA, GBR-SZF, JPN-IND, JPN-IDN, IND-KOR, IND-USA, KOR-JPN,
JPN-NZL, JPN-THA, JPN-USA, KOR-USA, KOR-ZAF, MEX-USA, MYS-USA, NZL-USA, PHL-USA, RUS-
USA, THA-USA, TUR-USA, USA-ZAF.




                                                     11
cost. Second, we check whether the elasticity of imports with respect to shipping cost is

systematically bigger for products with a high weight-to-value ratio.


2.3.1   Shipping Cost and Trade Imbalance

Consider the following equation:


           ln(Shipping costndt ) = 0 + 1 ln(Imbalancendt ) +  + nt + dt + endt ,
                                                             nd
                                                                                             (2)


where n and d are the origin and destination countries, respectively. Imbalancendt is the

trade surplus country d runs against country n in year t, measured by Exportndt /Importndt

= Importdnt /Importndt , where Importdnt is country n's import from country d (or country d's

export to country n) and Importndt is country d's import from country n.  is an origin-
                                                                         nd

destination pair-specific component that affects the shipping cost for both directions, such

as distance. This fixed effect does not distinguish between the two directions of the route.

nt and dt are the origin-year pair and destination-year pair fixed effects, respectively, which

are meant to absorb time-varying aggregate supply or demand shocks in the exporting and

importing countries. endt is an i.i.d. random component with a zero mean. The key coefficient

of interest is 1 , which measures the responsiveness of the shipping cost to a trade imbalance.

Note that, by including the separate importer-time fixed effects and exporter-time fixed effects,

our specification examines the effect of the bilateral trade imbalance, while holding the overall

imbalances constant for both the importing and exporting countries, on the shipping cost for

that particular route.

   Although container trade accounts for a majority of international trade, some goods such

as oil or ores are shipped in bulk rather than in containers. Throughout the paper, we remove

non-metal ores (2 digit HS code 25), metal ores (2 digit HS code 26), and oil and gas (2 digit

HS code 27) to calculate the trade imbalance.


                                               12
       In regressing unit shipping cost on bilateral trade imbalance, one may be concerned by

the possible endogeneity of the trade imbalance. Indeed, the very logic of our story indicates

that an OLS regression is problematic: If a country's initial trade surplus does cause the unit

shipping cost on the import side to decline, and the unit shipping cost on the export side to

increase, it will trigger an increase in the volume of imports and a decline in the volume of

exports than if the shipping costs were exogenous. The endogenous responses of the import and

export volumes would lead the ultimate trade imbalance to be smaller and would make it more

difficult to identify a negative relationship between the trade imbalance and the unit shipping

cost. In addition, there may also be factors that simultaneously affect both the shipping costs

and bilateral trade balance.

       To address the endogeneity of bilateral trade balance, we adopt an instrumental variable

approach. Here is the idea. First, country A is more likely to run a trade surplus against

country B if country A has an overall excess savings over its investment, and country B

has an overall savings shortage relative to investment. Second, a country's saving-investment

difference is the mirror image of the weighted average of its trading partners' saving-investment

differences. Third, a component of a trading partner's national savings is affected by its

government spending, which is likely to be exogenous to country A or B.13

       Using this logic, we construct the instrumental variable for the bilateral imbalance by the

ratio of the weighted averages of the government spending of the two countries' respective

trading partners. Specifically, the instrumental variable for Imbalancendt is:


                             Importnd2000                    Importdn2000
                                          × Xdt                           × Xnt ,                             (3)
                              Importd2000                     Importn2000


where Importnd2000 is country d's import from country n in 2000, Importd2000 is country d's
  13
    The empirical literature on fiscal multipliers suggests that the Ricardian equivalence does not hold in the
data, and a change in the public-sector savings is unlikely to be offset by a change in the private-sector savings
in the opposite direction. The literature on government spending provides several determinants (e.g., political
ideology), but none is related to shipping costs (see, e.g., Facchini (2018)).

                                                       13
aggregate import in 2000, and Xdt is the trade weighted average of the government expenditures

by the top 5 trade partners of county d in year t (excluding country n if n is one of the top

five trading partners of country d).14 Importdn2000 , Importn2000 , and Xnt are similarly defined.

We adjust the Xdt and Xnt by the share of bilateral trade in the country d and country n's

import bundles in 2000, a decade before our sample.

       The OLS result is reported in the first column of Table 2. While the sign of the estimate

1 , at -0.019, is consistent with Assumption 1, the estimate is not statistically significant.

In the second column of Table 2, we report the IV regression result. In the first stage, we

regress log (bilateral trade imbalance) on log of the term in (3). The coefficient before the

IV is approximately 0.45 and significant at the 1% level, suggesting that a 1% increase in the

IV leads to a 0.45% increase in country d's bilateral trade imbalance (export/import) with

country n. With the F-statistic around 69, we can easily reject the null of a weak instrument.

The IV estimate of 1 is negative and statistically significant: An increase in country d's trade

surplus against country n by 10% would lead to a decline in country d's import shipping cost
              15
by 1.77%.


Discussion of multi-country routes

A complication is that if country A runs a surplus against country B, ships from A to B do

not need to go back to A right away. Consider an extreme example: Suppose A runs a surplus

against B, B runs a surplus against C, and C runs a surplus against A, and each country has

a balanced overall trade. In this case, a ship can travel from A to B, B to C, and C to A,

while always carrying a full load in each route. This multi-routes arrangement would weaken

the shipping-cost response to bilateral surplus.
  14
    The top five trading partners typically contribute over 80% of the trade.
  15
    To examine whether the effect of the trade imbalance is non-linear, we have also added log(imbalance)
squared as an additional regressor, but found the coefficient on the new regressor to be statistically insignificant.
The result is not reported to save space.



                                                         14
   We respond to this concern in two ways. First, we note that contracting frictions often make

complicated re-routing difficult to arrange. As Brancaccio et al. (2019) document, satellite

tracking of ships often finds empty ships leaving a port to go to the next port, suggesting the

existence of non-trivial contracting frictions. Indeed, if multi-country rerouting could always

be arranged to avoid seafaring ships below their full carrying capacity, we would not have

observed a negative relationship between the shipping cost and trade imbalance as reported in

the first two columns of Table 2. In other words, empirical patterns suggest that the contracting

frictions are non-trivial.

   Second, we zoom in on those country pairs involving one running a surplus against 2/3 of

its trading partners and another running a deficit against 2/3 of its trading partners. These

country pairs are labeled as pervasive imbalanced pairs. For the importing country in such a

pair, it would be hard to use a multi-port route arrangement to avoid having relatively empty

ships come back to its ports. Similarly, for the exporting country in such a pair, it will be

hard to avoid relatively empty ships leaving its ports for other countries. When such two

countries are paired, the likelihood that relatively empty ships will travel from the pervasive

deficit country to the pervasive surplus country is stronger. If our endogenous shipping-cost

story is correct, the elasticity of the shipping cost to the trade imbalance should be greater for

these country pairs.

   We create a dummy ("pervasive route") for such country pairs, and add an interaction

term between the dummy and the size of the bilateral imbalance. We report the result in the

third column of Table 2. The coefficient on the interaction term is negative and statistically

significant. For country pairs that do not feature a pervasive imbalance, the elasticity of the

shipping cost with respect to the trade imbalance is -0.028, but for pervasively unbalanced

country pairs, the elasticity increases dramatically to -0.176 (= -0.028-0.148).

   In the fourth column of Table 2, we use an instrumental variable approach similar to column



                                               15
2. The estimated elasticities are -0.191 and -0.501 (= -0.191-0.310) for non-pervasive routes

and pervasively unbalanced routes, respectively. These results support the interpretation that

a trade surplus tends to reduce the unit shipping cost on the import side, and the effect is

much stronger for countries with a pervasive trade surplus.


2.3.2      Import Elasticity with Respect to Shipping Cost

To test Proposition 1 that the share of heavy-goods imports in total imports rises when the

shipping cost decreases, we consider the following specification:

                                                                                               wi
            ln(Importi,ndt ) =0 ln(Shipping costndt ) + 1 ln(Shipping costndt ) × ln
                                                                                               pi

                               + i,nt + i,dt +    i,ndt ,                                                  (4)


where n and d are the origin and destination countries, respectively, i refers to a HS 6-
                  wi
digit product,    pi
                       is the weight-to-value ratio of good i, i,nt (i,dt ) is the origin-good-year

(destination-good-year) fixed effect, and i,ndt is an random component with a zero mean.16

We allow i,ndt to be correlated among the same good across countries, different goods in the

same destination country, and different goods in the same origin country. This is essentially a

gravity equation with a long list of fixed effects to absorb many variations in the data.

       The first column of Table 3 reports the benchmark result for equation (4). 0 is -0.711

and statistically significant at the 1% level, which means the import of good i from country A

would be 7.11% larger than from country B if the shipping cost from country A is 10% lower

than from country B. More importantly, 1 is -0.062 and statistically significant at the 1%

level. This finding suggests shipment of relatively heavy goods is more responsive to a given

decline in the unit shipping cost than that of relatively light goods. The import elasticity with
  16
    We assume the weight-to-value ratio is a physical feature of a product and does not depend on the origin or
destination country. In the data section, we provide evidence that this assumption is reasonable. Nonetheless,
in the regression table, we present results when this assumption is relaxed.


                                                      16
respect to the shipping cost is 0.62% higher for good i than for good j if the weight per value

of good i is 10% greater than good j .

   If importation of a good requires a fixed cost, a more permanent reduction in the shipping

cost may elicit a stronger response in the import pattern than a transitory change in the

shipping cost. To investigate this possibility, we create a dummy variable, "Persist," for

country pairs whose bilateral trade imbalance takes on the same sign (e.g., the importing

country always runs a bilateral surplus) during 2010-2017. In the second column of Table 3, we

add a triple-interaction term among the "persist" dummy (for the country pair), the shipping

cost (for the bilateral route), and the log weight-to-value ratio (for the imported product).

The coefficient on the triple interaction is negative and statistically significant. This finding

suggests the effect of a change in shipping costs on the composition of imports is indeed more

pronounced for country pairs that feature an importing country running a persistent surplus

against the exporting country.

   The regressions so far already control for origin-good-year fixed effects and destination-

good-year fixed effects. Still, some trade costs such as tariff rates can potentially vary by

origin-destination pair or by time. Also, the weight-to-value ratio of the good could depend

on the characteristics of the importing countries. For example, richer countries may import

higher-quality varieties for a given HS 6-digit product. Assume the weight-to-value ratio has

two components: the first one is a physical feature that depends on the product but not on

country identity, and the second one depends on the importing country's income (and other

features). Then, we also need to control for origin-destination-year variations.

   We present the result with this ambitious set of control variables, including origin-destination-

year fixed effects, in the third column of Table 3. Such an extension would not allow us to

identify the coefficient before the shipping-cost variable, because it is absorbed by the newly

added fixed effects. Importantly for us, we find that even with this additional and demanding



                                               17
set of controls, the key coefficient for the interaction term between a product's weight-to-value

ratio and the shipping cost remains negative and statistically significant. This strongly con-

firms that a given decline in the shipping costs favors disproportionately the relatively heavy

goods.

       In the fourth column of Table 3, we use log imbalance to replace log shipping cost. The
                                                   w
coefficient estimate for ln(imbalance) × ln        p
                                                          is 0.012 and significant at the 1% level. In-

strumenting log trade balance as before (column 5), we find that the point estimate of the

coefficient on the interaction terms becomes bigger (0.032 versus 0.012).17

       To summarize, across different shipping routes, the unit shipping cost is negatively affected

by the trade imbalance. Moreover, across shipping routes, goods, and time, a given reduction

in the shipping cost benefits heavy goods shipment more than light goods as predicted by

Proposition 1. These patterns hold after controlling for a large number of fixed effects, and

accounting for possible endogeneity of the trade imbalance. Overall, trade imbalance is a

robust predictor for the composition of trade in terms of weight to value ratios.


2.3.3      Port-level Evidence

In the cross-country evidence reported above, unmeasured time-varying country-pair features

can, in principle, be correlated with unit shipping costs. In this subsection, we explore varia-

tions across ports within a country as a robust check. Specifically, we use port-level trade data

of the Chinese customs from 2000-2006. This is intended to provide further confirmation that

trade imbalance is a robust predictor of the heaviness of imports.

       In the Chinese customs data, for a given pair of port and HS6 good and a given trading

partner, we sum up all bilateral imports and bilateral exports in a year, respectively. For
  17
     In doing so, we assume that the government expenditure of the major trade partners is independent of the
composition of goods (in terms of weight/value ratio) that a country imports from other origin countries. As
it is hard to test this assumption directly, we check an implication of our identifying assumption - whether
the average weight-per-import value is correlated with the government expenditure of the trading partners on
average. We find no significant relationship in the data.


                                                     18
example, we know Shanghai port's total exports to the US by product, and the same port's

total imports from the US by product.18

      The gravity equation to be estimated is as follows:

                                                                                   wi
               ln(Importi,mnt ) =0 ln(Imbalancemnt ) + 1 ln(Imbalancemnt ) × ln
                                                                                   pi

                                   + i,mt + i,nt + i,mnt ,                                      (5)


where m denotes a port in China, and Importi,mnt is the dollar value of good i's import into

port m from country n. Imbalancemnt is the ratio of total exports from port m to country

n to the total imports into port m from country n. i,mt and i,nt are port-product-year and

origin-product-year fixed effects, respectively. The key parameter of interest is 1 . If a greater

port-level trade surplus leads to relatively more port-level imports of heavy products, we expect

1 > 0.

      Table 4 reports the estimation results. In the first column, where we control for both

product-port-year triplet fixed effects and product-exporter-year triplet fixed effects, 1 is

estimated to be 0.0095 and statistically significant at the 1% level. That is, the import elasticity

with respect to the trade imbalance is higher for heavier products. In the second column, where

we also control for port-exporter-pair fixed effects, 1 is estimated to be 0.0064 and statistically

significant. These estimates provide confirmation of our mechanism at the level of ports within

a country even after we control for a large number of relatively demanding fixed effects.



3       Application: Trade Surplus and Pollution

In this section, we investigate the relationship between the trade imbalance and pollution.

First, we show a connection between pollution intensity of the industries and their relative
 18
      More details of the port trade data are provided in Appendix B.



                                                      19
dependence on heavy goods as inputs. Next, we show the relative size of polluting industries

in an economy tends to expand in times of a larger trade surplus. This finding is consistent

with the first data pattern, because the inputs used more intensively in the polluting industries

(i.e., relatively heavy inputs) tend to be cheaper in times of a larger trade surplus. We use

variations within China and over time to investigate these data patterns.



3.1       Heavy Inputs and Polluting Output

We measure each sector's input heaviness via a two-step procedure. First, we map every

6-digit HS commodity to industrial sector classification in China's 2012 input-output table.

Second, we estimate the weight-to-value ratio of the intermediate input bundle for each industry

by combining sector-level weights on each input implied by the input-output table and the

product-level weight-to-value ratio extracted from the Colombian customs data. The details

of the estimate are reported in Appendix C.

       We measure each Chinese industry's output pollution intensity based on the data from the

World Bank's Industrial Pollution Projection System (IPPS) for 2000, which covers emissions of

three main pollutants, namely, SO2, NO2, and total suspended particles (TSP). In particular,

for each sector, we compute ratios of SO2, NO2, and total suspended particles (TSP) emission

per dollar value of output.19

       Table 5 reports the correlation between sector-level output-pollution-intensity measures

and the sector-level weight-to-value ratio of the intermediate input bundle. The correlation is

positive and statistically significantly different from zero for each of the three pollutants. This

finding suggests industries using heavier inputs tend to be more polluting in their output.

       An example of a polluting sector is one that uses industrial wastes. Most industrial waste

goods have a relatively high weight-to-value ratio. Figure 2 plots the density of the weight
  19
   These data were assembled by the World Bank using the data from the US Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) emissions database and manufacturing census. See Bombardini and Li (2016) for more details.


                                                  20
(kg)/value (US dollar) ratio for waste goods (the solid line) and for other goods (the dashed

line). On average, the weight-to-value ratio of non-waste goods is much lower, about 0.1

kg/USD. By contrast, waste goods are much heavier, with the peak of their density at about

1 kg/USD. Recycling of waste and scrap products often involves more pollution and more

unhealthy consequences than other imports. For example, imported waste products are often

dirty, poorly sorted, or contaminated with hazardous substances. The problem is worse if the

importer is a developing country. The film Plastic China shows the environmental damage

caused by the country's plastic-recycling industry, which is dominated by many small-scale

outfits that often lack proper pollution controls.20



3.2      Trade Surplus and Expansion of Polluting Industries

If a greater trade surplus leads to lower prices of the inputs that are used more intensively in

the polluting industries, it should lead to a relatively greater expansion of these industries. We

now investigate this prediction using Chinese data. In particular, we run the following panel

regression over 1999-2017:


                    ln(Outputi,t ) = 1 ln(Imbalancet ) × Pollutioni + i + t +                 i,t .               (6)


Outputi,t is industry i's total domestic sales in year t (total industry output minus export).

Imbalancet is China's trade imbalance in year t measured by the ratio of China's exports to

imports. Industry i is a 4-digit CSIC industry. P ollutioni is industry i's air pollution intensity

measured by log SO2 emission per dollar value of output in the US EPA data in 2000. It is

assumed to be a fixed industry characteristic.21 We control for both the industry fixed effects
  20
     The negative health effect of waste management has been pointed out in the medical research, such as
Rushton (2003).
  21
     The ranking of air pollution intensity across sectors is highly stable over time. In particular, the correlations
for the industry rankings between 1990 and 2000, for SO2, NO2, and TSP, respectively, are 0.98, 0.94, and
0.90. In other words, the industry ranking of the pollution intensity barely changes over the 10-year interval


                                                         21
and year fixed effects.

    We have also conducted similar panel regressions with NO2 and TSP emissions from the

US EPA data as a measure of industry-level pollution intensity. Because the different air

pollutants have similar industry rankings as indicated in the last two columns of Table 5, it is

perhaps not surprising that we find similar regression results. We omit these results to save

space. Due to a lack of comparable industry level data on solid or liquid pollutants, we are

not able to perform a similar analysis with other pollutants.

    In the first column of Table 6, the coefficient on the interaction term is 0.306 and is

statistically significant. This suggests that an increase in the trade surplus is associated with

an expansion of the more polluting industries relative to other industries.

    One may be concerned with possible endogeneity of the trade imbalance. We next imple-

ment an instrumental variable approach. In particular, we use the government expenditures as

a share of GDP by the United States, Japan, and South Korea, three major trading partners

of China, as the instrumental variables for China's trade imbalance. The idea is that changes

in major trading partners' government expenditures are likely to be exogenous to China, but

to represent a shock for Chinese international trade. We check and confirm that there is no

significant correlation over 1999-2017 between the pollution intensity of the Chinese import

bundles and the government expenditure as a share of GDP of any of these trading partners.

The IV estimate is presented in column 2 of Table 6, and is similar to the OLS result: The

polluting industries tend to expand more in times of a greater trade surplus.

    In column 3, we add a new triple interaction term: ln(Imbalancet )×Pollutioni ×Heavy-Inputi .

The heavy-inputs sectors are defined as those industries whose input-bundles' weight to value

ratios are in the top 25th percentile of the distribution. The coefficient for the new triple

interaction term is positive and statistically significant. This suggests that the expansion of

polluting sector is more pronounced for sectors using heavier inputs. In column 4, we imple-
for any of the major air pollutants.


                                               22
ment an instrumental variable regression in which log imbalance is instrumented in a similar

way as in column 2. The IV results are similar to the OLS, with somewhat larger point esti-

mates. Overall, we confirm that in times of a greater trade surplus, pollution-intensive sectors

expand relatively more than the rest of the economy. This is especially true for those polluting

sectors that use heavier inputs.



3.3    A Note on the Trade Pattern and Pollution

If a trade surplus leads to more emission of pollutants, it can cause a loss of utility. In

principle, a stronger pollution regulation can mitigate the pollution consequence of a larger

trade surplus. However, as shown in Appendix D, we find that the strength of national

pollution control regimes is unrelated to either the propensity to import heavy goods or the

size of trade imbalance. In such a setting, a rise in the trade surplus can conceivably generate

a welfare loss via additional imports of heavy goods and additional pollution.

    Perhaps seeing a connection between imports of industrial waste and pollution, the Chinese

government began in 2018 to forbid imports of certain industrial scraps with a plan to even-

tually ban more types of scrap imports. Is such a ban socially efficient? Can the problem be

addressed in a better way? We investigate these questions through the lens of a quantitative

model in the next section.



4      A Quantitative Model and Policy Evaluations

We first construct a two-country model to evaluate the welfare effects of various policies includ-

ing a ban on imports of industrial waste, which is motivated by an actual policy introduced

by China in 2018. We use the model to conduct counterfactual thought experiments that

take into account endogenous responses by both domestically generated scrap goods and im-

ports of non-scrap heavy goods. In the later part of the section, we extend the model into a

                                               23
three-country setup, and use it to demonstrate that bilateral imbalance patterns matter for

the welfare, even when the country's overall trade balance is held constant in every period.

   The model economy features three types of intermediate inputs in production: (recycled)

scrap goods, (non-scrap) heavy material, and light material. Light material represents all

intermediate inputs that would not generate pollution in the production process. Both scraps

and (non-scrap) heavy material can generate pollution when used as intermediate inputs.

We separate heavy material from scraps for two reasons. First, not all pollution-generating

intermediate inputs in the data are (recycled) industrial scraps. Second, because China has

introduced a ban on the imports of industrial scraps but not on other pollution-generating

material, we would like to allow for substitution between industrial scraps and other pollution-

generating material in the policy simulations. For concreteness, we calibrate the model to

certain features of the Chinese economy and, for simplicity, assume all international variables

are exogenous to the home economy.



4.1    Consumer problem

The home country is populated by identical consumers of measure L. The agent can live two

periods t = 1, 2 (young and old). In the first period, the agent supplies one unit of labor

inelastically and can save through the international capital market with an exogenous interest

rate R. In the second period, the agent retires and uses the savings to consume.

   The representative consumer's utility is ln c1 +  ln c2 - x1 . c1 and c2 are the consumption

levels in the two periods, and  is the discount factor. x1 is the pollution in the first period

and  measures disutility per unit of the pollution. Because the agent does not supply labor

in the second period, no domestic production exists, and the second-period pollution is zero.

The assumption that there is no pollution in the second period is meant to capture some key

features of developing countries like China - they tend to have a weak pollution control regime


                                              24
when they are in a low-income or middle-income stage, but their pollution control is likely to

become stronger when they become richer in the future.

   In a two-period model, because a trade surplus in the first period is accompanied by a

trade deficit in the second period, if there is production and pollution in the second period,

the overall welfare effect of the pollution will be made smaller. However, using a logic similar

to that in Section 4.7, we can show that the additional pollution from an increase in the trade

surplus in the first period, will not be completely offset by a reduction in pollution in the

second period.

   Scrapped goods are generated as a part of the consumption process and are assumed to be

a fixed proportion  > 0 of the final consumption goods. The scrapped goods can be recycled

into intermediate inputs for the production of other goods domestically or exported to the

rest of the world (ROW). The amounts of domestic usage and exports are denoted as kt and
                                                                             
Ek,t , respectively, and the domestic and international prices are Pk,t and Pk,t , respectively. To

export one unit of scrap goods, an iceberg cost k,t > 1 occurs. For simplicity, we assume

that for ROW firms, the domestic and foreign goods are perfect substitutes. The no-arbitrage
                              
condition implies k,t Pk,t = Pk,t and the resource constraint of the scrap goods implies


                                        kt + k,t Ek,t = ct .


                                                                          
The revenue from selling the scrap goods at home and abroad is Pk,t kt + Pk,t Ek,t = Pk,t ct .

   The agent in each period is endowed with heavy material H (such as copper) and light

material M (such as fabrics). Both material goods can be either used in domestic production

or exported. The domestic and international prices of the light material are denoted as Pm,t
     
and Pm,t , respectively. Similarly, the domestic and international prices of the heavy material
                                                                                             
are denoted as Ph,t and Ph,t , respectively. The no-arbitrage condition ensures ¯m,t Pm,t = Pm,t
                
and h,t Ph,t = Ph,t , where ¯m,t (h,t ) is the export trade cost for the light (heavy) material. The

                                                25
unit trading costs respond to the size of the trade imbalance, as we explain below. The total

revenue from selling the light and heavy goods is Pm,t M + Ph,t H .

   The consumer's problem is as follows:


                              max ln c1 +  ln c2 - x1
                             {ct ,St }


            subject to Pc,1 c1 + S1 = w1 L + Pk,1 c1 + Pm,1 M + Ph,1 H + 1                   (7)

                             Pc,2 c2 = (1 + R) S1 + Pk,2 c2 + Pm,2 M + Ph,2 H + 2 .


The two equalities denote the budget constraints in the two periods, respectively. Pc,t is the

price of the final consumption goods. wt is the wage per unit of labor in the home country. St

is the saving of the country or the current account surplus. t is the lump-sum transfer from

the government, which we explain later. The right-hand side of the first-period budget is the

income of the household, including labor income, and the three revenues from selling the scrap

goods, light material, and heavy materials, respectively. The left-hand side denotes the first-

period expenditure including the consumption and the saving. In the second-period budget,

the income comes from the gross returns on the first-period saving, the three revenues from

selling the scrap goods, light material, and heavy material, and a transfer from the government.

   The final-goods consumption is tradeable. Without loss of generality, we assume the trade
                                                                                        
cost of final goods is zero and denote its international price as Pc,t . Hence, Pc,t = Pc,t . The

domestic final-goods producer combines output from the polluting sector qt and output from

the non-polluting (green) sector yt to produce Ct :


                                                  1-
                                         Ct = c yt qt ,


where c = - (1 - )-(1-) , and  is the share of the final expenditure on the non-polluting



                                               26
(green) sector's output. We denote the prices of yt and qt as Py,t and Pq,t respectively. The

optimality condition yields

                                                                           
                                      1-
                                                    Pc,t Ct               Pc,t Ct
                     Pc,t   =   Py,t Pq,t ,   yt =          , qt = (1 - )         .
                                                     Py,t                  Pq,t


   We assume that the unit export costs for heavy materials and scrap goods are affected by

the trade imbalance, measured by total exports divided by total imports. Specifically,

                                                                 v
                                                       Export
                                         h,t = ¯h,t                  ,                      (8)
                                                       Import

                                                                 v
                                                       Export
                                         k,t = ¯k,t                  ,                      (9)
                                                       Import

where v > 0 and ¯h,t and ¯k,t are the level of trade costs when trade is balanced (St = 0). 

measures the elasticity of export trade costs with respect to the trade imbalance. Its value in

subsequent simulations will be guided by the empirical estimates in the earlier section. The

above two equations suggest that for a deficit country, the heavy and scrap goods' export cost

becomes cheaper when the deficit increases. For the unit trade costs on the import side, we

later specify two similar equations.

   Both the polluting and green sectors have a representative firm. The output of these two

sectors cannot be traded. However, the inputs they use are tradable. Both sectors combine

materials and labor to produce. Because the second period has no labor supply, the domestic

output in both sectors will be zero, and the final good in the second-period consumption will

be imported.




                                                      27
4.2       Non-polluting (Green) Sector

The representative firm in the non-polluting sector uses light material and labor to produce.

The light material comes from either domestic supply or imports. We use mt and mt to

denote the domestic and foreign imported light material goods.22 The production function of

the non-polluting sector is
                                                                 
                                                         (1- )         -
                                      yt = y mt mt                  L1
                                                                     y,t ,



where y = ()- ((1 -  ))-(1-) (1 - )-(1-) and Ly,t is the labor employed by this sector.

 measures the share of the domestic light material in the total amount of light material used,

and 1 -  measures the labor share in the production.
               
       We use ¯m,t to denote the unit trading cost of importing the light materials, which, for

simplicity, is assumed to be exogenous. The optimality conditions yield


                                            1-                       (1- )
                                    Py,t = wt Pm,t ¯m,t Pm,t                 ,


and the demands for each production input are derived, respectively, as follows:


                              Py,t yt                Py,t yt           Py,t yt
                    mt =             , mt = (1 -  )    , Ly,t = (1 - )         .
                              Pm,t                  ¯m,t Pm,t           wt


4.3       Polluting Sector

The representative firm in the polluting sector uses heavy material, scrap goods, and labor to

produce qt . The production function is

                                                                                 k
                                                  k -1                   k -1
                                                                                 k -1
                                   (1- )
                   qt = q h                                                             L1 - -
                                                  k                      k
                           t ht               kt         + (1 -  ) kt                    q,t   ,          (10)

  22
    For simplicity, we assume the foreign producer takes the domestic light material and foreign light material
                                          
as perfect substitutes so that ¯m Pm = Pm  , whereas the domestic producer's technology takes m and m as
imperfect substitutes. Similar assumptions also apply to heavy material and scraps.


                                                      28
where q = ( )- ((1 -  ) )-(1- ) (1 -  - )+-1 . ht and ht are the domestic and

                                  
imported heavy materials. kt and kt are the domestic and foreign scrap goods. Lq,t are

the labor hired in this sector.  and  measure the shares of domestic heavy and scrap

materials, respectively, relative to the imported counterparts.  and  measure the shares of

heavy materials and scrap goods, respectively, in the total production. k is the elasticity

of substitution between domestic and foreign scraps. We allow k to be different from 1

because the substitution between domestic and foreign scraps may be higher than that between

other materials. Because we wish to explore later the sensitivity of the policy experiments to

different degrees of substitution between domestic and imported scraps, we use a slightly more

general functional form to describe this particular substitution than that between domestic

and imported heavy material.
                  
   We use h,t and k,t to denote the unit import costs of heavy material and scraps, respec-

tively. Specifically,
                                                             -v
                                                    Export
                                   h,t   =   ¯h,t                 ,                        (11)
                                                    Import

                                                             -v
                                                    Export
                                   k,t =¯k,t                      ,                        (12)
                                                    Import

                
where ¯h,t and ¯k,t are some constants. These two equations say that when the surplus increases,

the import cost will decrease. The exact magnitude of the elasticity is guided by the empirical

estimates in a previous section.

   From the representative firm in the polluting sector, if its output is qt , it emits xt =

(b - t ) qt amount of pollution, where b is the amount of pollutant produced per unit of output,

and t is the amount of pollution abatement per unit of output. Pollution abatement is costly

because the firm may need to use a more costly production technique, or to purchase and

install new equipment. To reduce t qt amount of pollution, we assume that the abatement cost

is wt  (t ) qt , where  is an increasing and convex function with  (0) = 0. We assume that


                                                    29
the government imposes a penalty of Tt for each unit of emission and the tax is transferred to

the consumer in a lump-sum amount of t .

   The firm's problem is

                                                                                                  
                                 Pq,t qt - wt Lq,t - Ph,t ht - P    h                     
                                                                h,t h,t t - Pk,t kt - Pk,t k,t kt
                                                                                                  
                 max
         {ht ,h        
               t ,kt ,kt ,Lq,t ,t } 
                                                    -wt  (t ) qt - Tt (b - t ) qt
                                                                                                     


                        subject to t  b,          and equations (10), (11), and (12).


   The firm's problem implies


                                        Pq,t = q,t + wt  (t ) + Tt (b - t ) ,

                                                                                                  
                     (1- -)                    (1- )        1-k                           1-k   1-k
where q,t = wt                 
                              Ph,t   
                                   Ph,t h,t              k Pk,t + (1 -  )k Pk,t
                                                                             
                                                                                k,t                   , which is

the per-unit cost of production. The abatement cost is derived:


                                                                    Tt
                                              t = min[b,  -1           ].
                                                                    wt


If Tt = 0, the total pollution reduction is t = 0 and the marginal cost of production q,t = Pq,t .

   Finally, the demands for each input are derived, respectively, as


                                 q,t qt                         q,t qt                      q,t qt
                ht =                    ,    ht = (1 -  )         
                                                                         , Lq,t = (1 -  - )
                                 Ph,t                           Ph,t h,t                    wt
                                                 -k
                                              k Pk  q,t
                kt =                                                        q,
                                                                             t
                                   1-k                 k      1-k
                                k Pk,t      + (1 -  )      Pk,t k,t
                                                            -k
                 
                                        (1 -  )k Pk,t
                                                   
                                                      k,t         q,t
                kt    =                                                     q.
                                                                             t
                                   1-k                 k      1-k
                                k Pk,t      + (1 -  )      Pk,t k,t




                                                           30
4.4       Equilibrium

The lump-sum transfer t in the budget constraint (7) comes from the government's pollution

tax, which is defined as Tt (b - t ) qt . Notice that in the second period, the lump-sum transfer

is 0 because no domestic production exists.

       A competitive equilibrium is defined as the lump-sum transfer t , the prices, final-goods

consumption and saving {ct , St }, labor demand {Ly,t , Lq,t }, and the amount of pollution abated

t , such that (i) given the prices, all individual optimality conditions are satisfied, (ii) all

markets clear, including the scrap market, and (iii) the lump-sum transfer is consistent with

the government's budget constraint.



4.5       Calibration
                                                            2
The pollution-abatement technology is assumed to be  ( ) = 2  . We assume all parameters,

such as international material prices, remain the same for the two periods. We calibrate

the model economy so that the model moments in period 1 match with those in the Chinese

economy in 2012 (based on an input-output table in that year). We normalize the labor supply

L to be 1 and the wage per person to be 1.23

       To calibrate the parameters in the production function, we set  = 0.6 to match the

expenditure share of the polluting sector (60%).24 We set  = 0.45 to match the labor share in

the non-polluting sector (55%), and choose  to match the import share of the light material

in the total expenditure (9.2%). We assume  =  and calibrate  , ,  , and  to match the

labor share in the polluting sector (52%), the import share of heavy goods (12.3%), and the

import share of scraps in the total expenditure (0.5%), respectively. In the baseline calibration,

following Broda and Weinstein (2006), we set k = 5.
  23
    This normalization implies that the value of one unit in our model is around 24,000 RMB or 3,500 USD.
  24
    The polluting sector in the model corresponds to an aggregation of the Chinese industries whose SO2
pollution intensities are above the median across all industries.



                                                   31
                                               
       For international prices Pm , Ph , and Pk , we use the information in China's customs data and

the 2012 input-output table. We classify all goods into four categories. First, we assign each

HS6 good to either final consumption goods or intermediate inputs.25 Among the intermediate

inputs, a good is defined as a scrap if its name description contains either "scrap" or "waste."

The remaining intermediate inputs are placed in the heavy-material basket if their weight-to-

value ratios are above the median value across all non-scrap goods, and in the light-material

basket otherwise. In terms of the average prices of each type of goods, by normalizing Pc = 1,
                                        
we infer that Ph = 1.3, Pm = 0.98, and Pk = 0.1.

       For the unit trading costs, we assume the exogenous component of all trade costs ¯ is the

same, and calibrate it so that the total transportation costs are around 20% of the trade values

when the trade is balanced. This assumption is consistent with the estimates in Anderson and

Van Wincoop (2004).26 Because China is a perennially trade-surplus country, we set the

elasticity of the unit trading cost for heavy goods and scraps with respect to a trade surplus,

 , to 0.501, based on the empirical estimates in column 4 of Table 2.

       We assume that the pollution tax is zero in the benchmark case.27 In the model, we choose

the unit of x as a ton of emission, and set the pollution generated per unit of output, b, to match

the number of tons of pollution emission per value of output.28 For pollution-abatement cost

 , we do not have China-specific information and thus use the price of tradeable permits for

SO2 emission in the United States, which is about US$ 1,600 per ton (Burtraw and Szambelan

(2009)), or 0.46 model unit value. This value should be equal to the marginal cost of the
  25
     The classification is based on https://unstats.un.org/unsd/tradekb/Knowledgebase/50090/Intermediate-
Goods-in-Trade-Statistics.
  26
     Another way to think about the transportation cost is to connect it to the ratio of the cost of insurance
and freight (CIF) and the free-on-board cost (FOB). According to Gaulier et al. (2008), the Chinese CIF/FOB
ratio is around 3% to 7%. In Appendix E, we present the calibration results under ¯ = 1.05 and find our model
predictions are robust.
  27
     China's pollution discharge fee was considered too low, and the enforcement was considered weak (Li and
Chen (2018)).
  28
     From the China city statistical yearbook, we aggregate air, solid, and water pollutants, and divide it by
the total GDP.




                                                     32
abatement wq , and allows us to back out  .29

       For parameters related to the intermediate inputs, we calibrate  so that the model economy

does not export scraps in the equilibrium. The endowments of light material M and heavy

material H are calibrated to match the shares of their exports in total expenditure (13.0% and

11.7%, respectively).

       For the remaining parameters (mostly in the consumer's problem), we calibrate  to gen-

erate a trade surplus that is about 5% of GDP (which is roughly the level for China in the

recent past). We set the foreign real return R = 10%. (If we consider one period in the model

is ten years, the annual real interest rate is 1%.)

       The parameter for the disutility of pollution,  , is both important for our inferences and

challenging to pin down from the data. Existing papers that estimate a willingness to pay

(WTP) for reducing pollution almost always focus on changing concentration of a particular

pollutant. We need to convert tonnage of emission in our model to the degree of concentration.

We estimate a relationship between concentration and tonnage of pollution emission using US

EPA data over 1990-2018. We find that one ton of PM10, SO2, and VOC+NOX emissions

increase the concentration of PM10, SO2, and the ozone by 2.46µg/m3 , 4.56 ppb, and 0.99

ppb, respectively. Unfortunately, the empirical literature on the WTP to reduce the pollutant

concentration contains a too wide range of the estimates to provide a sharp guide for us.30

       We decide to base our parameter value on Bajari et al. (2012), which appears to be one of

the most cited WTP estimates. It uses a hedonic price-regression approach and handles the

time-varying correlated unobservables. Their estimates (Table 6 in their paper) suggest that

the WTP of PM10 (1µg/m3 ), SO2 (1 ppb), and the ozone (1 ppb) are US$ 103, 178 and 180
  29
     One caveat to bear in mind is that  may differ across pollutants and across countries. So the US information
may not be a good guide for China. On the other hand, in the benchmark case when the pollution tax is zero,
the exact value of  does not matter for the calibrations, because no firm will choose to reduce the emission.
 will affect the counterfactual simulations, when the optimal pollution tax is imposed.
  30
     For instance, Smith and Huang (1995) survey the empirical estimates of the WTP for reducing TSP
emission, and find the estimates vary from US$ -239.8 to US$ 1,807. Sieg et al. (2004) Similarly, for ozone
emission, the WTP estimates vary from US$ 8 to US$ 181.


                                                       33
(in 2003 dollars), respectively. Hence, the monetary costs of one ton of emission of PM10, SO2,

and the ozone are 253.38 (103×2.46), 811.68 (178×4.56), and 178.2 (180×0.99), respectively.

We take the WTP of one ton of emission as the max of these three numbers (811.68), which

implies  = 0.03.31

       It is hard to say whether our choice is an under- or over-estimate of the true disutility

of pollution. On the one hand, we have included three air pollutants, PM10, SO2, and the

ozone, but the list of health-reducing pollutants is surely longer than three. By ignoring other

pollutants, we may have underestimated  . On the other hand, our estimate is based on the

US data. Bayer et al. (2016) show that the WTP of pollution is low for low income-groups.

Thus, we may have overestimated  in the Chinese economy. We will conduct a robustness

check regarding  in Figure 4.

       Additional details about the calibrations are in Appendix E.



4.6       Welfare and Policy Analysis

Welfare Cost of Trade Surplus

The baseline results are recorded in the first column of Table 7, where we normalize the

pollutant emission (in the first row), imports of scrap and heavy material in the first period

(in the second and third rows, respectively), the total export value of heavy goods and scrap

(the fourth row), and the wage per capita (the fifth row) to 100. The trade surplus in this

case is about 5% of GDP (the sixth row). For subsequent thought experiments, we report the

percentage change in the part of the utility ln(c1 ) +  ln(c2 ) from a change in consumption

relative to the benchmark case while ignoring any disutility of pollution (second to the last

row), and the percentage change in total utility due to the thought experiment that also takes

into account any change in disutility from a change in the pollution level (the last row). By
  31
     The US consumption per capita is about US$ 28,000 in 2012 (in 2003 dollar). Therefore, one ton emission
is equivalent to about a 3% (811.68/28,000) consumption reduction.


                                                    34
construction, the last two numbers are zero in the baseline case.

   We next quantify the welfare cost of a trade surplus through our endogenous shipping cost

channel when the environmental regulation is weak (i.e., T = 0). To this end, we set v = 0,

thereby making the shipping cost independent of the trade surplus. (Relative to the case of

endogenous shipping costs, the import shipping cost becomes higher and the export shipping

cost becomes lower.) The results are presented in the second column of the table.

   With exogenous shipping costs, the welfare is affected in four ways: two working through

consumption and two through pollution. First, a higher unit shipping cost on the import

side increases the input costs of the polluting industry, which reduces pollution. Second, a

lower unit shipping cost on the export side leads to more exports of scraps and heavy material,

which further increases the input costs to the polluting industry and augments the reduction in

pollution. The combined consequence of the first two effects is a total reduction of pollution by

4.58% and an increase in utility by about 1.84%. Third, the higher input costs to the polluting

industry lowers the sector's production and lowers the wage rate, which in turn lowers the life-

time income. Fourth, the additional exports of domestic scraps and heavy material increase

total revenue and boost export revenue, resulting in an increase in the lifetime income. We

find the fourth effect numerically dominates the third effect, and the combined consequence

of the third and fourth effects is an additional increase in consumption, leading to a 0.54%

increase in utility. Overall, the total consequence of all four effects is a 2.38% welfare increase.

   We can also summarize the results in the reverse direction - by going from column 2 (with

no response of the shipping cost to a trade surplus) to column 1 (with an endogenous reduction

in the shipping cost to a trade surplus). Four channels exist. First, because a trade surplus

can endogenously reduce the unit shipping cost, the country imports more scraps and more

heavy material than it would in the absence of a trade surplus. Second, the endogenous change

in the shipping cost on the export side implies a reduction in the exports of the scrap goods



                                                35
and heavy material. Both channels lead to a reduction in the input costs of the polluting

industry, leading to more pollution and a lower utility. Third, due to a lower price of the

polluting industry's output along with a higher wage rate, the consumption increases. Fourth,

the higher shipping cost on the export side implies a reduction in the total export revenue,

which by itself would depress consumption. The net effect of all four channels is a 2.38%

reduction in welfare.

   With an endogenous response of the shipping cost to the trade imbalance, an increase

or decrease in the trade imbalance may have systematically different welfare consequences.
                                                                                ¯. Then,
To illustrate, we impose a credit market constraint on the household problem S  S
              ¯ generate variations in the level of the trade imbalance. The results from varying
variations in S
¯ are plotted in Figure 3. On the x-axis, the saving/GDP ratio increases from a deficit -5% to
S

a surplus 5%. For a given trade imbalance, we plot the difference with and without endogenous

responses of the shipping cost. This difference is the total effect on welfare that incorporates

the changes in welfare due to changes in both pollution and consumption (solid line). To isolate

the importance of the pollution channel, we also report the partial utility change resulting from

a change in consumption without a change in pollution (dashed line). As we can see, when

the trade surplus increases from 0% to 5%, the welfare level in a world in which the shipping

costs responds to the trade balance relative to one with an exogenous shipping cost declines

monotonically from 0% to 2.38%. The utility change excluding pollution is much smaller,

suggesting the pollution channel is a quantitatively important part of the story. Conversely,

a country with a trade deficit tends to enjoy a utility gain in a world with an endogenous

shipping cost relative to one with an exogenous shipping cost. Much of the gain comes from

the fact that the endogenous shipping channel lowers the pollution level in the trade-deficit

country.




                                               36
Banning Scrap Imports

We now examine the effects of some public policies that aim to improve upon the outcomes.

In particular, we analyze a ban of imports of all scraps, which is motivated by a similar policy

that China has implemented since early 2018. We then compare it with a policy of increasing

the pollution tax.

   We summarize the results in Table 8. For ease of comparison, we copy the baseline results

of Table 7 and paste them into the first column of the current table. The result on banning

scrap imports is shown in the second column of Table 8. Banning scrap imports raises the

input cost of the polluting sector higher, which in turn generates several effects. First, the

output in the polluting sector decreases, and the pollution in turn decreases by 1.40%. The

import of heavy goods decreases by 0.78%, because the polluting sector shrinks. Second, the

contraction of the polluting sector results in a decline of the final good production at home

and a decline of the export revenue of the final goods. Because this effect dominates the

decrease in imports, the trade surplus reduces by 4.83%. While the reduction in the trade

surplus pushes up the unit shipping cost of importing heavy goods and scraps, it pushes down

the unit shipping costs on the export side. In response to a lower export shipping cost, the

exports of heavy material and scraps increase by 0.66%. Third, the reduced output in the

polluting sector pushes down the labor demand (so that the wage declines by 0.78%). Hence,

the lifetime income decreases and the utility from consumption declines by 0.26%. Finally, the

utility loss from a lower consumption is more than offset by a utility gain from lower pollution.

The net change in welfare is a gain of 0.30% relative to the benchmark case.

   We now consider some sensitivity analyses. Would the result be different if using recycled

scrap is less polluting than using the heavy materials? For instance, recycling scrap copper

may be less polluting than extracting copper ore from the ground and processing them into

copper inputs. Indeed, the pollution effect of using raw copper ore may even become stronger


                                               37
as one hunts for increasingly scarce raw ores or has to smelt increasingly impure ores. For

this exercise, we consider (non-scrap) heavy material as a substitute for scrap. In the copper

example, the heavy material can be thought of as the copper processed from the raw copper

ore. Instead of assuming the pollution intensity b from heavy material is a constant, we now

assume its pollution intensity is an increasing function in its usage relative to that of the scrap:

                                                                          b1

                                                     (1- )
                                                 h
                                                                            
                                                  t ht
                                                                            
                          b = b0                                       k 
                                                                             ,
                                        k -1                    k -1   k -1 
                                        k
                                                                k
                                     kt        + (1 -  ) kt


where b0 and b1 are two positive parameters. This equation suggests the pollution intensity is

increasing when the firm uses more heavy material relative to the scrap. We choose b1 = 0.1

and calibrate b0 to match the tons of pollutant emission per value. The results in column 3

are intuitive. First, because no pollution tax exists, the effect of pollution is not internalized,

and all variables except for the pollution emission (reported in the first row) and the utility

change (the last row) are the same as in column 2. Second, because the heavy material is more

polluting, the pollution level is 4% higher than in the baseline case, and the overall utility is

1.87% lower. In other words, banning scrap imports can lower the overall welfare when the

heavy material is more polluting than the scrap itself.

   The second sensitivity exercise investigates the consequence of a higher degree of elasticity

of substitution between foreign and domestic scraps. Whereas the elasticity in the baseline

case is set at 5, which follows Broda and Weinstein (2006), we now increase it dramatically

to k = 200. In other words, we assume they are close to perfect substitutes. The results are

shown in column 4. Compared to the second column, both the reduction in consumption and

the reduction in pollution become much smaller. The reason is intuitive: Because the firm can

more easily substitute the imported scrap with domestic scrap, a given increase in the cost of



                                                  38
the imported scraps would not alter the production by as much. As a result, the impacts on

consumption and pollution also become smaller. Relative to the baseline case in column 1,

the net welfare effect is a 0.12% increase, which is smaller than the case in column 2 when the

elasticity is substantially smaller. Because the elasticity of substitution increases substantially

from column 2 to column 4 without dramatically altering the end result, one may also conclude

the welfare analysis of banning scrap imports is not sensitive to the assumption on elasticity

of substitution between foreign and domestic scraps.

   Finally, we check the sensitivity of our result to  . In Figure 4, we plot the welfare change

after banning the scrap import under different values of  . Similar to Figure 3, the solid line

and dashed line denote the net utility change and utility change excluding pollution. When

 = 0.03, the numbers are the same as those in the last two rows of column 2 of Table 8.

Not surprisingly, the change in  will not affect the utility change excluding pollution, because

individuals do not take into account the externality. This number is always negative because

the import ban increases the cost of production. After including pollution, the net welfare is

positive as long as   0.015. In other words, the ban of scrap import can bring a welfare gain

if the Chinese WTP to pollution is more than half of American's WTP.


Optimal Regulation

We now consider the optimal tax on pollution. Specifically, we do a grid search over the value

of T that maximizes the consumer's welfare. We find the optimal tax is T = 0.58, which is

about 14,000 RMB (2,000 USD) per ton of pollution emission. We should note at the outset

that the welfare is maximized when the optimal pollution tax is imposed, because pollution

externality is the only source of market failure in our model. This qualitative conclusion can

be reached even without looking at the numbers. One purpose of the calibration exercise is to

study how close other policies - such as a ban on imports of scraps - can approximate the



                                                39
optimal pollution tax in terms of the welfare changes.

   After imposing this pollution tax, the representative firm in the polluting sector responds

by cutting emissions, which leads to a smaller production in the polluting sector, a reduced

demand for scraps and heavy material, and a higher cost of the output from the polluting

sector. As a result, the pollution emission declines by 99.9%. The consumption also declines

given the higher cost of production. However, a utility loss from a lower level of consumption

(a utility loss of 5.54% as reported in the second to the last row in column 5) is more than

offset by a utility gain from a lower level of pollution. On net, the welfare gain is 34.53% (the

last row in column 5) higher than in the benchmark case.

   The most important reason for the relatively big welfare gain is that a higher pollution

cost has reduced the demand for both scrap and heavy material, whether they are imported

or domestically sourced. From the second and third rows, the scrap- and heavy-goods imports

decline by 99.98%. Meanwhile, because the demand for domestic scrap and heavy material

declines, the household would choose to sell them abroad. As a result, the revenue from

exporting scrap and heavy goods increases by 183.96%.

   Compared to an optimal tax on pollution (column 5), a ban on scrap imports (column 2)

seems far inferior. In other words, although banning imports of scrap can increase welfare

given the structure of the model and the parameter values, one can do far better by switching

to an optimal tax on pollution (without banning imports). Banning scrap imports (as China

has done) is a poor substitute for an optimal tax on pollution. The effect of increasing the

cost of importing scraps on closing the gap between the private and social costs of pollution

is indirect and imprecise, in part because foreign scraps can be substituted by both imported

heavy material and domestic scraps.




                                               40
4.7    Discussion of Bilateral Imbalances

We finish this section by discussing an interesting implication of our findings - that the

distribution of bilateral trade imbalances across trading partners can affect welfare for a given

overall trade balance.

   Existing welfare analyses of the current account imbalance focus on the total current ac-

count imbalance (or the aggregate trade imbalance) by using a one-country or two-country

model setup, and ignore the bilateral trade imbalances. In our story, bilateral imbalances

also matter when there are interactions between the endogenous shipping cost and pollution

externality. We demonstrate this argument in detail through an example.

   Consider a two-period model with three countries: H (home country), F (a foreign country),

and R (the rest of the world). All three countries have the same utility function ln c1 + ln c2 -

x1 - x2 , where ct and xt denote the final goods consumption and pollution in period t. We

will focus on the welfare of the home country H in the subsequent discussion. We assume zero

interest rate on the savings.

   To simplify, there are two endowments, the final consumption good and the heavy material.

All three countries have 1 unit of heavy material in each period. Country F has  units of

consumption good in the first period and 1 -  units of consumption good in the second period.

Country R is a mirror image of F, and has 1 -  units of consumption good in the first period
                                                                      1
and  units of consumption good in the second period. Assume that 0    2 . Collectively,

F and R have 1 unit of consumption good in each period.

   Country H has no consumption-good endowment in any period and has to produce it from

heavy material using a linear technology. To produce a unit of the consumption good, one

unit of heavy material is used, and b units of pollutants are generated. Only country H has

the technology to produce the consumption good. We normalize the price of the consumption

good to be 1. Given the linear production technology, the price of material in country H is 1


                                               41
as well. For simplicity, we assume that the pollution tax in country H is zero.32

       Note that the supply of the heavy material is perfectly competitive in all three countries,

and the production of the consumption good in country H is also perfectly competitive. There-

fore, the producers in country H will buy up all heavy material in the world in each period

and convert them into consumption goods. Furthermore, the pollution that is generated in

the production process, while it is harmful to the representative household, is not internalized

by the producers.

       F and R export heavy material endowments to H, and import consumption goods from H.

Given the assumed endowment sequence, country H runs a surplus (deficit) against F (R) in

period 1, and a deficit (surplus) against F (R) in period 2.

       For simplicity, we assume that it is costless to ship the final goods, but heavy material

shipment involves an endogenous iceberg trade cost. Denote i as the exporting cost of heavy

material from country i  F, R to H. Denote country H's bilateral current account balance

with country i by Si . In this notation, if SF > 0, it means country H runs a trade surplus

against country F. Let i =  (Si ), which is decreasing in Si . Thus, heavy material is cheaper

to import when H runs a larger surplus.
                                                                                                  1
       For country F, the budget constraints in the two periods are c1F =                        (SF )
                                                                                                         +  + SF , and
                  1
c2F + SF =      (-SF )
                       +(1 - ).     Notice that SF is the bilateral trade surplus of country H against F
                 1               1
in period 1.    (SF )
                        and    (-SF )
                                        are country H's import shipping costs from country F in periods 1

and 2, respectively. The first term on the right hand side of the first period budget constraint
                                                                                    1
means that F exports its 1 unit heavy material to H, but only                      (SF )
                                                                                           arrives. The second term

is the consumption goods endowment in the first period. The second budget constraint has
                                                  1          1             1                    1       1            1
a similar meaning. Hence c1F = c2F =              2
                                                      1+    (SF )
                                                                    +    (-SF )
                                                                                  and SF =      2     (-SF )
                                                                                                               -    (SF )
                                                                                                                            -
  1                                                                           1          1             1
+ 2 . Similarly, for country R, we have c1R = c2R =                           2
                                                                                  1+    (SR )
                                                                                                +    (-SR )
                                                                                                               and SR =
  32
    The assumption that F and R do not produce consumption goods can also be interpreted as their having
a very high pollution tax. Such will also cause H to be the only country that produces consumption good in
equilibrium.

                                                         42
1       1            1         1
2     (-SR )
               -    (SR )
                            +- 2 . Since F and R are symmetric, SF = -SR .

         As country H is endowed with 1 unit of heavy material in each period, it has no incentive to

save and runs a balanced overall trade in each period: c1H = c2H = 1. The pollution generated
                                                1            1
in each period is x1H = x2H = b(1 +            (SF )
                                                       +    (SR )
                                                                  ),   where each component in the bracket

denotes heavy material used in production from a country.

         Therefore, the aggregate welfare for country H, ln c1H + ln c2H - x1H - x2H , equals to


                                           1      1                1      1
                   W elf are = -2b 1 +         +       = -2b 1 +       +        ,
                                          (SF )  (SR )            (SF )  (-SF )


where the second equality uses the fact that SF = -SR .

         We consider some thought experiments by altering the value of . This produces some

perturbations of bilateral imbalance patterns between H against F or R while holding the

overall current account pattern of H constant.33 Note, in the absence of disutility of pollution

(b = 0), the welfare of country H does not depend on . In other words, bilateral trade

imbalance patterns do not matter. This is the same as the standard open-economy models.

In addition, suppose b > 0 but the shipping cost is exogenous:  (SF ) =  (-SF ) = ¯. The

aggregate welfare does not depend on  either. This too is the same as the standard open-

economy models.

         In general, with b > 0 and endogenous shipping costs, when  changes, the aggregate welfare

will change as well. When SF increases (so that bilateral imbalances are more dispersed),

it is cheaper to import heavy material from country F (since  (SF ) decreases), but more

expensive to import heavy material from country R (since  (SR ) increases). If the first channel

dominates, we can see that a large SF leads to more heavy goods import and more pollution.
    33
    For instance, if  = 0.5, then all countries run a balanced trade in each period. However, when  = 0,
country F only has endowment in the second period, and has a strong incentive to borrow in the first period.
While country R only has endowment in the first period, and exhibits a strong incentive to save in the first
period.




                                                       43
In this case, the welfare will be lower.34

      For concreteness, let us assume that ln  (S ) = ln ¯ - v ln(1 + S ), when S > 0, and

ln  (S ) = ln ¯ + v ln(1 - S ) if S < 0. v measures the elasticity of trade cost with respect

to the trade imbalance, and ¯ is the exogenous part of trade cost. We choose the values of

¯, v and b the same as in Table 14. Varying  from 0 to 0.5, Table 9 reports country H's

bilateral imbalance, aggregate current account and welfare in different scenarios. In the first

row,  = 0.5. This is the case when country H has a balanced trade with both F and R

(SF = SR = 0). We normalize the welfare to be 100 in this case.

      In the second and third rows,  = 0.25 and 0 respectively. H's surplus (deficit) against F

(R) increases to 0.18 and 0.37, while the aggregate current account is always 0. In these two

cases, the aggregate welfare decreases to 84.56 and 54.89, respectively. In other words, a more

dispersed bilateral imbalance generates lower welfare.

      We report the case of v = 0, i.e., no endogenous shipping cost response to the bilateral

trade imbalances, in rows 4-6. Note that the bilateral imbalances still become more dispersed

when  goes from 0.5, to 0.25, and to 0. However, without any change in the unit shipping cost,

imports of heavy material and the total amount of pollution in country H do not change. This

means that the welfare level stays constant at the level 100. This confirms that an endogenous

shipping cost is a necessary condition for bilateral imbalances to have a welfare effect.

      We next report the case of b = 0 in the last three rows. Since there is no disutility of

pollution, the welfare level is unsurprisingly higher than all previous rows. The important

result is that the welfare level is also invariant to bilateral imbalance patterns since a change

in the pollution level without a change in total consumption does not alter the welfare level.

This confirms that disutility of pollution is another necessary condition for bilateral imbalances

to have a welfare effect.
 34                         (SF )          (-SF )                      dW elf are
      More precisely, if    2 (SF )   <    2 (-SF ) ,   we then have     dSF        < 0.




                                                                   44
    To summarize, the example is constructed in such a way that country H always has a

balanced overall current account in each period, but the patterns of its bilateral imbalances

depends on the values of . In the absence of either disutlity of pollution or endogenous

adjustment of shipping costs, country H's welfare does not depend on bilateral imbalance

patterns. However, with both pollution externality and endogenous shipping costs, bilateral

imbalances matter for the welfare.



5     Conclusion

This paper provides a new channel for a trade imbalance to have welfare consequences. In

particular, with endogenous responses of the unit shipping cost to the size of trade imbalance,

and the weak pollution control, a greater trade imbalance leads to a greater welfare loss.

    The first ingredient of our theory is that shipping costs and the composition of a country's

imports respond to the size of trade imbalance. We find strong empirical evidence that trade-

surplus countries import more heavy goods, including scrap metals and other industrial waste.

With nearly two million observations, we show robust evidence that the composition of trade

is affected by shipping costs, and shipping costs in turn are affected by the trade imbalance.

    A novel implication of the theory is that bilateral trade balances matter for a country's

welfare. In particular, a greater bilateral surplus against a partner country, even if it is offset

by a greater deficit against the rest of the world, produces a worse welfare.

    This theory helps explain why China imports so much scraps and industrial waste: China

being a country with a very large trade surplus while being a very large importer of scraps

and waste (and other heavy goods) is not a coincidence. Because the recycling of scraps and

waste (to produce intermediate inputs) generates pollution, the mechanism we study suggests

a concrete channel for a trade surplus to generate a welfare loss, especially in countries with

low environmental standards or weak enforcement. In other words, even in the absence of

                                                45
distortions in savings or investment, a trade surplus can reduce welfare.

   With the help of a quantitative model, we perform counterfactual policy experiments. We

find that a ban on imports of scraps, a policy that China has implemented since 2018, is able

to increase welfare - by raising the cost of pollution indirectly. However, the model also makes

clear that such a policy is inferior to a direct increase in a pollution tax. A ban on imports

of scraps is not as effective, partly because domestic scraps and imported (non-scrap) heavy

material are substitutes for foreign scraps.



References

J. E. Anderson and E. Van Wincoop. Trade costs. Journal of Economic literature, 42(3):

  691­751, 2004.


P. Bajari, J. C. Fruehwirth, C. Timmins, et al. A rational expectations approach to hedonic

  price regressions with time-varying unobserved product attributes: The price of pollution.

  American Economic Review, 102(5):1898­1926, 2012.


P. Bayer, R. McMillan, A. Murphy, and C. Timmins. A dynamic model of demand for houses

  and neighborhoods. Econometrica, 84(3):893­942, 2016.


K. Behrens and P. M. Picard. Transportation, freight rates, and economic geography. Journal

  of International Economics, 85(2):280­291, 2011.


M. Bombardini and B. Li. Trade, pollution and mortality in China. Technical report, National

  Bureau of economic research, 2016.


G. Brancaccio, M. Kalouptsidi, and T. Papageorgiou. Geography, transportation and endoge-

  nous trade costs. Econometrica, Forthcoming, 2019.




                                               46
L. Brandt, J. Van Biesebroeck, L. Wang, and Y. Zhang. WTO accession and performance of

  chinese manufacturing firms. American Economic Review, 107(9):2784­2820, 2017.


C. Broda and D. E. Weinstein. Globalization and the gains from variety. The Quarterly journal

  of economics, 121(2):541­585, 2006.


D. Burtraw and S. J. Szambelan. US emissions trading markets for SO2 and NOx. Permit

  Trading in Different Applications, pages 15­45, 2009.


G. F. De Oliveira. Determinants of european freight rates: The role of market power and trade

  imbalance. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review, 62:23­33,

  2014.


A. De Palma, R. Lindsey, E. Quinet, and R. Vickerman. A handbook of transport economics.

  Edward Elgar Publishing, 2011.


R. Dekle, J. Eaton, and S. Kortum. Unbalanced trade. The American Economic Review, 97

  (2):351­355, 2007.


S. Djankov, C. Freund, and C. S. Pham. Trading on time. The Review of Economics and

  Statistics, 92(1):166­173, 2010.


P. Epifani and G. Gancia. Global imbalances revisited: The transfer problem and transport

  costs in monopolistic competition. Journal of Journal of International Economics, 108(5):

  99­116, 2017.


F. Facchini. What are the determinants of public spending? an overview of the literature.

  Atlantic Economic Journal, 46(4):419­439, 2018.


J. A. Frankel. Environmental effects of international trade. Working Paper, 2009.




                                             47
F. Friedt and W. W. Wilson. Trade, transportation and trade imbalances: An empirical

  examination of international markets and backhauls. Working Paper, 2015.


G. Gaulier, D. Mirza, S. Turban, and S. Zignago. International transportation costs around

  the world: A new CIF/FOB rates dataset. CEPII. March, pages 304­24, 2008.


D. Hummels and A. Skiba. Shipping the good apples out? an empirical confirmation of the

  Alchian-Allen conjecture. Journal of Political Economy, 112(6):1384­1402, 2004.


D. L. Hummels and G. Schaur. Time as a trade barrier. The American Economic Review, 103

  (7):2935­2959, 2013.


J. Ishikawa and N. Tarui. Backfiring with backhaul problems: Trade and industrial policies

  with endogenous transport costs. Journal of International Economics, 111:81­98, 2018.


O. Jonkeren, E. Demirel, J. van Ommeren, and P. Rietveld. Endogenous transport prices and

  trade imbalances. Journal of Economic Geography, 11(3):509­527, 2010.


D. Kellenberg. Consumer waste, backhauling, and pollution havens. Journal of Applied Eco-

  nomics, 13(2):283­304, 2010.


D. Kellenberg. Trading wastes. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 64(1):

  68­87, 2012.


D. K. Kellenberg. An empirical investigation of the pollution haven effect with strategic

  environment and trade policy. Journal of international economics, 78(2):242­255, 2009.


J. Lan, M. Kakinaka, and X. Huang. Foreign direct investment, human capital and environ-

  mental pollution in China. Environmental and Resource Economics, 51(2):255­275, 2012.


A. Lashkaripour. Worth its weight in gold: Product weight, international shipping and patterns

  of trade. Working Paper, 2015.

                                             48
Y. Li and K. Chen. A review of air pollution control policy development and effectiveness in

  china. Energy Management for Sustainable Development, page 1, 2018.


L. Rushton. Health hazards and waste management. British medical bulletin, 68(1):183­197,

  2003.


H. Sieg, V. K. Smith, H. S. Banzhaf, and R. Walsh. Estimating the general equilibrium benefits

  of large changes in spatially delineated public goods. International Economic Review, 45(4):

  1047­1077, 2004.


V. K. Smith and J.-C. Huang. Can markets value air quality? a meta-analysis of hedonic

  property value models. Journal of political economy, 103(1):209­227, 1995.


W. F. Wong. The round trip effect: Endogenous transport costs and international trade.

  Working Paper, 2019.




Tables and Figures

            Table 1: Top and Bottom 5 Goods in Terms of Weight-to-Value Ratio


               Highest Weight-to-Value Ratio           Lowest Weight-to-Value Ratio

               Bitumen and asphalt              Diamond
               Limestone                        Precious metal
               Wasted granulated slag from iron Gold
               Ceramic building bricks          Halogenated derivatives
               Scrap glass                      Watch

NOTE: This table shows the top and bottom 5 goods in terms of the weight-to-value ratio, estimated from
transaction-level data on Colombian imports, averaged over 2007-2013.




                                                  49
Table 2: Bilateral Trade Imbalance and Shipping Costs across International Shipping Routes


                                                         (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)
                                                       ln ndt       ln ndt        ln ndt       ln ndt

         ln(Imbalancendt )                             -0.019 -0.177***           -0.028     -0.191***
                                                      (0.022)  (0.062)           (0.022)      (0.063)
         ln(Imbalancendt ) × Pervasive-route                                    -0.148**     -0.310***
                                                                                 (0.073)      (0.102)

         Country-pair FE                                  Y            Y            Y             Y
         Destination-year FE                              Y            Y            Y             Y
         Origin-year FE                                   Y            Y            Y             Y
         IV                                                            Y                          Y

         Obs.                                           728          728           728           728
         R-squared                                      0.93         0.93          0.93          0.93

Notes: This table shows the estimation results of equation (2). ndt is the shipping cost from an origin country
(n) to a destination country (d) in year t. Imbalancendt is the bilateral trade imbalance between a country-pair
(n and d) in a year, measured by the total export of d to n divided by the total import of d from n. Pervasive
route=1 if the destination country runs trade surplus against 2/3 of its trade partners and the origin country
runs a trade deficit against 2/3 of its trade partners. We use the log value of equation (3) for an instrumental
variable for log Imbalancendt . The first-stage F-statistics are around 69 and 34 in columns 2 and 4, respectively.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                        50
          Table 3: Shipping Cost and Heavy Goods Imports ­ International Evidence


                                       (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)
                                   ln(Impi,ndt )   ln(Impi,ndt )   ln(Impi,ndt )   ln(Impi,ndt )   ln(Impi,ndt )

 ln ndt                             -0.711***       -0.714***
                                     (0.017)         (0.017)
                wi
 ln ndt × ln    pi
                                    -0.062***       -0.051***        -0.06***
                                     (0.007)         (0.007)          (0.007)
                wi
 ln ndt × ln    pi
                     × Persist                      -0.017***
                                                     (0.001)
                            wi
 ln(Imbalancendt ) × ln     pi
                                                                                    0.012***         0.032*
                                                                                     (0.004)         (0.017)

 Origin-good-year FE                     Y               Y               Y               Y               Y
 Destination-good-year FE                Y               Y               Y               Y               Y
 Destination-origin-year FE                                              Y               Y               Y
 IV                                                                                                      Y

 Obs.                               1,836,440       1,836,440       1,836,440       1,976,537       1,976,537
 R-squared                             0.80            0.80            0.83            0.83            0.83

Notes: This table shows the estimation results of equation (4). Impi,ndt is the import of good i from an origin
country (n) to a destination country (d) in year t. ndt is the shipping cost from an origin country (n) to
a destination country (d) in year t. Imbalancendt is the bilateral trade imbalance between a country pair (n
and d) in year t, measured by the total export of d to n divided by the total import of d from n. "wi /pi " is
the weigh-to-value ratio of good i from the Colombian data. "Persist" is the dummy variable indicating one
partner within a pair (n and d) runs a persistent trade surplus to the other partner. In column 5, we use
the log value of equation (3) for an instrumental variable for log Imbalancendt . The first-stage F-statistics are
around 38 in column 5. Standard errors are clustered at the goods, destination, and origin level. *** p<0.01,
** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                       51
            Table 4: Trade Imbalance and Import Composition across Chinese Ports


                                                          (1)                 (2)
                                                     ln(Importi,nmt )    ln(Importi,nmt )

                  ln(Imbalancenmt )                       0.065***            0.003*
                                                           (0.002)            (0.001)
                                              wi
                  ln(Imbalancenmt ) × ln      pi
                                                          0.0095***         0.0064***
                                                           (0.001)           (0.001)

                  Port-good-year FE                          Y                   Y
                  Origin-good-year FE                        Y                   Y
                  Port-origin FE                                                 Y

                  Obs.                                    4,917,896          4,917,336
                  R-squared                                  0.79               0.81

Notes: This table shows the estimation results of equation (5). Importi,nmt is the import of good i from an
origin country (n) to a Chinese port (m) in year t. Imbalancenmt is the bilateral trade imbalance between an
origin (n)-port (m) pair in year t, measured by the total export of m to n divided by the total import of m
from n. "wi /pi " is the weigh-to-value ratio of good i from the Colombian data. Standard errors are clustered
at goods, origin level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                     52
Table 5: Correlations between Output Pollution Intensities and Input Weight/Value Ratio
across Chinese Industries


                 weight-per-value for inputs                 ln(SO2)                       ln(NO2)

    ln(SO2)                 0.219***
                             (0.061)
    ln(NO2)                  0.189*                          0.980***
                             (0.106)                          (0.000)
    ln(TSP)                  0.194*                          0.929***                      0.944***
                             (0.098)                          (0.000)                       (0.000)

Notes: This table shows the correlations between output pollution intensities and input weight-per-value across
Chinese industries. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




       Table 6: Trade Imbalance and the Relative Expansion of the Polluting Industries


                                         (1)                (2)               (3)               (4)
                                     ln(Outputi,t )     ln(Outputi,t )    ln(Outputi,t )    ln(Outputi,t )

    ln(Imbalancet )×ln(SO2)i            0.306***            0.411***         0.177**           0.261***
                                         (0.051)             (0.073)         (0.063)            (0.073)
    ln(Imbalancet )×ln(SO2)i                                                 0.348**           0.403**
      ×Heavy-sectori                                                         (0.159)            (0.182)

    Year FE                                 Y                  Y                 Y                 Y
    Industry FE                             Y                  Y                 Y                 Y
    IV                                                         Y                                   Y

    Obs.                                  5,917              5,917            5,917              5,917
    R-square                               0.98               0.98             0.98               0.98

Notes: This table shows the estimation results of equation (6). The dependent variable, Outputit is domestic
output of industry i in year t. Imbalancet = Chinese exports/Chinese imports in year t. Heavy-sectori is the
dummy variable defined in section 3.2. In columns 2 and 4, the government expenditure as a share of GDP for
U.S, Japan and South Korea (three major trading partners of China) are used as instrumental variables for log
of China's trade imbalancet . The first-stage F-statistics are around 17 and 15 in columns 2 and 4, respectively.
Standard errors are clustered at year levels. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                       53
                       Table 7: Welfare Effect of Endogenous Shipping Cost


                                                         (1)                     (2)
                                                       Baseline          Exog. shipping cost

               Pollution                                   100                    95.42
               Scrap import                                100                    96.10
               Heavy goods import                          100                    96.10
               Heavy goods+scrap export                    100                   111.08
               Wage                                        100                    96.10
               Surplus/GDP (%)                             5.04                   5.75
               Utility change from c (%)                    0                     0.54
               Utility change (%)                           0                     2.38

Notes: This table presents the welfare effect of the endogenous shipping cost. In column 1, the baseline results
are shown where pollution, scrap imports/exports, (non-scrap) heavy material imports/export, and wage are
all normalized to be 100. In column 2, we assume the shipping cost does not respond to the trade imbalance
(v = 0).




                                                      54
              Table 8: Welfare Comparisons of Counterfactual Policy Experiments


                                         (1)          (2)              (3)         (4)              (5)
                                       Baseline    Ban scrap      Dif pollution   High            Optimal
                                                    imports        Intensity    elasticity          tax

   Pollution                             100          98.60           104.01           99.37         0.01
   Scrap import                          100             0                0              0           0.02
   Heavy goods import                    100          99.22            99.25           99.66         0.02
   Heavy goods+scrap export              100         100.66           100.57          100.27       283.96
   Wage                                  100          99.22            99.25           99.66         5.76
   Surplus/GDP (%)                       5.04          4.83             4.83           4.93         -0.94
   Utility change from c (%)              0           -0.26            -0.27           -0.14        -5.54
   Utility change (%)                     0           0.30             -1.87            0.12        34.53

Notes: This table presents the model predictions for different counterfactual experiments. In column 1, the
baseline results are shown where pollution, scrap imports/exports, (non-scrap) heavy material imports/export,
and wage are all normalized to be 100. In column 2, a ban on scrap imports is imposed. In column 3, a ban on
scrap imports + low pollution intensity of recycling scraps is imposed. In column 4, a ban on scrap imports is
imposed, but the elasticity of substitution between domestic and imported scraps is increased (k = 200). In
column 5, the optimal tax on pollution is imposed.




                           Table 9: Welfare Effects of Bilateral Imbalances


              (b, v )               H's bilateral imbalance         H's overall   Welfare
                                    against F against R           current account

              b = 29.08 0.5             0               0                  0               100
              v = 0.501 0.25           0.18           -0.18                0              84.56
                          0            0.37           -0.37                0              54.89
              b = 29.08 0.5             0               0                  0               100
              v=0       0.25           0.25           -0.25                0               100
                          0            0.50           -0.50                0               100
              b=0        0.5            0               0                  0             104.78
              v = 0.501 0.25           0.18           -0.18                0             104.78
                          0            0.37           -0.37                0             104.78

Notes: This table presents the welfare effects of bilateral imbalances. The welfare level when  = 0.5, b = 29.08
and v = 0.501 is normalized to be 100.




                                                      55
              Figure 1: The Current Account Imbalance and the Trade Imbalance




NOTE: This figure shows the correlation between the current account-GDP ratio and the trade surplus-GDP
ratio across countries in 2015. The trade surplus is defined as export-import. The dashed line is the linear
fit: Trade surplus/GDP = -0.884(0.628) + 0.941 (0.098) × Current Account/GDP. The standard errors are
reported in the parenthesis.




                                                    56
Figure 2: The Weight-to-Value Ratio (kg/US$) for Industrial Waste Goods versus Other Goods
             3
             2
   Density
             1
             0




                 0                2                   4                        6                      8
                                                 Weight/Value

                                      Other Goods                     Wasted Goods



NOTE: This figure shows the density of the weight-to-value ratio. We define the waste products as HS 6-digit
product lines that contain either "scrap" or "waste" in their descriptions.




                                                    57
                                            Figure 3: The Welfare Cost of Trade Surplus



                                 4
                                                                                                 U
                                                                                                 Uc
                                 3
       (U(v=0.501)-U(v=0))*100




                                 2


                                 1


                                 0


                                 -1


                                 -2


                                 -3
                                  -0.06   -0.04      -0.02        0         0.02          0.04        0.06
                                                               S/GDP

NOTE: This figure shows the utility difference when v = 0.501 and v = 0 under different trade-surplus values.
U refers to the net utility change. Uc refers to the partial change in welfare ignoring pollution.




                                                                58
                                                   Figure 4: The Welfare Change of Banning Scrap Import



                                         0.7

                                         0.6
    (U(scrap ban)-U(scrap import))*100




                                         0.5

                                         0.4

                                         0.3

                                                                                                            U
                                         0.2
                                                                                                            Uc

                                         0.1

                                           0

                                         -0.1

                                         -0.2

                                         -0.3
                                            0.01   0.015   0.02    0.025    0.03    0.035    0.04   0.045    0.05
                                                                            eta

NOTE: This figure shows the utility change when banning the scrap import under different  values. U refers
to the net utility change. Uc refers to the partial change in welfare ignoring pollution.




                                                                           59
Online Appendix (not for publication in print)

A       Alternative Equilibrium Restriction

In our theory (section 2), we impose an equilibrium restriction whereby the total weight is

balanced for bilateral trade between two countries. In this section, we consider an alternative

equilibrium restriction: the total volume (or the number of shipping containers) is balanced

for bilateral trade between two countries.

    First, we redefine the per-unit shipping cost ci,nd as


                                            ci,nd = nd vi,nd ,


where nd is the shipping cost per container and vi,nd is the number of containers per unit of

good i. Then, the per-value trade cost is


                                                               vi,nd
                                      i,nd = ti,nd + nd                ,
                                                               pi,nd

        vi,nd
where   pi,nd
                is the number of containers per dollar.

    With the same argument in section 2, nd is decreasing in the trade surplus. Therefore, a

country that runs a trade surplus imports goods that have a high container-per-value ratio.

We can rewrite the above equation as


                                                          wi,nd vi,nd
                                   i,nd = ti,nd + nd                       ,
                                                          pi,nd wi,nd

        wi,nd                                        vi,nd
where   pi,nd
                is the weight-per-value ratio and    wi,nd
                                                               is the number of containers per unit of
                                                     vi,nd
weight. Note that although we do not observe         pi,nd
                                                           ,   if the container-per-weight ratio is similar

across goods, our main proposition that a trade surplus country tends to import more heavy


                                                   60
goods still holds.

    Under the assumption that the container-per-weight ratio is the same within a 2-digit HS

code, we re-test whether the trade-surplus country imports more heavy goods. Note we control

the destination-origin-year-2-digit HS code dummies. The results are reported in Table 10.

                     Table 10: Estimates for the Log Import Value Regressions


                                                                          (1)
                                                                      ln(Impi,ndt )

                                             wi
                             ln ndt × ln     pi
                                                                          -0.011
                                                                         (0.009)

                             Origin-good-year FE                            Y
                             Destination-good-year FE                       Y
                             Destination-origin-year-HS2 FE                 Y

                             Obs.                                       1,830,158
                             R-squared                                     0.85

Notes: This table shows the estimation results of equation (4) while additionally controlling for Destination-
origin-year-HS2 fixed effect. Impi,ndt is the import of good i from an origin country (n) to a destination
country (d) in year t. ndt is the shipping cost from an origin country (n) to a destination country (d) in year t.
Imbalancendt is the bilateral trade imbalance between a country pair (n and d) in year t, measured by the total
export of d to n divided by the total import of d from n. "wi /pi " is the weigh-to-value ratio of good i from
the Colombian data. Standard errors are clustered at the goods, destination, and origin level. *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1.


    With a finer level of fixed effect, the coefficient becomes smaller. Nevertheless, we have the

consistent result: the elasticity of the import value with respect to the shipping cost is higher

for goods with a higher weight per value.



B      The Chinese Port-Level Data

To show more about the Chinese port-level data, we plot the export and import of each port in

year 2006. Figure 5 shows the results. Notice that although we use the word port, we actually


                                                       61
mean a city in customs data. For instance, even though Xining is not a coastal city, customs

data are recorded for Xining. Because our story does not only hold for maritime trade, we

include those inland cities in the analysis. The x-axis and y-axis are the export and import in

log values, respectively.

                            Figure 5: The Exports and Imports across Chinese Ports


                                                                                             Shanghai
                                                                                          Shenzhen
               26




                                                                                                   Nanjing
                                                                                           Ningbo
                                                                                       Dalian
               24




                                                                                     Hangzhou
                                                                            Fuzhou
          ln(export)
                22




                                                 Xining
               20




                                               Guiyuan
                                                Yinchuan
                             Lhasa
               18




                                             45 degree line
               16




                       16            18            20                  22            24               26
                                                          ln(import)



NOTE: This figure shows the ln(export) and ln(import) of each Chinese port in year 2006.



   We observe a large variation in the export and import values across Chinese ports. For

example, Shanghai, the largest port in China, is 10 times larger in trading volume, than the

smallest port in terms of either imports or exports.




                                                          62
C        The Weight-per-Input Value across Industries
To construct the weight-to-value ratio of intermediate inputs for an industry, we first map
each HS6 product to an Chinese 4-digit industry (CSIC).35 We then map each CSIC code
to an input-output table industry. By combining the usage table of the 2012 Chinese input-
output table and the weight-to-value ratio from the Colombian data, we compute the average
weight-to-value ratio of each industry's input. We list all the ratios in Table 11.

           Table 11: The Weight-to-Value Ratio of Intermediate Inputs of Each Industry

 Industry Name                                                               Weight-per-input-value

 Asbestos cement products manufacturing                                               1.78

 Building ceramics manufacturing                                                      0.81

 Cement manufacturing                                                                 0.69

 Frozen food manufacturing                                                            0.69

 Compound fertilizer manufacturing                                                    0.55

 Candied production                                                                   0.49

 Steel rolling                                                                        0.43

 Daily glass products and glass packaging containers                                  0.40

 Manufacture of synthetic single (polymeric) bodies                                   0.39

 Metal furniture manufacturing                                                        0.38

 Bottle (can) drinking water manufacturing                                            0.38

 MSG manufacturing                                                                    0.37

 Wood chip processing                                                                 0.35

 Book, newspaper, publication                                                         0.34

 Other special chemical products manufacturing                                        0.34

 Beer manufacturing                                                                   0.34

 Manufacture of sealing fillers and similar products                                  0.34

 Metal kitchen utensils and tableware manufacturing                                   0.33

 Biochemical pesticides and microbial pesticide manufacturing                         0.33

 Machine paper and cardboard manufacturing                                            0.32


 35
      The concordance table could be found from Brandt et al. (2017).


                                                       63
Feed processing                                                                    0.32

Sugar production                                                                   0.32

Nylon fiber manufacturing                                                          0.31

Oral cleaning products manufacturing                                               0.31

Non-edible vegetable oil processing                                                0.31

Ferroalloy smelting                                                                0.30

Ironmaking                                                                         0.29

Inorganic alkali manufacturing                                                     0.28

Other non-metal processing equipment manufacturing                                 0.27

Metal shipbuilding                                                                 0.26

Plastic artificial leather, synthetic leather manufacturing                        0.26

Vegetable, fruit and nut processing                                                0.25

Manufacture of other non-metallic mineral products                                 0.23

Electric light source manufacturing                                                0.23

Battery manufacturing                                                              0.23

Hydraulic and pneumatic power machinery and component manufacturing                0.22

Mica product manufacturing                                                         0.22

Lifting transport equipment manufacturing                                          0.22

Other rubber products manufacturing                                                0.21

Other sporting goods manufacturing                                                 0.21

Insulation products manufacturing                                                  0.21

Nuclear radiation processing                                                       0.21

Gear, transmission and drive component manufacturing                               0.20

Machine tool accessories manufacturing                                             0.20

Manufacturing of special equipment for agricultural and sideline food processing   0.20

Gardening, furnishings and other ceramic products manufacturing                    0.20

Liquid milk and dairy products manufacturing                                       0.20

Construction machinery manufacturing                                               0.19

Auto parts and accessories manufacturing                                           0.19

Internal combustion engine and accessories manufacturing                           0.19



                                                      64
Micromotors and other motor manufacturing                                           0.19

Camera and equipment manufacturing                                                  0.19

Industrial and mining rail vehicle manufacturing                                    0.18

Other power transmission and distribution and control equipment manufacturing       0.18

Agriculture, forestry, animal husbandry and fishing machinery parts manufacturing   0.17

Household refrigeration electric appliance manufacturing                            0.17

Precious metal calendering                                                          0.16

Motorcycle manufacturing                                                            0.16

Modified car manufacturing                                                          0.15

Manufacture of automobiles and other counting instruments                           0.15

Silk knitwear and woven fabric manufacturing                                        0.15

Leather processing                                                                  0.15

Manufacture of other textile products                                               0.14

Leather shoes manufacturing                                                         0.14

Aluminum smelting                                                                   0.13

Chemical drug manufacturing                                                         0.13

Cap                                                                                 0.12

Printed circuit board manufacturing                                                 0.12

Cotton, chemical fiber textile processing                                           0.11

Grain grinding                                                                      0.11

Other electronic equipment manufacturing                                            0.10

Aquatic feed manufacturing                                                          0.10

Silk screen dyeing and finishing                                                    0.09

Livestock and poultry slaughter                                                     0.09

Communication terminal equipment manufacturing                                      0.09

Home audio equipment manufacturing                                                  0.09

Wool textile                                                                        0.08

Application of TV equipment and other radio equipment manufacturing                 0.08

Electronic computer manufacturing                                                   0.07

Coking                                                                              0.07



                                                   65
 Nuclear fuel processing                                                                       0.07

 Cigarette manufacturing                                                                       0.07




D         Trade Surplus and Environmental Regulation

We document that the strength of environmental regulation is not related to a country's trade

surplus nor to the heaviness of its imports.

       We first use the environmental regulation stringency index (ERS) collected by OECD

Statistics. The ERS is a country-specific and internationally comparable measure of the strin-

gency of environmental policy. Stringency is defined as the degree to which environmental

policies place an explicit or implicit tax on polluting or environmentally harmful behavior.

The index ranges from 0 (not stringent) to 6 (highest degree of stringency). The index covers

28 OECD and 6 BRIICS countries. The index is based on the degree of stringency of 14

environmental policy instruments, primarily related to climate and air pollution. OECD Stat

also releases in stringency of all 14 of these policy instruments as well.36 Table 12 lists all

countries in the ERS index. The left panel presents indexes of BRIICKS and the right panel

presents indexes of other OECD countries. Note that developing countries often run a large

trade surplus against developed countries. The ERS is significantly lower in BRIICKS.

       In Table 13, we regress different measures of environmental regulation indexes on heavy-

goods imports and the trade imbalance, including the ERS index, environmental tax index,

and the regulation standard index.37 We also control for the countries' GDP-per-capita level,

corruption level, and government efficiency.38 In all specifications, we do not find a significant
  36
      The BRIICS denote Brazil, Russia, India, Indonesia, and China. The details of the data can be found at
https://stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=EPS.
   37
      We define the heavy goods as the goods whose weight-to-value ratio is above the 90th percentile among
all HS6 goods.
   38
      The corruption index and regulation quality index are collected from the World Bank Governance Indica-
tor dataset. The data can be found at http://databank.worldbank.org/data/reports.aspx?source=worldwide-
governance-indicators.



                                                    66
correlation between heavy-goods imports (or trade imbalance) and environmental regulation.

                                       Table 12: ERS Index


                           BRIICKS           ERS          OECD           ERS

                            Brazil           0.42          Turkey        0.88
                          Indonesia          0.44            USA         1.05
                        South Africa         0.44     Slovak Republic    1.10
                            India            0.60        Australia       1.17
                      Russian Federation     0.65          Poland        1.27
                            China            0.85         Norway         1.42
                                                           Ireland       1.46
                                                             Italy       1.49
                                                          Canada         1.58
                                                      Czech Republic     1.63
                                                        Switzerland      1.69
                                                           Greece        1.73
                                                      United Kingdom     1.73
                                                            Japan        1.90
                                                        Netherlands      1.90
                                                          Belgium        1.98
                                                           France        2.13
                                                          Portugal       2.13
                                                          Hungary        2.33
                                                        Korea, Rep.      2.33
                                                          Austria        2.40
                                                          Finland        2.48
                                                         Denmark         2.59
                                                         Germany         2.67
                                                            Spain        2.75
                                                          Sweden         2.75

Notes: This table lists the environmental-regulation-stringency index of OECD countries and 6 BRIICKS
countries in in 2004. High index denotes high regulation.




                                                 67
        Table 13: Estimates for Regulation and Heavy-Goods Import across Countries


                                                    (1)          (2)              (3)
                                                   ERS       Environment       Regulation
                                                                 tax           Standard

                 ln(Heavy-goods Import)            0.022          0.163            0.087
                                                 (0.072)        (0.267)          (0.070)
                 ln(Imbalance)                    -0.697         -1.646           -0.926
                                                 (0.654)        (2.417)          (0.669)
                 ln(GDP)                          -0.430         -5.113         5.251***
                                                 (1.224)        (4.526)          (1.211)
                 Corruption                     -0.745**         -1.242           -0.135
                                                 (0.322)        (1.164)          (0.319)
                 Regulation Quality                0.231         -0.931          0.534**
                                                 (0.265)        (0.977)          (0.261)

                 Country FE                         Y               Y               Y
                 Year FE                            Y               Y               Y

                 Obs.                               89             92               89
                 R-squared                         0.94           0.85             0.96

Notes: This table shows the estimation results for environmental regulation. We use three measures of environ-
mental regulation: (1) the EPS index, (2) environmental tax index, and (3) the pollution regulation standard
index. Heavy goods are those whose weight-to-value ratio is above the 90th percentiles among all HS6 goods.
Imbalance is a country's export divided by the country's import. GDP refers to a country's GDP per capita.
The measure for corruption and regulation quality is from World Bank. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                     68
E       Calibration Details

All the following variables are meant to capture outcomes in the first period. For corresponding

data, we use Chinese data in 2012. We normalize the 2012 wage to be 1, which implies that

the value of one unit in our model is around 24,000 RMB or 3,500 USD. Table 14 summarizes

all the parameters and moments we target.

                                 Table 14: Calibration Result


    Parameters   Value   Moments                                                Model   Data

                 0.497   Surplus/GDP                                             0.05   0.05
                 0.659   light import/total expenditure                         0.092   0.092
                 0.461   labor share in polluting industry                       0.52    0.52
                 0.019   scrap import/total expenditure                         0.005   0.005
                 0.333   heavy import/total expenditure                         0.123   0.123
    M            0.743   light export/total expenditure                          0.13    0.13
    H            0.325   heavy export/total expenditure                         0.117   0.117
                 0.032   scrap export/total expenditure                            0      0
    b            29.08   Total pollutants emission (ton)/total expenditure      10.75   10.75
                 0.340   SO2 ton trade price                                    0.46    0.46
    v            0.501   Column 4 of table 2                                       -       -



    The model fits the data well. For instance, the model predicts the wage per capita is around

0.98, whereas the corresponding number in the data is 1.06.

    In the benchmark calibration, we set ¯ = 1.2. As an alternative specification, we re-
                                                    CIF
calibrate our model with ¯ = 1.05 (so that ¯-1 =    FOB
                                                        ).   The calibration strategy is the same

as the benchmark model. With the new calibration values, we replicate Table 7. Table 15

shows the results. Compared to Table 7, the results are quite robust.




                                               69
             Table 15: Welfare Effect of Endogenous Shipping Cost When ¯ = 1.05


                                                        (1)               (2)
                                                      Baseline    Exog. shipping cost

                   Pollution                              100              95.41
                   Scrap import                           100              96.09
                   Heavy import                           100              96.09
                   Heavy goods+scrap export               100             111.12
                   Wage                                   100              96.09
                   Surplus/GDP (%)                        5.04              5.78
                   Utility change from c (%)               0               0.54
                   Utility change (%)                      0               2.38

Notes: This table presents the welfare effect of the endogenous shipping cost when    ¯ = 1.05. In column 1,
the baseline results are shown, where pollution, scrap imports, and (non-scrap) heavy material imports are all
normalized to be 100. In column 2, we assume the shipping cost does not respond to a trade imbalance (v = 0).




                                                     70
