                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       POST-9/11 WAR DEPLOYMENTS INCREASED CRIME AMONG VETERANS

                                         Resul Cesur
                                        Joseph J. Sabia
                                          Erdal Tekin

                                      Working Paper 27279
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27279


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2020




Dr. Cesur acknowledges research support from the School of Business at the University of
Connecticut. Dr. Sabia acknowledges support from the Center for Health Economics and Policy
Studies at San Diego State University, including grant funding received from the Charles Koch
Foundation and the Troesh Family Foundation. We thank Samuel Safford, Erich Kevari, and
Isaac Baumann for helpful research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Resul Cesur, Joseph J. Sabia, and Erdal Tekin. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Post-9/11 War Deployments Increased Crime among Veterans
Resul Cesur, Joseph J. Sabia, and Erdal Tekin
NBER Working Paper No. 27279
May 2020
JEL No. H56,K14

                                         ABSTRACT

Several high-profile news stories have linked post-September 11 (9/11) combat service to violent
crime among veterans. Nevertheless, there is scant causal evidence for this claim. We exploit the
administrative procedures by which U.S. Armed Forces senior commanders conditionally
randomly assign active duty servicemen to overseas deployments to estimate the causal impact of
modern warfare on crime. Using data from two national surveys and a unified framework, we
find consistent evidence that post-9/11 combat service substantially increased the probability of
crime commission among veterans. Combat increases the likelihood of property and violent
crime, arrest, gang membership, trouble with police, and punishment under the Uniform Code of
Military Justice. Back-of-the-envelope calculations suggest that post-9/11 combat exposure
generated approximately $26.7 billion in additional crime costs. Finally, we document
descriptive evidence that Traumatic Brain Injury and Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD)
may be important mechanisms to explain post-9/11 combat-induced increases in crime.

Resul Cesur                                     Erdal Tekin
University of Connecticut                       School of Public Affairs
School of Business                              American University
2100 Hillside Road                              4400 Massachusetts Avenue NW
Storrs, CT 06269                                Washington, DC 20016-8070
and IZA                                         and IZA
and also NBER                                   and also NBER
cesur@uconn.edu                                 tekin@american.edu

Joseph J. Sabia
San Diego State University
Department of Economics
Center for Health Economics
& Policy Studies
5500 Campanile Drive
San Diego, CA 92182
and IZA & ESSPRI
jsabia@sdsu.edu
           "[P]eople in war had so inured themselves to corrupt and wicked manners had taken a
          delight and pleasure in robbing and stealing, that through manslaughter they had gathered
          boldness to mischief, that their laws were held in contempt, and nothing set by or
          regarded."
                                                                  - Sir Thomas Moore, Utopia, 1516

          "The [unit's] soldiers who survived all exhibited signs of posttraumatic stress disorder and
          other psychological conditions. Twelve of them have been arrested for murder or attempted
          murder."

                                                            - U.S. Supreme Court Justice Sonia Sotomayor,
                                                                              Lockhart v. Alabama, 2015


1. Introduction

          Approximately 181,500 veterans are incarcerated in the United States, representing 8
percent of the prison and jail populations (Bronson et al. 2015). Many are veterans of wars
waged in the Global War on Terrorism (GWOT), launched in the wake of the September 11,
2001 attacks on the United States. Thirteen percent of currently incarcerated veterans served in
the Afghanistan or Iraq conflicts and approximately 45,000 incarcerated veterans were exposed
to combat during their war deployments. While the incarceration rate for veterans is nearly 10
percent lower than for civilians (855 per 100,000 veterans compared to 986 per 100,000 U.S.
civilians), a far greater share of incarcerated veterans has been sentenced for violent offenses (64
percent versus 48 percent) (Bronson et al. 2015). Surveys of post-9/11 veterans suggest that
approximately one-third have exhibited non-job-related physical aggression and a further 11
percent engaged in "severe or lethal violence" (Elbogen et al. 2012).
          High-profile incidents of violence committed by post-9/11 veterans, including aggravated
assaults (Simkins 2018) and mass shootings (Keneally 2018), have permeated the national news
media. The link between modern warfare and violence has been tied to historically high rates of
Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD), Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI), and substance abuse
among combat veterans deployed during GWOT (Tanielian and Jaycox 2008; Cesur et al.
2019).1




1
  See Elboge (2012), MacManus et al. (2013), and Cesur and Sabia (2016) for a discussion of the link between
"invisible wounds of war" and subsequent violence.

                                                        1
         Isolating the causal effect of modern war service on crime is a challenging task due to
endogenous selection into the military. Prior studies of the effect of U.S. military service on
crime have used draft lottery assignment to generate exogenous variation in wartime service
(Rohlfs 2010; Lindo and Stroeker 2014). However, the abolition of the U.S. draft lottery in
January 1973, followed by a transition to all-volunteer Armed Forces (AVFs), necessitates an
alternative identification strategy. Moreover, from a policy perspective, in the absence of a return
to the draft, a more relevant comparison group may be necessary to evaluate the crime costs of
waging of modern warfare.
         There are a number of reasons why the effect of modern warfare on crime may differ
from prior draft-era conflicts. First, the marginal fighter has changed in ways that could
exacerbate or dampen the effects of war service on crime (Sabia and Skimmyhorn 2019). AVFs
are drawn from less socially connected and more disadvantaged populations than conscripted
forces (Elder et al. 2010; Laich and Wilkerson 2017), traits that may generate larger adverse
effects of war service. On the other hand, if volunteers are better matched to job duties than
conscripted civilians, they may face lower private costs of fighting a war, generating smaller
impacts on crime. Moreover, there is evidence that those who selected into combat occupations
during the Afghanistan and Iraq wars were more likely to be drawn from white and higher-
income neighborhoods (Carter et al. 2017), factors that could be protective, and therefore mute
crime effects.
         In addition, the nature of modern warfare itself has changed in ways that could alter the
effect of war service on crime. First, modern military training techniques, which include more
effective and depersonalized killing strategies such as unmanned drones, may more easily enable
servicemembers to overcome their resistance to kill other human beings (Grossman 2009). 2



2
  For example, while those trained to fight previous wars such as the Second World War did shoot at bullseye
targets, in more recent times the training of military personnel shifted to use of more realistic targets such as a photo
of a human being or silhouette, or even use of a video simulator (Grossman 2009). According to the British
Broadcasting Company (BBC):

          "[Military training] methods are perfected, increasingly directed to reducing inhibitions. This is one of the
         reasons why simulation systems are in use in many countries today, and the soldiers themselves are the
         targets. The soldier, his weapon, the vehicles - as much as possible, is electronically networked. This
         creates a pseudo-realistic situation - the soldiers shoot straight at their comrades, who are acting as
         `enemies.' The aim is desensitization with a view to future reality." (BBC 2015,
         https://www.bbc.com/news/magazine-30573936.


                                                            2
Hence, modern combat training may more easily condition post-9/11 veterans to engage in
violent behavior both while in war theatre and their post-separation lives.
        Second, post-9/11 military engagements in Iraq and Afghanistan often took the form of
"asymmetric warfare" in which enemies of vastly inferior military strength employed remotely
detonated improvised explosive devices (IEDs), roadside bombs, and mines (Congressional
Research Service 2007; Wallace 2009; Thornton 2007; Wilson 2007; Buffaloe 2006) against
U.S. and allied forces. While casualty rates in these modern conflicts were substantially lower
than in draft-era conflicts (Sabia and Skimmyhorn 2019), the nature of injuries among those who
have survived asymmetric warfare changed significantly. 3 In particular, TBI became the
signature injury of GWOT (McKee and Robinson 2014; Hoge et al. 2008; Okie 2005), affecting
over 17 percent of post-9/11 veterans (Lindquist et al. 2011). TBI has been linked to substantial
declines in cognitive skills and social interactions (Lash 2015; National Research Council 2008;
Zoroya 2007), factors that may exacerbate the risk of crime (Elbogen et al. 2012; Williams et al.
2018). Furthermore, nearly 20 percent of post-9/11 veterans suffered "invisible wounds of war"
(Tanielian and Jaycox 2008; Hoge et al. 2004), which has been linked to increased hostility
(Jakupcak et al. 2007) and violence (Orcutt et al. 2003; Taft et al. 2005; Cesur and Sabia 2016)
among veterans (Sreenivasan et al. 2013).4
        Third, in part due to the heavy psychological toll that modern warfare has taken on
veterans, there is strong evidence that post-9/11 combat deployments are linked to substance use
disorders, including heavy episodic alcohol use (Seal et al. 2011; Wilk et al. 2010; Teeters et al.
2017; Cesur et al. 2017) and opioid addiction (Cesur et al. 2019). Accordingly, combat-induced
addiction may generate more property crime for income-generating purposes, as well as more
violent crime through addiction-induced reductions in inhibitions or increases in discount rates.
        Fourth, modern warfare has had a more negative effect on veterans' schooling and labor
market outcomes than prior conflicts. There is evidence to indicate that draft exposure in prior
conflicts increased veterans' educational attainment (Lemieux and Card 2001; Angrist 1993;
Stanley 2003; Barr 2015), driven by the availability of generous schooling benefits under the GI
Bill. In contrast, post-9/11 combat deployments and modern warfare had negative effects on


3
  Advances in military medicine, evacuation techniques, and body armor have resulted in a casualty rate for GWOT-
era service that is 70 percent lower than in draft-era wars (Fischer 2015; Fazal 2014; Stiglitz and Bilmes 2008;
Physicians for Social Responsibility 2006).
4
  See Glenn et al. (2002), Jakupcak et al. (2007), and Gartner and Kennedy (2018) for additional evidence.

                                                       3
education, particularly for those exposed to casualties among members of their units, and
employment among separating veterans (Sabia and Skimmyhorn 2019). These declines in
schooling and labor force attachment may generate larger increases in crime (Lin 2008; Fone et
al. 2019; Lochner and Moretti 2004; Machin et al. 2011) than was seen from prior wars. 5
        Finally, modern veterans' benefits programs could differently affect combat veterans'
propensity for crime. Large entitlement benefits programs provided by the Department of
Veteran Affairs (VA) to post-9/11 veterans -- including the Veterans Disability Compensation
(VDC) program, Unemployment Compensation for Ex-Servicemembers (UCX), the Post-9/11
GI Bill, and Transition Assistance Programs (TAPs) -- may reduce the propensity to engage in
income-generating illegal activities by providing a more generous social safety net. 6 On the other
hand, unintended consequences of many modern veterans' entitlements programs, such as work
disincentives generated by the Veterans Disability Compensation program (VDC) (Angrist et al.
2010; Autor et al. 2010, 2016), could increase veteran idleness and reduce their social
connectedness (Gade et al. 2013), potentially resulting in more crime. In summary, the impact of
post-9/11 combat on crime is, a priori, ambiguous, and remains an empirical question.
        This study provides new evidence on the impact of modern warfare on crime among
veterans. We exploit the administrative procedures by which senior commanders assign active-
duty servicemembers to overseas deployments to estimate the causal impact of post-9/11 combat
deployments on crime. Because U.S. Armed Forces Human Resources Command treats
servicemen of identical military rank and occupation as perfect substitutes for the purposes of
unit deployment assignments, the natural experiment we propose is able to mimic conditional
random assignment.
        Using data from the military module of the 2007-2008 National Longitudinal Study of
Adolescent to Adult Health (Add Health) and the 2008 Department of Defense Survey of Health
and Related Behaviors Among Active Duty Personnel (HRBS), we find that post-9/11 combat
deployments substantially increased the risk of crime. Increases in violent crime appear largest
for those who were exposed to enemy firefight during combat deployments. Furthermore, we

5
  Additionally, as with previous wars, military deployments may decrease men's wages (Angrist 1990, 1998; Angrist
and Krueger 1994), which could have similar effects on crime.
6
  Moreover, the quality of mental health services provided by the Veterans Health Administration is relatively high
(Mantorell and Bergman 2013), and AVF veterans are more likely to seek help for mental health distress than their
conscripted counterparts from prior wars (Stiglitz and Bilmes 2008), each of which may mute the effect of post-9/11
combat-induced psychological harm on crime.

                                                        4
document that combat exposure increases the probability that a veteran joins a gang, has trouble
with military or civilian police, is arrested, and faces punishment under the Uniform Code of
Military Justice (UCMJ). These effects are largest among enlisted servicemen under the age of
33. The magnitudes of our estimates suggest that post-9/11 combat exposure generated
substantial crime costs to society: approximately $26.4 billion in additional costs for violent
crime and $315 million in costs for property crime (in 2018 dollars). Auxiliary analyses reveal
TBI and PTSD as likely mechanisms through which the identified relationship may be operating.


2. Background
        Criminal activity following combat deployments are dealt with by military law,
administered via the UCMJ or by civilian courts. We begin by describing these procedures.


2.1 Crime During Active Duty
        Active-duty servicemembers are subject to the UCMJ for criminal offenses committed
while on active duty or, in the case of reservists, when performing a duty that is directly related
to their reservist status (United States Code, Title 10, Subtitle A, Part II, Chapter 47, Article 2).
The UCMJ outlines expectations for servicemembers' standards of conduct, procedures that
govern the adjudication of alleged conduct violations, and possible sanctions for those
violations. 7
        Reports of servicemembers' alleged UCMJ violations are typically brought to their
commanders' attention by a commissioned officer, warrant officer, petty officer, or
noncommissioned officer. Once apprehended, a member of command authority may confine the
member in military jail or impose restrictions on servicemembers movements (i.e., on post or
base). Unlike civilian courts where a district attorney decides to press charges, under the UCMJ,
senior commanders make this decision. Servicemembers have a right against self-incrimination
and are entitled to be informed of the suspected offense(s) before being questioned by an officer
(UCMJ Article 31). If the offense is one that warrants a general court-martial, the prosecutor


7
  Article I Section 8 of the U.S. Constitution, ratified in 1789, gave the U.S. Congress the authority to regulate
conduct in the Armed Forces. The UCMJ was passed by the U.S. Congress on May 5, 1950, and signed into law by
President Truman on the following day. This law established the modern U.S. military justice system, which covers
all service branches of the Armed Forces and governing behavior of active-duty personnel, reservists, those in
custody, and those serving with (and employed by) the Armed Forces (Article 2 UCMJ).

                                                        5
must be a military lawyer (judge advocate), and an appointed military lawyer may defend the
accused servicemember.
         Courts-martial may take three forms. In a summary court-martial, a single commissioned
officer acting as judge and jury generally presides over cases reserved for lesser infractions such
as simple assaults, failing to properly salute a superior officer, or abandoning watch.
Punishments typically involve confinement, forfeiture of pay, and reduction of pay to lowest pay
grade (United States Code, Title 10, Subtitle A, Part II, Chapter 47, Article 17). 8 A special
court-martial, adjudicated by a military judge and four members of a jury, generally hears more
serious cases such as those involving issuing false statements, weapons violations, drug
possession, and disrespect toward a superior commissioned officer (Court Martial Reports 2019;
Navy Trial Results 2019). Punishments are more severe than those handed down from summary
courts-martial and also include bad conduct discharges. Finally, a general court-martial --
which adjudicates the most serious cases dealing with larceny of military property, assault, rape,
espionage, war crimes and murder (Court Martial Reports 2019; Navy Results of Trial 2019) --
includes a military judge, the accused, prosecuting and defense attorneys, and a panel of at least
five members (United States Code, Title 10, Subtitle A, Part II, Chapter 47). For general courts-
martial, which handles the most serious charges, punishments can include the death penalty,
imprisonment for life, and dishonorable discharge from the Armed Forces. 9 Between 2001 and
2010, there were 69,272 courts-martial across all branches of the Armed Services with the
number of courts-martial remaining steady or slightly declining (U.S. Court of Appeals for the
Armed Forces 2019).
         Minor offenses such as non-alcohol-related traffic law violations, lateness to meetings,
and disobeying minor orders are generally not handled via courts-marital, but rather with non-
judicial punishments (NJPs) under Article 15 of the UCMJ. Article 15 NJPs are seen as
corrections to misconduct without the stigma of a court-martial with a two-year statute of
limitations. 10 Disciplinary punishments that can be imposed under Article 15 generally involve


8
  For instance, the following punishments are prohibited in such cases: death, dismissal, dishonorable or bad conduct
discharge, confinement for more than one month, hard-labor without confinement for more than 45 days, restriction
to specified limits for more than two months, and forfeiture of more than two-thirds of one month's pay (United
States Code, Title 10, Subtitle A, Part II, Chapter 47, Article 17).
9
  For general courts-martial, any punishment not forbidden by this chapter, including the penalty of death when
specifically authorized by this chapter (United States Code, Title 10, Subtitle A, Part II, Chapter 47, Article 17).
10
   Servicemembers have the right to demand a court-martial for these charges if they wish to have a formal trial.

                                                         6
forfeiture of pay, restriction to base or ship, a reprimand, and specific punishments dependent on
rank. 11 From 2000 through 2010, there were between 65,000 and 80,000 Article 15 punishments
imposed throughout all service branches (U.S. Court of Appeal for the Armed Forces 2019).
         A limited class of offenses is only prosecutable and punishable by military law, such as
insubordination, failure to obey an order, sedition, and mutiny (UCMJ Articles 91, 92, 94). 12
However, some offenses committed while a servicemember is on active duty such as driving
under the influence (DUI), assault, robbery, and murder (Urbanic Law 2017; Military DUI:
Court Martial and Civilian Charges 2016), can be tried by both military and (state) civilian
courts.13


2.2 Post-Separation Crime
         Following active duty service, trials of veterans' crimes are largely handled by state and
federal courts (Ziezulewicz 2017). Several high-profile national media stories following criminal
trials have linked post-9/11 combat service to violence. For example, a 2008 New York Times
article highlighted 121 homicide cases committed by Iraq and Afghanistan veterans (Sontag and
Alvarez 2008). Burchett et al. (2008) examined the facts behind these cases and documented that
90 percent of the individuals had served in Iraq, with approximately 40 percent exposed to
combat. Also, stories appearing in major media outlets such as the Chicago Tribune, Los Angeles
Times, and New York Times have linked post-9/11 service to mass shootings. 14
         Substantial numbers of PTSD-linked offenses coupled with a growth in post-9/11 veteran
engagement with the criminal justice system have prompted the establishment of veterans'
treatment courts (VTCs) in over 500 counties across the United States (Douds and Hummer

11
   Enlisted personnel can include such actions as a reduction in rank, forfeiture of pay (up to one-half of one month's
pay per month for two months), restriction to base or the ship (up to 60 days), extra duties, correctional custody (up
to 30 days), and a reprimand. For officers, permissible punishments can include forfeiture of pay (up to one-half of
one month's pay per month for two months), restriction to base or the ship (up to 60 days), arrest in quarters (up to
30 days), and a reprimand. (United States Code, Title 10, Subtitle A, Part II, Chapter 47, Article 15).
12
   Adultery, fraternization, straggling, wearing unauthorized insignia, decoration, badge, ribbon, device, or lapel
button, all fall under Article 134. These infractions can lead to punishments via Article 15 or courts-martial,
depending on the implications of the offense.
13
   A servicemember subject to a military court trial cannot be tried for the same offense in federal court (Grafton v.
the United States 1907).
14
   See, for example, the following news stories from the New York Times, the Chicago Tribune, and the Los Angeles
Times: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/11/08/us/shooting-california-thousand-oaks.html
https://www.chicagotribune.com/nation-world/ct-california-bar-shooting-20181108-story,amp.html
https://www.latimes.com/world-nation/story/2019-09-01/us-mass-shootings-most-recent-list


                                                          7
2019). VTCs are a hybrid of mental health and drug courts. Veterans selected for admission to a
VTC are given an opportunity to complete an individualized treatment program -- which
requires regular court appearances, participation in treatment sessions, and random drug testing
-- in exchange for avoiding incarceration (National Center for State Courts 2012; Tsai et al.
2016).15,16


2.3 Prior Literature on the Relationship between the Military Draft and Crime
         Much of the economics literature examining the impact of military service on crime has
used the draft lottery to generate exogenous variation in service. This approach identifies the
effects of service (due to draft) on the criminal behavior of a civilian who is "randomly" drawn
into military service. The results of these studies are mixed across countries, conflicts, and
whether military service occurs during peacetime or wartime.
         Rohlfs (2010) exploits heterogeneity in draft lottery risk across U.S. birth cohorts to
estimate the impact of Vietnam War-era military service on crime. Using data from the National
Vietnam Veterans Readjustment Study (NVVRS) and U.S. Defense Manpower Data Center
(DMDC), he finds that exposure to the Vietnam draft was associated with a reduction in crime
rates while servicemembers were on active duty, consistent with an incapacitation effect.
However, following their return, exposure to the draft lottery was associated with an 8 to 16
incident per year increase in violent acts committed by African Americans. For whites, however,
the estimated effect on violent crime was smaller and statistically indistinguishable from zero (1
to 1.5 incidents per year). Based on these findings, Rohlfs (2010) estimates that waging the
Vietnam war generated approximately $65 billion in additional crime costs (in 2007 dollars).




15
   While there is state-level heterogeneity in eligibility for VTCs (Jaafari 2019; Timko et al. 2017), deferments to
these courts are generally reserved for non-violent offenders who have suffered deployment-related psychological
trauma (Brummet 2013). Still, surveys of VTC eligibility criteria suggest that 62 percent of VTCs will not entirely
rule out violent offenders when determining veteran court eligibility (Flatley et al. 2017). Domestic violence appears
to be the most common violent crime that will not necessarily disqualify a veteran from a VTC.
16
   Studies on the effectiveness of VTCs on recidivism have been hampered by the lack of exogenous variation in the
assignment. The literature has mainly been descriptive and either compared VTC participants with VJO-engaged
non-participants and controlled for observable differences between the two groups (Blue-Howells et al. 2013) or
examined only VTC participants and relied on a before-after estimator (Tsai et al. 2016). Unsurprisingly, the
findings from these studies are mixed, though there is some evidence that VTC participation is positively related to
the probability of recidivism, which the authors interpret as a consequence of enhanced monitoring (Tsai et al.
2016).

                                                          8
        Lindo and Stroecker (2014) also study the Vietnam conflict, but obtain data on the exact
birth date of inmates to identify individual risk probabilities for the draft. Combining data from
1979, 1989, and 1991 Surveys of Inmates in State and Federal Correctional Facilities (SISFCF)
with data from the Vital Statistics of the United States (VSUS), the authors create measures of
incarceration probabilities for each day of birth for cohorts affected by Vietnam era draft
lotteries. These data are then supplemented with 1983-1991 prison admissions data from the
National Corrections Reporting Program (NCRP) and U.S. Census data from 2000 to estimate
the effect of the Vietnam era military service on incarceration. Two-sample instrumental variable
estimates show that military service increased the incarceration probability for a violent crime by
0.34 percentage points, but decreased the probability of confinement for a nonviolent crime by
0.30 percentage points. The authors explain this finding by suggesting that military service does
not change an individual's propensity to commit a crime, but instead may cause them to commit
more-severe crimes involving violence.
        Siminski et al. (2014) study the impact of the Vietnam draft on crimes committed by
Australian men using cross-cohort differences in exposure to the draft. Using administrative data
on (i) birth dates for the universe of Australian male cohorts who were draft-eligible, and (ii)
criminal court cases in the three largest Australian states (New South Wales, Victoria, and
Queensland) between 1994-2010, the authors find no evidence that draft-induced military service
increased the probability of violent or non-violent crime. The estimates are sufficiently precise
that, with 95 percent confidence, the authors can rule out crime rate changes of larger than 11
percent in response to military service. Siminski et al. (2014) argue that differences in the effects
of Vietnam war exposure for Australian as compared to U.S. combat veterans can be explained
by Australia's Vietnam military training programs preparing recruits for a war of covert
counterinsurgency rather than large-scale conventional battles. 17
        Other studies have examined the effect of military service across periods that include
both peacetime and wartime service. Galiani et al. (2011) study the crime effects of conscription
in Argentina between 1901 and 1995. 18 Using data from the Argentine Ministry of Justice, the


17
   Specifically, the authors argue that counterinsurgency training may be less realistic and, therefore, less
desensitizing than conventional war training (Anderson and Rees 2015).
18
   Wars during this period included the Revolution of 1905, Revolución Libertoda in 1955, the 1963 Argentine Navy
Revolt, the far-leftist insurgency of 1970-1979, Operativo Independencia in 1975-1977, the Falklands War
(Malvinas War) in 1982, and the 1990 Gulf War.

                                                       9
authors find that conscription increased the likelihood of subsequent prosecutions and
incarcerations among veterans of both peacetime and wartime military service. Across both types
of service, IV estimates show that military service raises the probability of incarceration by 4
percent.
        Albæk et al. (2017) use longitudinal administrative data from Denmark, which link draft
records with the educational, labor market, and criminal records of the 1964 birth cohort, to
estimate the effect of peacetime military service on crime. The authors find that conscripted
peacetime service reduced property crime among youths by 18 percent in the year of military
enlistment, and by 10 to 14 percent in each of the subsequent three years. They find no evidence
that violent crime was affected by peacetime service in either the short- or long-run. Albæk et al.
(2017) conclude that because there are no education or labor market effects of military service,
the property crime reductions they detect can be explained by other channels, such as changing
tastes toward crime.
        Finally, Lyk-Jensen (2018) also study the military draft in Denmark using longitudinal
administrative data. However, she examines a wider set of birth cohorts (1976 through 1983)
than considered in Albæk et al. (2017) and finds no evidence that peacetime military service
affected property or violent crime.


2.4 Post-9/11 War Deployments and Crime
        Only one study of which we are aware has credibly estimated the impact of post-9/11
military deployments on crime. Anderson and Rees (2015) exploit the timing of overseas unit
deployments among post-9/11 servicemembers stationed in Fort Carson, Colorado as a natural
experiment to estimate the effect of local veteran presence on arrests. 19 They find that the return
of a previously deployed unit had no impact on county-level arrests among 18-to-29 year-olds.
However, they also document that the presence of a trained but never-deployed unit is associated
with a 5.4 percent increase in the probability of a violent crime arrest in El Paso county, where
Fort Carson is located. The authors attribute this result to the possibility that combat exposure
may have increased soldiers' compassion, self-discipline, resilience, and spirituality, which could



19
  Note that these authors employ a different comparison group than the one generated from the draft lottery, relying
on exogeneity of the timing of unit deployment assignments, following Lyle (2006). Unlike conscripted military
service, this approach will capture the effects of deployments rather than the effect of military service per se.

                                                        10
deter violent crime. 20 However, because the authors use aggregate county-level crime data, they
cannot detect whether crime averted (or caused) is committed by veterans. Furthermore, the time
horizon of their work is limited to the immediate effects of combat deployments upon returning
to the United States.
        The current study extends the prior literature in general, and Anderson and Rees (2015)
in particular, in several important ways. First, we are able to measure crime-related behaviors
that do not necessarily result in civilian arrest, including (i) court-martials or Article 15 non-
judicial punishments handled exclusively through the Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ),
(ii) criminal behavior committed outside of the unit's stationed location, including during
overseas deployments, and (iii) criminal behavior that does not result in arrest. These crime
measures have the potential to capture costly criminal behaviors that are undetectable in other
data, such as those examined by Anderson and Rees (2015). Second, we have individual-level
data on potentially important mechanisms through which post-9/11 combat deployments may
affect criminal behavior, including TBI, PTSD, illicit substance use, and exposure to intense
battlefield trauma. These data will allow us, for the first time, to descriptively examine the
relative importance of several key channels. Third, our analyses rely on (i) a longitudinal dataset
that allows us to control for the pre-enlistment propensity for criminal behavior, and (ii) a large
military dataset designed to be representative of all active-duty U.S. servicemembers around the
globe. This latter source will permit more generalizable estimates of the effect of post-9/11
combat service. Finally, our data will allow us to examine both short- and longer-run impacts of
military deployments, which may be important if there are a considerable lag between separation
from the military and engagement with the criminal justice system (Wolfe 2013).


3. Identification Strategy
        The identification strategy we rely on employs a different comparison group than the one
generated from studies of the draft lottery, and the results apply to a different population. Rather
than identifying the causal effect of military service per se, we identify the impact of
conditionally randomly assigning an active-duty serviceman to a combat deployment. The policy
parameter we obtain is essential in assessing the social costs of waging war with AVFs and is


20
  Anderson and Rees (2015) conclude that soldiers deployed to war may reduce their taste for violence or even
serve as role models in the community, instilling discipline, and discouraging aggressive behavior.

                                                       11
arguably more policy-relevant given that there is little prospect for the reinstitution of the
military draft in the U.S. (Roper Center 2017). 21
         Our natural experiment relies on the administrative procedures by which senior
commanders in the U.S. Armed Forces assign active duty deployed servicemembers to combat
deployments. Individual servicemembers rarely receive deployment orders from Human
Resources Command that are independent of orders given to other servicemembers. 22 Rather,
units (i.e., battalions) receive deployment orders. In the assigning of individual servicemembers
to units and in making unit deployment assignments and then issuing deployment duties, Armed
Forces Human Resource Command treats active-duty servicemen of identical rank and military
occupation as perfect substitutes. As a rule, deployment assignments are made without regard to
other background characteristics of servicemen, including predisposition for crime, personality,
family background, home circumstances, and marital status (Engel et al. 2010). 23
         Unit deployment decisions are based on (i) the operational needs of the Armed Forces
determined by world events, and (ii) the readiness and availability of units, measured by the
occupational skill set of unit servicemembers and the timeliness of equipment for shipment
(Army Regulation 220-1). Such factors are exogenous to individual servicemembers' propensity
for crime. There is no evidence that senior commanders issue unit-level deployment orders based
on non-military characteristics of units (Carter and Skimmyhorn 2019; Sabia and Skimmyhorn
2019).
         There are two main threats to this identification strategy. First, some individuals may be
selected as "stay-back" personnel to remain on base for administrative duties. We argue that this
is not a significant threat to identification because stay-back personnel represent just five percent
of all active-duty servicemembers (Sabia and Skimmyhorn 2019). Studies using administrative
data that have instrumented for individual deployment using unit-level deployment orders to
address stay-back selection have found no evidence that the estimated effects of individual
combat deployment on labor market outcomes (Sabia and Skimmyhorn 2019), program receipt
(Sabia and Skimmyhorn 2019), or child well-being (Lyle 2006) are biased.

21
   See: https://ropercenter.cornell.edu/blog/suppose-they-gave-war-and-nobody-came-changing-opinions-draft
22
   The identification strategy we propose is similar to that used by a number of previous studies (e.g., Cesur et al.
2013; Cesur and Sabia 2016; and Lyle 2006).
23
   Thus, while servicemen can affect their likelihood of seeing combat through occupation choice and re-enlistment
decisions (reflected in rank), servicemen of identical rank and occupation will face equal probabilities of combat
deployments at any point in time.

                                                         12
         Second, some active-duty servicemen may be deemed "non-deployable" for reasons
related to physical and mental health (National Guard Association of the United States 2018).
Estimates suggest that between five and 15 percent of active-duty servicemembers have been
classified as non-deployable (Arnold et al. 2011; Lacdan 2018). Given that the health effects of
post-9/11 combat may be an important channel through which combat service affects crime, we
address this concern in two ways. 24 We restrict our sample to servicemen who have been
deployed overseas and exploit conditionally random variation in the location of that overseas
deployment assignment (e.g., to a combat or non-combat zone). And in a series of robustness
checks, we condition on combat deployment length and explore the impact of exposure to enemy
firefight within a combat zone. While this approach may understate the full effect of combat
assignment, this "treatment effect" is unlikely to be contaminated by non-deployability. 25


4. Data and Measures
         Our analysis makes use of two data sources: the military module of the 2007-2008
National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent to Adult Health (Add Health), and the 2008
Department of Defense Survey of Health and Related Behaviors among Active Duty Personnel
(HRBADP). While each dataset has its strengths and drawbacks, which are discussed below, the
shortcomings of one survey are often rectified in the other.
         The Add Health data set is a nationally representative school-based panel survey that,
when weighted, is designed to be representative of all public and private U.S. middle and high
school students during the 1994-95 school year. The first wave of data collection (Wave I)
occurred during the 1994-95 academic year when respondents were largely ages 12 to 18. The
first follow-up survey (Wave II) occurred one year later in 1996, the second follow-up survey
(Wave III) in 2001-2002 when respondents were ages 18 to 26, and the third follow-up survey
(Wave IV) in 2007-2008 when respondents were ages 24 to 34. 26


24
   To the extent that the factors associated with being "non-deployable" are positively correlated with crime, our
estimates would be a lower bound.
25
   An additional concern with the above-described identification strategy is the possible sample selection bias. This
could occur if combat assignments affect the likelihood of re-enlistment (and hence future combat exposure), which
could impact the sample on which we can measure our outcomes under study (Sabia and Skimmyhorn 2019). While
all of our regressions control for rank and enlistment length, one of our datasets, the National Longitudinal Study of
Adolescent Health, allows us to measure criminal outcomes both for those who remain on active duty and those who
have separated back to civilian life.
26
   Wave V of the Add Health data was collected in 2016-17 and is due to be released in 2020.

                                                         13
        Our Add Health-based analysis focuses on the military module of Wave IV. We identify
482 men who (i) reported active duty service in the U.S. Armed Forces (Army, Marines, Navy,
or Air Force) after age 17, (ii) reported an overseas deployment, and (iii) provided non-missing
information on criminal behavior. Of these 482 men, 286 had separated from the military by the
time of the Wave IV survey, while 196 remained on active duty.
        We generate our measures of combat assignments using self-reports of overseas
deployments. The variable Combat Deployment is set equal to 1 if the active-duty deployed
serviceman reports having been sent to a combat zone and set equal to 0 if overseas deployments
were exclusive to non-combat zones. The definition of a combat zone is made by senior
commanders. Over the sample period during which we measure deployments, combat
deployments are almost exclusively in the post-9/11 period and reflect deployments to Iraq and
Afghanistan as part of Operation Enduring Freedom and Operation Iraqi Freedom. 27 Because
servicemen receive hostile fire or imminent danger pay when deployed to combat zones, there is
strong reason to expect that survey responses will be accurate. In our analysis sample, 75.5
percent of active duty deployed servicemen received a combat zone deployment assignment
while 24.5 percent were exclusively deployed overseas to non-combat zones.
        In addition to deployment assignments, the Add Health includes information on whether
an overseas deployed serviceman was exposed to combat. Specifically, respondents are asked:


        "Thinking about all of your deployments, [have you] or members of [your] unit, received
        incoming fire from small arms, artillery, rockets, or mortars...or [has your] unit fired on
        the enemy?"

If the active-duty serviceman reported engaging the enemy in a firefight, Combat Exposure is set
equal to 1; it is set equal to 0 otherwise. We find that 36.7 percent of servicemen were exposed to
combat during their overseas deployment assignments.
        We measure criminal behavior on the extensive margin using self-reported information
from the Add Health. While these measures may understate the true prevalence of crime due to
its illicit nature, self-reported measures will also capture criminal behavior that remains




27
  During this period, combat zone deployments could also include assignments in Qatar, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia,
Yemen, Sudan, Tunisia, Egypt, Syria, and Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.

                                                      14
undetected, did not result in arrest, and would not be captured in administrative data. 28
Moreover, as long as measurement error in crime is unrelated to deployment assignment,
marginal effects in terms of percent changes in crime should be unbiased.
        At Wave IV, respondents are asked whether, in the last year, they had "deliberately
damaged property that didn't belong to you" or "stole something." Property Crime is set equal to
1 if respondents reported stealing or damaging property, and it is set equal to 0 otherwise. We
find that 9.8 percent of deployed active duty servicemen report committing a property crime. 29
        Second, Violent Crime is set equal to 1 if, in the last 12 months, respondents had "used or
threatened to use a weapon to get something from someone," had "pulled a knife or gun on
someone," had "shot or stabbed someone," "took part in a physical fight where a group of your
friends was against another group," or "hurt someone badly enough in a physical fight that he or
she needed care from a doctor or nurse." Otherwise, Violent Crime is set equal to 0. We find that
24.2 percent of the sample reported engaging in violent criminal activity. 30
        Next, White Collar Crime is set equal to 1 if the respondent had, in the last year, "used
someone else's credit card, bank card, or ATM card without his/her permission or knowledge,"
"deliberately write a bad check," or "buy, sell, or hold stolen property." Otherwise, White Collar
Crime is set equal to 0. Four percent of overseas deployed servicemembers reported commission
of white-collar crime. 31


28
   Survey administrators took several steps to maintain data security and to minimize the potential for interviewer
influence. First, respondents were not provided with any printed questionnaires. Instead, all data were recorded on
laptop computers. Second, the respondents listened to pre-recorded questions through earphones for sensitive topics
such as criminal behavior and entered their answers directly on the laptops. The rates of crime reported in the Add
Health have been shown to be consistent with those of other sources (see Anderson et al. 2015; Mocan and Tekin
2010; Currie and Tekin 2012).
29
   Respondents to the Add Health were asked:
         "In the past 12 months, how often did you deliberately damage property that didn't belong to you?"
         "In the past 12 months, how often did you steal something (worth more/less than $50)?"
30
   Respondents to the Add Health were asked:
         "In the past 12 months, how often did you use/threaten to use a weapon to get something from someone?"
          "Which of the following things happened in the past 12 months: You pulled a knife or gun on someone?
         (Yes/No); You shot or stabbed someone? (Yes/No)"
         "In the past 12 months, how often did you take part in a physical fight where a group of your friends was
         against another group?"
         "In the past 12 months, how often did you hurt someone badly enough in a physical fight that he or she
         needed care from a doctor or nurse?"
31
   Respondents to the Add Health were asked:
          "In the past 12 months, how often did you use someone else's credit card, bank card, or automatic teller
         card without their permission or knowledge?"
         "In the past 12 months, how often did you deliberately write a bad check?"
         "In the past 12 months, how often did you buy, sell, or hold stolen property?"

                                                        15
        We measure illicit drug sale in an analogous way, with an indicator, Drug Sale, set equal
to 1 if the respondent "sold marijuana or other drugs" in the last year. We observe that 3.5
percent of the deployed sample reported selling drugs in the last year.
        Finally, using self-reports of arrest histories, we generate an indicator for whether a
respondent was arrested in the last year (Arrested). We find that 3.8 percent of deployed
servicemen reported a criminal arrest in the last year.
        In Table 1, we present the means of our five crime outcomes by deployment assignment
and combat exposure. As shown in the table, the prevalence of crime is higher for those assigned
to combat zones relative to non-combat zones (column 2 vs. column 3) and higher still for those
assigned to combat zones where enemy firefight materializes (column 4). 32 This pattern appears
to hold across property, violent, white-collar, and drug crimes. The only exception to this pattern
is the rate of arrest, which seems to be lower among those assigned to combat zones relative to
non-combat zones.
        An important advantage of the Add Health is that the survey includes information on all
key military observables available to Human Resources Command when the conditional random
assignment of servicemembers to overseas deployments are made. These include the branch of
service (Amy, Marines, Navy, and Air Force), highest rank attained 33, duration of service,
occupation, and whether still on active duty at the time of the Wave IV survey. The availability
of these variables ensures that the observed variation in overseas deployment assignment will be
orthogonal to criminal behavior.
        The Add Health is also rich in pre-deployment measures of personal and family
background characteristics including age, race/ethnicity, height, weight, number of siblings,
parental educational attainment, parental marital status, Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test
(PPVT) score, and religiosity (each measured at Wave I). Importantly, we can also measure
criminal behaviors prior to enlistment into the U.S. Armed Forces. Given the procedures through




32
  Appendix Table 1 shows the descriptive statistics for control variables in the Add Health.
33
  For enlisted servicemembers, ranks in the sample vary from Army Private to Chief Warrant Officer in the Army,
Seaman Recruit to Chief Petty Officer in the Navy, Airman to Master Sergeant in the Air Force, and Marine Lance
Corporal to Staff Sergeant in the Marines. For officers, ranks vary from Captain to Chief Warrant Officer in the
Army, Lieutenant Junior Grade to Lieutenant Commander in the Navy, Lieutenant to Chief Warrant Officer in the
Air Force, and Second Lieutenant to Captain in the Marines.

                                                       16
which military deployment assignments are made, deployment assignments should be unrelated
to these observables, conditional on within-branch rank, occupation, and timing of service.
         One of the limitations of the Add Health is that the size for the military sample is
relatively small. This means that the research design has relatively low statistical power, a
problem that is exacerbated when attempting to examine heterogeneous effects of combat across
service branches and servicemember characteristics. Moreover, estimated combat effects using
the Add Health data may not generalize to all active duty overseas deployed servicemen.
         To supplement our Add Health analysis, we turn to the 2008 HRBADP Survey. The
HRBADP Survey, a representative survey of the active-duty members of the armed forces,
includes 28,546 men and women between ages 18 to 50. Although a large majority of interviews
were conducted at facilities under the jurisdiction of the U.S. Military, such as military bases,
camps, posts, stations, yards, and centers, a small fraction of surveys were completed via mail for
those who could not be present in on-site surveys. Participating individuals completed these self-
administered surveys via the use of pencil and paper. As the participants did not answer the
questions using a computer-assisted self-interview (CASI) survey instrument, estimates on
sensitive information may suffer from underreporting bias. 34 Nevertheless, if combat assignment
is orthogonal to the likelihood of criminal involvement, such measurement error should not
affect our results. When weighted, the HRBADP survey sample is designed to be representative
of all U.S. active-duty personnel serving around the globe.
         Our main analysis sample is comprised of 11,542 active duty servicemen who (i) reported
an overseas deployment assignment, (ii) provided non-missing information on whether they were
exposed to combat, and (iii) provided non-missing information on crime-related behavior. In
contrast to the Add Health, the HRBADP survey measures criminal behavior that has exclusively
occurred while the servicemember was on active duty. Hence, we measure the short-run effects
of combat assignment on criminal behavior that could be (or is) punished according to military
rather than civilian law.
         Our primary measure of combat in the HRBADP survey is Combat Exposure, which
captures a similar measure as that reported in the Add Health. Respondents are asked:



34
  The data collection effort was conducted by the Research Triangle Institute. Bray et al. (2009) provide detailed
information on the HRBADP data collection procedures.


                                                         17
       "Thinking about all of your deployments, [have you] or members of [your] unit, received
       incoming fire from small arms, artillery, rockets, or mortars...or [has your] unit fired on
       the enemy?"

Combat Exposure is set equal to 1 for servicemen who reported engaging the enemy in a
firefight, and it is set equal to 0 otherwise. We find that 51.5 percent of the HRBADP sample
reported exposure to combat, much of it in Afghanistan and Iraq, including the so-called surge in
2007-2008. One limitation of the HRBADP deployment data is that we cannot disentangle
overseas deployments to non-combat zones and deployments to combat zones without enemy
engagement beyond the year before the administration of the survey. Thus, if there are crime
effects of combat from combat zone deployments without combat exposure ­ perhaps because of
the psychological consequences of fearing war could materialize ­ estimates from the HRBADP
Survey will understate the full crime effect of combat assignment.
       We measure five crime-related outcomes in the HRBADP survey. First, respondents are
instructed to indicate whether (and how many times) in the last year, the following events
happened to them:


       "I received a UCMJ punishment (e.g. Court Marital, Article 15, Captain's Mast, Office
       Hours, Letter of Reprimand, Other)."
       "I had trouble with the police (civilian or military)."
       "I was arrested."
       "I got into a fight where I hit someone other than a member of my family."

From these items, four dichotomous variables are generated. UCMJ Punishment, Trouble with
Police, Arrested, and Physical Fight are each set equal to 1 if the respondent indicated that the
event had happened to him at least once in the last year. These variables are set to 0 otherwise. In
our analysis sample, 6.9 percent of individuals reported receiving a UCMJ punishment, 6.7
percent reported trouble with police, 0.5 percent reported to being arrested, and 6.7 percent
reported hitting others in physical fights. Finally, respondents are asked whether they were
currently gang members (Gang Member). We find that 1.3 percent of our analysis sample
reported being in a gang.
       Table 2 presents means of the key variables from the HRBADP Survey for the pooled
sample (column 1), those deployed to combat zones with enemy firefight (column 2), and those

                                                18
deployed to non-combat zones or combat zones without enemy firefight (column 3). 35 Consistent
with findings from the Add Health in Table 1, results from the DOD survey show higher crime
prevalence and gang membership rates for those exposed to combat during combat deployments
as compared to those deployed overseas who do not face enemy engagement. For example,
UCMJ punishments were 36.2 percent more likely for active duty servicemen exposed to combat
relative to those who were deployed but not exposed to combat.
           An important advantage of the HRBADP Survey is the large sample that, when weighted,
is designed to be representative of all active duty deployed servicemembers. With a sample size
over 25 times greater than that of the Add Health military module, the HRBADP Survey data
allow for higher statistical power as well as an exploration of heterogeneous combat effects by
the branch of service and servicemember background. Moreover, the estimates have a greater
degree of external validity. However, limitations of these data include (i) an inability to examine
longer-run post-separation criminal behavior, (ii) lack of data on military occupation, which
poses a (surmountable) challenge to identification, and (iii) an inability to disentangle overseas
deployments to non-combat zones from deployments to combat zones without enemy firefight
beyond the year prior to the 2007-2008 data collection effort. Many of these limitations are
mitigated by the use of the complementary Add Health data.


5. Empirical Approach
           We begin with a set of descriptive tests of the exogeneity of combat deployments. We use
ordinary least squares regression (OLS) to examine whether personal and family background
characteristics are related to the probability of a combat deployment, after controlling for
military characteristics of servicemen available to Human Resources Command:

           Combat Deploymenti = 0 + Mi 1 + Xi 2 + 3PreCrimei + i                               (1)

           Combat Exposurei = 0 + Mi 1 + Xi 2 + 3PreCrimei + i                                 (2)

where Mi is a vector of military observables available to Human Resources Command including
indicators for the branch of service, military rank, occupation, year of enlistment, whether on
active duty at the time of the Wave IV survey, and the timing of the interview; Xi is a vector of


35
     Appendix Table 2 displays the summary statistics for control variables in the HRBADP.

                                                         19
personal and family background controls for individual i measured prior to enlistment, including
age, gender, height, number of siblings, parental educational attainment, parental marital status,
Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test (PPVT) score, race/ethnicity, religion, height, and weight; and
PreCrimei is a vector of servicemembers' criminal behaviors measured prior to enlistment into
the U.S. Armed Forces. 36 If combat assignment is conditionally random, then 2 = 3 = 2 = 3 =
0.
         Next, we estimate the impact of combat assignment on crime in the Add Health:

         Crimei = 0 + 1Combat Deploymenti + Mi 2 + Xi 3 + 4PreCrimei + i                                    (3)

If combat assignment is exogenous to crime, then 1 can be interpreted as the causal impact of
assignment to a combat zone (relative to assignment to a non-combat zone overseas deployment)
on the probability of subsequent crime commission.
         We then add an indicator for whether the respondent was exposed to combat during his
combat deployment assignment:

         Crimei = 0 + 1Combat Deployment without Exposure i + 2Combat Exposurei
                     + Mi 3 + Xi 4 + 5PreCrimei + i                                                (4)

In the above specification, 1 can be interpreted as the crime effect of deployment to a combat
zone without enemy firefight, and 2 can be interpreted as the crime effect of deployment to a
combat zone with enemy engagement.
         Turning to the HRBADP Survey, after conducting a similar set of descriptive tests for the
exogeneity of deployment assignment, we estimate:

                  Crimei = 0 + 1Combat Exposurei + Hi 2 + Zi 3+ i                                           (5)

where Hi is a vector of military observables available in the HRBADP Survey, including the
branch of service, branch-specific rank-by-major command, and Zi is a vector of individual-level
observables including race/ethnicity, age, and educational attainment. Our key coefficient of
interest, 1, should produce unbiased estimates of the effect of combat exposure on criminal


36
  Since the sampling design of Add Health is school-based, the standard errors are corrected for clustering at the
school level.

                                                         20
activity to the extent that this specification captures the conditional random assignment of
servicemembers to combat zones. 37


6. Results
6.1 Exogeneity of Combat Deployments
        We begin by presenting results from balancing tests performed on the Add Health sample
in Table 3A. These tests are designed to capture whether our assumption of conditional random
assignment of deployment is valid. All models include the vector of military observables (the
branch of service, rank, occupation, timing, and length of enlisted service), and then adds
sequential sets of background characteristics from the vectors Xi and PreCrimei. Note that the
coefficients and standard errors, shown in Table 3, are generated from regressions that include
controls for Mi and the addition of pre-enlistment non-military characteristics one at a time (and
then finally all together). Thus, they are tests of conditional mean differences in personal and
family background characteristics, conditional on all of the military observables (branch of
service, military rank, occupation, and length/timing of enlistment) that Human Resources
Command uses to make deployment assignments.
        Our results in column (1) of Table 3A show that background characteristics in Xi have no
individual predictive power in explaining deployment to a combat zone. Moreover, criminal
behavior measured prior to enlistment (at Wave I of the Add Health survey) does not predict
being assigned to a combat zone (joint F-stat = 0.78 and p-value = 0.54). Finally, when all
variables in the vector Xi and PreCrimei are simultaneously included as controls, a test of the
joint significance of all of these observables generates an F-statistic of 1.01 and a p-value of
0.46. This pattern of findings is consistent with the administrative procedures through which
active-duty servicemen are assigned to their deployment duties.
        We then repeat the above analysis by exploring whether those assigned to combat zones
where enemy firefight materializes are systematically different from those deployed to combat


37
  Prior work by Cesur et al. (2019) and Cesur and Sabia (2016) finds that Major Command-by-rank-by-education
controls adequately proxy for occupation. We take two approaches to push this assumption further. First, in
Appendix Table 3, we show that when we restrict the Add Health observables to those available in the HRBADP
Survey and re-estimate equations (3) and (4), estimates of 1, 1, and 2 are largely unchanged. Second, we use a
nearest neighbor matching approach to match combat deployed, and non-combat deployed servicemen using each of
the right-hand-side variables in equation (5). As discussed below, the nearest neighbor matching estimates of the
effect of combat deployments on crime are quantitatively similar to those produced by equation (5).

                                                       21
zones without enemy firefight (column 2) or to non-combat zones (column 3). The pattern of
results is remarkably similar. The only exception is for Hispanics, who are less likely to be
assigned to combat zones with enemy firefight. In supplemental analyses, we restrict our sample
to non-Hispanic whites and find a pattern of results similar to those reported on the full sample.
         In Table 3B, we show descriptive evidence for conditional random assignment in the
HRBADP Survey. Because we lack data on occupation, we are careful to match "treatment"
(assigned to combat zones where enemy firefight occurred) and "control" (assigned to non-
combat zones or combat zones without enemy firefight) servicemen on available military
characteristics. Consistent with our Add Health-based results, the results in Table 3B show little
evidence that sociodemographic controls in the HRBADP Survey predict combat exposure.
Together, findings in Tables 3A and 3B are consistent with the hypothesis that deployment
orders are issued exogenously to future crime commission.


6.2 Add Health Results
         Table 4 presents estimates of the effect of combat zone deployment on crime using the
Add Health data. 38 Controlling for the vector Mi alone (Panel I), we find that assignment to a
combat zone is associated with a 0.092 increase in the probability of committing a property
crime (column 1), and a 0.037 increase in the probability of committing a white-collar crime
(column 3). While the estimated effects on violent crime (column 2) and drug crime (column 4)
are also positive and economically meaningful, 0.064 and 0.023 respectively, these estimates are
not statistically distinguishable from zero at conventional levels. Interestingly, the estimated
effect of combat zone deployment on the probability of arrest is zero (column 5). This could
suggest that criminal activities in which servicemembers are engaged are infrequently detected or
punished. If that is the case, focusing on arrest probabilities alone may understate the crime-
related social costs of war. However, our measure of arrests captures only those taken into
custody in the last year and released before the administration of the Add Health survey. Thus,
this measure likely only captures minor crimes that are committed recently.
         In Panel II of Table 4, we explore heterogeneity in the crime effects of combat service by
whether the combat zone deployment involved exposure to enemy firefight. Our findings suggest


38
 Standard errors are corrected for clustering on the school, which is the unit of sampling in the Add Health.
However, if we cluster standard errors at the occupation-by-rank level, the results are qualitatively similar.

                                                         22
that the effects of combat deployments on property crime (column 1) and white-collar crime
(column 3) do not differ by whether combat exposure materializes. However, our point estimates
suggest that exposure to enemy firefight has a larger positive effect (0.118 vs 0.018) on the
probability that a serviceman subsequently commits a violent crime (column 2). A similar pattern
of result appears for drug crimes (column 4), though this effect is imprecisely estimated.
       In the final two panels of Table 4, we add controls for individual and family background
characteristics (Panel III) and pre-enlistment crime (Panel IV) respectively. We highlight two
important findings in these panels. First, the magnitudes of the estimated effects of combat
assignment on crime are quite similar to those shown in Panel II, consistent with the hypothesis
that combat deployments are assigned exogenously to a wide set of pre-enlistment non-military
observables, further adding to our confidence in our identification strategy. Second, the findings
in Panel IV now show that combat exposure is associated with significantly larger increases in
the probabilities of both violent and drug crime, in part because the estimates are more precisely
estimated. In summary, the findings in Table 4 suggest that physical or psychological shocks
from firefight exposure may be more important mechanisms to explain increases in violent
offenses as compared to property crime.
       In Table 5, we explore whether the effects of combat zone deployment on crime differ for
those who have separated from the military as compared to those who remain on active duty.
While the sample sizes are relatively small, and therefore, the estimates are imprecise, we find
the strongest evidence for property crime effects among those whose active duty service has
concluded rather than for those who remain on active duty. To the extent that those who remain
on active duty are more stable financially and have easier access to credit, healthcare, and
housing, such individuals may have less of an incentive to engage in economically motivated
illegal activities. In contrast, combat-induced increases in violent crime are present both for
those who have separated from the military and those for whom service is ongoing at the time of
the Wave IV survey.




                                                 23
6.3 HRBADP Survey Main Findings
         Table 6 presents our main findings from the HRBADP Survey. 39 In Panel I, we control
for military observables available in the HRBADP survey. We find that assignment to a combat
zone with enemy firefight induces a 0.025 increase in the probability of receiving a punishment
under the UCMJ (column 1), a 0.022 increase in the probability of trouble with military or
civilian police (column 2), a 0.005 increase in the probability of arrest (column 3), a 0.035
increase in violent physical fighting with strangers (column 4), and a 0.017 increase in the
probability of gang membership (column 5). These results provide further evidence that post-
9/11 combat deployments increased criminal activity among recent combat veterans and suggest
that many of these crime costs materialize prior to separation from the U.S. Armed Forces.
         While the results presented in the top panel are qualitatively similar to those shown in
Table 4, they are quantitatively smaller. This is consistent with the above argument that the
effect of deployment on crime is likely to be understated in the analysis with the HRBADP data
as compared to the Add Health data to the extent that those assigned to combat zones without
enemy firefight also experience increases in the propensity for crime.
         In Panel II of Table 6, we add controls for non-military characteristics to the regression.
Reassuringly, the estimated crime effects are nearly identical, consistent with the conditional
random assignment of overseas deployments. Along the same lines, in Panel III, we use a nearest
neighbor matching procedure to ensure that those deployed to combat zones with enemy firefight
and those deployed without seeing enemy firefight were well matched on observables available
to Human Resources Command (branch of service, rank, occupation, Major Command, and
education). 40 The results from the matching estimator are quantitatively similar to those obtained
in Panels I and II.


39
   Estimated effects of combat service on crime obtained from the HRBADP survey data may differ from those
obtained from the Add Health data for several reasons. First, the sample is more representative of all active-duty
servicemen than the non-representative Add Health sample. Second, combat zone deployments without enemy
firefight cannot be disentangled from non-combat zone deployments in the HRBADP data, a limitation that may
understate the crime effects of combat deployments. Finally, estimated crime effects we uncover in the HRBADP
data are driven by criminal activity prior to separation from the U.S. Armed Forces. For these reasons, we view the
results obtained from the analysis with HRBADP data as a complement to the analysis with Add Health data rather
than a substitute. Standard errors in all of our HRBADP Survey results are corrected for clustering on the stratum,
which is the unit of sampling. If we instead cluster standard errors at the Major Command-by-rank level, the results
are nearly identical.
40
   We employ a nearest neighbor matching procedure without replacement using a caliper value of 0.00001.
Employing alternative caliper values, such as 0.001, 0.0001, and 0.0005, produce results very similar to those
presented here. We also estimated out models using alternative matching procedures, including nearest neighbor

                                                         24
         An examination of heterogeneity in the crime effects of combat exposure by the branch
of service suggests larger crime effects for those serving in the Army (Panel IV), Marines (Panel
V), and Navy (Panel VI) relative to the Air Force (Panel VII), with the exception of arrests. 41
These results are consistent with much of the prior military literature, which finds that the
adverse health (Cesur et al. 2013), human capital (Sabia and Skimmyhorn 2019; Cesur et al.
2016), and family violence (Cesur and Sabia 2016) effects of post-9/11 deployments are smaller
for airmen relative to those serving in other branches.
         In Table 7, we find that the crime effects of post-9/11 combat exposure are more
substantial for servicemen younger than age 33 as compared to those ages 33 and older (Panel I).
Interestingly, we also find evidence that post-9/11 combat assignments increase criminal
behavior among women (Panel II) and do not appear to largely differ by race or ethnicity, except
white-collar crime (Panel III). Finally, each of the crime effects we uncover is uniformly larger
among enlisted servicemen as compared to officers (Panel IV), consistent with evidence that the
largest adverse health effects of combat service are found for enlisted servicemen (Cesur et al.
2019). This pattern is also consistent with the notion that the opportunity cost of engaging in
crime is likely to be higher among officers.


6.4 Length of Deployments and Intensity of Combat Exposure
         While combat exposure is more likely with longer and more frequent deployments, it
may be important to disentangle these effects to judge how important psychological trauma and
physical injury of enemy engagement are in explaining the crime effects we observe. We do this
in Table 8. Across crime outcomes, we find evidence that the length and frequency of combat
deployments are positively related to the probability of crime (columns 2 and 3). 42 However,
including combat exposure, the number of post-9/11 combat deployments, and average length of
combat deployment all in the same model (column 4) results in only one variable, combat
exposure, being economically consequential and statistically distinguishable from zero in most


matching with replacement, k-nearest neighbor, and exact matching on the branch of service. Our results are robust
to employing these matching methods.
41
   However, given that the mean for arrests is less than one half of one percent, we test the robustness of this finding
to the use of a probit model rather than OLS. These findings in Appendix Table 4 show little evidence that combat
exposure affected the probability of arrest for those in the air force. The remainder of findings are comparable to our
OLS results.
42
   There is also strong evidence that length and number of deployments (as well as the location of deployment) is
also conditionally randomly assigned (Anderson and Rees 2015; Lyle 2006).

                                                          25
cases. This suggests that combat exposure is likely the primary trigger for the rise in criminal
propensities among active-duty servicemen.
         To examine whether the intensity of combat exacerbates the effects of combat exposure,
Panel I of Table 9 presents estimates of the effect of a combat intensity index on crime. This
index, provided by the HRBADP survey, is constructed based on 17 questions pertaining to
combat experiences, including whether the veteran has engaged in hand-to-hand combat, fired on
the enemy, knew someone who died in combat, and interacted with prisoners of war. 43 The index
ranges from 0 to 68 with higher levels indicating more intense combat. We use the constructed
combat intensity index by the HRBADP, which defined High Intensity Combat as having 10 or
more positive indicators of combat and Lower Intensity Combat as 1 to 9 (Bray et al. 2009).
        The estimates, displayed in Panel I of Table 9, show that high intensity combat exposure
has a far larger effect on the probability of crime commission than lower intensity combat
exposure. For example, high intensity exposure is associated with a 0.038 increase in the
probability of UCMJ punishment (column 1), a 0.008 increase in the probability of arrest (column
3), and a 0.029 increase in the probability of being a gang member (column 5).
        In Panel II of Table 9, we explore the impact of specific forms of battlefield trauma on
crime. Specifically, we examine whether the veteran (i) suffered an injury during his deployment
to a combat zone; (ii) witnessed the injury or death of an allied soldier; and (iii) witnessed the



43
   The combat exposure index is constructed by the HRBADP survey based on answers to the following 17
questions, with possible frequencies: 0; 1 to 3; 4 to 12; 13 to 50; and 51 or more.

        Thinking about all of your deployments, how many times have you had each of the following experiences?
        I was sent outside the wire on combat patrols, convoys, or sorties.
        I, or members of my unit, received incoming fire from small arms, artillery, rockets, or mortars.
        I, or members of my unit, encountered mines, booby traps, or IEDs (improvised explosive devices).
        I worked with landmines or other unexploded ordnances.
        My unit fired on the enemy.
        I personally fired my weapon at the enemy.
        I engaged in hand-to-hand combat.
        I was responsible for the death or serious injury of an enemy.
        I witnessed members of my unit or an ally unit being seriously wounded or killed.
        My unit suffered causalities.
        I saw dead bodies or human remains.
        I handled, uncovered, or removed dead bodies or human remains.
        Someone I knew well was killed in combat.
        I took care of injured or dying people.
        I interacted with enemy prisoners of war.
        I witnessed or engaged in acts of cruelty, excessive force, or acts violating rules of engagement.
        I was wounded in combat.

                                                      26
death of an enemy soldier. We find that the relationship between combat deployment and
subsequent crime is the strongest among those who suffered an injury. This finding lends further
support to the notion that physiological or physical trauma suffered during combat missions may
be key to subsequent criminal behavior. 44


6.5 Mechanisms
         The above results, across two datasets, show that post-9/11 combat deployments
substantially increased the probability of veteran crime commission. We now descriptively
explore observable mechanisms through which combat exposure might affect crime.
Specifically, we examine the roles of TBI, PTSD, binge drinking, and substance abuse as
potential channels. 45 First, consistent with the prior literature, we document in Appendix Table 5
that combat assignment to zones with enemy firefight substantially increases the risk of
exhibiting the symptoms of TBI, PTSD, and substance abuse.


44
   However, we note that 70 percent of those who witnessed an enemy death also witnessed an ally hurt, and 50
percent of those who observed the death or injury of an ally also observed an enemy death.
45
   We define TBI as an indicator using HRBADP Survey criteria in which an individual is identified as exposed to
TBI based on responses to a list of items about events experienced during deployments, including"[experiencing]
blast or explosion (IED, RPG, land mine, grenade, etc.)""vehicular accident/crash (any vehicle, including
aircraft),""fragment wound above the shoulders,""bullet wound above the shoulder, "fall," lost consciousness or
got `knocked out,'" "felt dazed, confused, or `saw stars',"didn't remember the event," "had a concussion or
symptoms of a concussion (such as headache, dizziness, irritability, etc.)," or "had a head injury."

We define PTSD as an indicator using HRBADP Survey criteria in which an individual is identified as exhibiting
the symptoms of PTSD based on responses to a list of items about things bothering the respondent in the last month,
including "Repeated, disturbing memories, thoughts or images of a stressful experience," "Repeated, disturbing
dreams of a stressful experience," "Suddenly acting or feeling as if a stressful experience were happening again (as
if you were reliving it)," "Feeling very upset when something reminded you of a stressful experience," "Having
physical reactions (e.g., heart pounding, trouble breathing, sweating) when something reminded you of a stressful
experience," "Avoiding thinking about or talking about a stressful experience or avoiding having feelings related to
it," "Avoiding activities or situations because they reminded you of a stressful experience," "Trouble remembering
important parts of a stressful experience, "Loss of interest in activities you used to enjoy," "Feeling distant or cut
off from other people," "Feeling emotionally numb or being unable to have loving feelings for those close to you,"
"Feeling as if your future somehow will be cut short," "Trouble falling or staying asleep," "Feeling irritable or
having angry outbursts," "Having difficulty concentrating," "Being "superalert" or watchful or on guard," or
"Feeling jumpy or easily startled."

Binge Drinking is a dummy variable set equal to 1 if the respondent reports consuming at least 5 drinks in a single
occasion in the past 30 days.

Substance Abuse is a dummy variable set equal to 1 if the respondent reported consuming marijuana, cocaine, PCP,
MDMA, hallucinogens, methamphetamine, heroin, GHB, inhalants, or painkillers (for non-medical reasons) in the
last 12 months.



                                                         27
       In Table 10, we descriptively explore their mediating role of various factors. In Panel I,
we reproduce our baseline estimates of the effect of combat exposure on crime. Then, we add a
control for TBI (Panel II), PTSD (Panel III), binge drinking (Panel IV), substance abuse (Panel
V), and finally all of these endogenous mediators (Panel VI). The findings show that the
estimated crime effects fall by the largest magnitudes (20 to 38 percent) with the addition of TBI
in the model (Panel II versus Panel I). PTSD appears to be the second most important mediator,
with estimated crime effects declining by 19 to 26 percent. Binge drinking and substance abuse
appear to be relatively less important pathways to crime, suggesting that addiction may play a
smaller role. Together, the inclusion of controls for all of our observed mediators (Panel VI)
reduces the magnitudes of our estimated crime effects of combat by 41 to 54 percent.


7. Conclusions
       U.S-led wars in Iraq and Afghanistan following the September 11, 2011 attacks on the
American homeland constitute the longest wars in the nation's history. The Global War on
Terrorism (GWOT) constitutes the second most costly war in American history, topped only by
World War II (Congressional Research Service 2010). Estimates from the Watson Institute
(2019) place the budgetary costs of this conflict at over $5.6 trillion, which includes increased
public expenditures on VDC benefits (Sabia and Skimmyhorn 2019; Stiglitz and Bilmes 2008)
and Veterans Health Administration-provided health care benefits (Congressional Budget Office
2010; Stiglitz and Bilmes 2008). However, the cost of fighting the GWOT on public budgets
may vastly understate the social costs of this conflict if waging Operation Enduring Freedom,
Operation New Dawn, and Operation Iraqi Freedom have increased the likelihood of criminal
behavior by veterans following war deployments.
       This paper provides new evidence on the effect of post-9/11 combat deployments on
subsequent criminal behavior among veterans. Using data from two national surveys and
exploiting exogenous assignment to combat zones generated by U.S. Armed Forces
administrative procedures, our analysis shows that deployment to combat zones in the post-9/11
era substantially increased criminal tendencies among servicemembers. In addition to significant
increases in property and violent crime, our results indicate that combat exposure resulted in a
higher likelihood of trouble with military and civilian police, arrest, and punishment under
UCMJ. Our auxiliary analysis suggests that the rise in TBI and PTSD are the likely explanations


                                                 28
behind the rise in crime among servicemembers. Thus, the changing nature of modern warfare
and war-related injuries, along with the waging of war with AVFs, may help to explain why the
crime effects of post-9/11 warfare are larger than in prior conflicts.
        Back-of-the-envelope calculations suggest that combat exposure generated substantial
economic costs to society in the form of additional crime. Using the marginal effects we obtain
from Table 4, and per-crime costs of property and violent crime reported by Chalfin (2015), we
estimate post-9/11 combat exposure-induced crime costs of approximately $26.4 billion for
violent crime and $315 million for property crime (in 2018 dollars). 46 Moreover, we note that
these estimates may be lower bound given that assignment to a combat zone without enemy
firefight may also generate increases in property crime.
        Our findings have a number of important public policy implications. The discovery of
high social costs of crime from post-9/11 combat deployments significantly influences the cost-
effectiveness of programs designed to ease veterans' transition from military to civilian life, such
as the Department of Labor Veterans' Employment and Training Service (VETS) and the
Morale, Welfare, and Recreation (MWR) programs. Moreover, our findings have important
implications for the optimal provision of services designed to comprehensively address PTSD,
TBI, and other combat-related trauma among active-duty personnel. Finally, a recent poll shows
that the American public is increasingly opposed to new U.S. military interventions (Carden
2018). Revealing previously undocumented social costs of post-9/11 warfare may strengthen this
sentiment and influence future decisions by the U.S. government to engage in military action.




46
   The median cost per incident for each index crime among estimates in the extant literature reported by Chalfin
(2015) is $5,600,000 for homicide, $157,500 for rape, $40,950 for robbery, $89,250 for assault, $5,431 for burglary,
$2,086 for larceny, and $9,341 for motor vehicle theft in 2012 dollars. Using the median cost per incident and the
total number of each index crimes committed in the United States in 2018 reported by the Federal Bureau of
Investigation, we calculated the weighted average cost of each violent crime (i.e., homicide, rape, robbery, and
assault) to be $176,619 and each property crime (i.e., burglary, larceny, and motor vehicle theft) to be $3,827, both
in 2018 dollars. A 2018 RAND study indicates that, of the 2.77 million service members deployed to GWOT in Iraq
and Afghanistan, 2.1 million were active duty members (Wenger et al. 2018). According to the HRBADP, which is
designed to be representative of active duty forces, 51.5 percent of service members had been exposed to combat.
Combining these figures with our estimates of the effect of combat exposure on violent crime ranging from 0.118 to
0.138 (Panels II through IV of Table 4) and 0.076 to 0.093 for property crime, we obtain cost estimates of $22.5 to
$26.4 billion for violent crime and $315 to $385 million for property crime.

                                                        29
                                           References

Albæk, K., LethPetersen, S., Le Maire, D., & Tranæs, T. (2017). Does peacetime military
service affect crime?. The Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 119(3), 512-540.

Anderson, D.M., Cesur, R. and Tekin, E. (2015). Youth depression and future criminal
behavior. Economic Inquiry, 53(1), 294-317.

Anderson, D. M., & Rees, D. I. (2015). Deployments, combat exposure, and crime. The Journal
of Law and Economics, 58(1), 235-267.

Angrist, J. D. (1990). Lifetime earnings and the Vietnam era draft lottery: Evidence from social
security administrative records. American Economic Review, 313-336.

Angrist, J.D. (1993). The effect of veterans benefits on education and earnings. Industrial and
Labor Relations Review, 46(4), 637-652.

Angrist, J., & Krueger, A. B. (1994). Why do World War II veterans earn more than
nonveterans?. Journal of Labor Economics, 12(1), 74-97.

Angrist, J. D. (1998). The Palestinian labor market between the Gulf War and Autonomy.

Angrist, J. D., Chen, S. H., & Frandsen, B. R. (2010). Did Vietnam veterans get sicker in the
1990s? The complicated effects of military service on self-reported health. Journal of Public
Economics, 94(11-12), 824-837.

Arnold, S., Crate, C., Drennan, S., Gaylord, J., Hoffmann, A., Martin, D., ... & Willoughby, M.
(2011). Non-deployable soldiers: Understanding the Army's challenge. Army War Coll Carlisle
Barracks Pa.

Autor, D. H., & Duggan, M. G. (2008). The effect of transfer income on labor force participation
and enrollment in federal benefits programs: Evidence from the veterans disability compensation
program. A Report to the Social Security Administration.

Autor, D., H., Duggan, M. G., & Lyle, D. S. (2011). Battle scars? The puzzling decline in
employment and rise in disability receipt among Vietnam era veterans. American Economic
Review, 101(3), 339-44.

David, H., Duggan, M., Greenberg, K., & Lyle, D. S. (2016). The impact of disability benefits on
labor supply: Evidence from the VA's disability compensation program. American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics, 8(3), 31-68.

Barr, A. (2015). From the battlefield to the schoolyard: The short- term impact of the post- 9/11
GI Bill. Journal of Human Resources, 50(3), 580-613.

Burchett K., Fereira D., Sullivan G. (2008). Post-deployment homicide. Newsletter of Section VII
of the American Psychological Association, 13­14

                                                30
Blue-Howells, J. H., Clark, S. C., van den Berk-Clark, C., & McGuire, J. F. (2013). The US
Department of Veterans Affairs Veterans Justice Programs and the sequential intercept model:
Case examples in national dissemination of intervention for justice-involved
veterans. Psychological Services, 10(1), 48.

Bray, R.M., Pemberton, M.R., Hourani, L.L., Witt, M., Olmsted, K.L., Brown, J.M., Weimer, B.,
Lance, M.E., Marsden, M.E. and Scheffler, S., (2009). Department of Defense survey of health
related behaviors among active duty military personnel (No. RTI/10940-FR). Research Triangle
International, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina.

Brummett, T. (2013). Veterans treatment courts: An experiment in therapeutic jurisprudence for
combat veterans. Social Sciences Capstone Projects. Paper 21.

Buffaloe, D. L. (2006). Defining asymmetric warfare. Arlington, VA: Institute of Land Warfare,
Association of the United States Army.

Carden, J. (2018). A new poll shows the public is overwhelmingly opposed to endless US
military interventions. The Nation. Retrieved February 2, 2020 from
https://www.thenation.com/article/archive/new-poll-shows-public-overwhelmingly-opposed-to-
endless-us-military-interventions/

Carter, S. P., Greenberg, K., & Walker, M. S. (2017). The impact of computer usage on
academic performance: Evidence from a randomized trial at the United States Military Academy.
Economics of Education Review, 56, 118-132.

Carter, S. P., & Skimmyhorn, W. (2018, May). Can information change personal retirement
savings? Evidence from social security benefits statement mailings. American Economic
Association: Papers and Proceedings, 108, 93-97.

Cesur, R., Sabia, J.J. and Tekin, E. (2013). The psychological costs of war: military combat and
mental health. Journal of Health Economics, 32(1), 51-65.

Cesur, R., Chesney, A., & Sabia, J. J. (2016). Combat exposure, cigarette consumption, and
substance use. Economic Inquiry, 54(3), 1705-1726.

Cesur, R., & Sabia, J. J. (2016). When war comes home: The effect of combat service on
domestic violence. Review of Economics and Statistics, 98(2), 209-225.

Cesur, R., Sabia, J. J., & Bradford, W. D. (2019). Did the war on terror ignite an opioid
epidemic? (No. w26264). National Bureau of Economic Research.

Chalfin, A. (2015). Economic costs of crime. The Encyclopedia of Crime and Punishment, 1-12.

Court Martial Reports (2019). Marines Judge Advocate Division. Retrieved October 23, 2019,
from https://www.hqmc.marines.mil/sja/Court-Martial-Reports/.

                                                31
Currie, J., & Tekin, E. (2012). Understanding the cycle childhood maltreatment and future
crime. Journal of Human Resources, 47(2), 509-549.

Daggett, S. (2010). Costs of major U.S. wars. Congressional Research Service. Order Code
RS22926.

Douds, A.S. & Hummer, D. (2019) When a Veterans Treatment Court fails: Lessons learned
from a qualitative evaluation. Victims & Offenders, 14(3), 322-343.

Elbogen, E. B., Johnson, S. C., Newton, V. M., Straits-Troster, K., Vasterling, J. J., Wagner, H.
R., & Beckham, J. C. (2012). Criminal justice involvement, trauma, and negative affect in Iraq
and Afghanistan war era veterans. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 80(6), 1097-
1102.

Elder Jr, G. H., Wang, L., Spence, N. J., Adkins, D. E., & Brown, T. H. (2010). Pathways to the
allvolunteer military. Social Science Quarterly, 91(2), 455-475.

Engel, R. C., Gallagher, L. B., & Lyle, D. S. (2010). Military deployments and children's
academic achievement: Evidence from Department of Defense Education Activity Schools.
Economics of Education Review, 29(1), 73-82.

Fazal, T. M. (2014). Dead wrong? Battle deaths, military medicine, and exaggerated reports of
war's demise. International Security, 39(1), 95-125.

Fischer, H. (2015). A guide to US military casualty statistics: Operation Freedom's Sentinel,
Operation Inherent Resolve, Operation New Dawn, Operation Iraqi Freedom, and Operation
Enduring Freedom. Congressional Research Service, 7, 5700.

Flatley, B., Clark, S., Rosenthal, J., & Blue-Howells, J. (2017). Veterans court inventory 2016
update: Characteristics of and VA involvement in Veterans Treatment Courts and other veteran-
focused court programs from the veterans justice outreach specialist perspective. Retrieved from
Washington, DC.

Fone, Z. S., Sabia, J. J., & Cesur, R. (2019). Do minimum wage increases reduce crime? (No.
w25647). National Bureau of Economic Research.

Gade, D. M., Biggs, A. G., & Weinzierl, M. (2013). A better way to help veterans. National
Affairs. Retrieved October 15, 2019, from https://www.nationalaffairs.com/publications/detail/a-
better-way-to-help-veterans.

Galiani, S., Rossi, M. and Schargrodsky, E. (2011). Conscription and crime: Evidence from the
Argentine draft lottery. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 3(2), 119-36.

Gartner, R., & Kennedy, L. (2018). War and postwar violence. Crime and Justice, 47(1), 1-67.



                                                32
Glenn, D. M., Beckham, J. C., Feldman, M. E., Kirby, A. C., Hertzberg, M. A., & Moore, S. D.
(2002). Violence and hostility among families of Vietnam veterans with combat-related
posttraumatic stress disorder. Violence and Victims, 17(4), 473.

Grafton v. United States. (1907). 206 U. S. 333, 51 L. Ed. 1084,27 S. C. R. 749, 11 Ann. Cas.
640.

Grossman, D. (2009) On killing: The psychological cost of learning to kill in war and society.
Open Road Media.

Hoge, C.W., Castro, Carl A., Messer, Stephen C., McGurk, Dennis, Cotting, Dave I., Koffman,
Robert L. (2004). Combat duty in Iraq and Afghanistan, mental health problems, and barriers to
care. New England Journal of Medicine, 351(1), 13.

Hoge, C.W., D. McGurk, J.L. Thomas, A.L. Cox, C.C. Engel, C.A. Castro. (2008). Mild
traumatic brain injury in U.S. soldiers returning from Iraq. New England Journal of Medicine,
358, 453-463

Jaafari, J. (2019). Special courts for veterans languish. Retrieved from
https://www.themarshallproject.org/2019/02/19/special-courts-for-veterans-languish

Jakupcak, M. Conybeare, D. Phelps, L. Hunt, S. Holmes, H. A. Felker, B. McFall, M. E. (2007).
Anger, hostility, and aggression among Iraq and Afghanistan war veterans reporting PTSD and
subthreshold PTSD. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 20(6), 945­954.

Keneally, M. (2018). Why the link between veterans and mass shootings is more complicated
than you think. Retrieved October 23, 2019, from https://abcnews.go.com/US/link-veterans-
mass-shootings-complicated/story?id=59057321.

Lacdan, J. (2018). Non-deployable directive to help Army work toward more 'lethal' force.
Retrieved October 26, 2019, from
https://www.army.mil/article/213757/non_deployable_directive_to_help_army_work_toward_m
ore_lethal_force.

Laich, D., & Wilkerson, L. (2017). The deep unfairness of America's all-volunteer force.
Retrieved October 30, 2019, from https://www.theamericanconservative.com/articles/the-deep-
unfairness-of-americas-all-volunteer-force/.

Lash, M. (2015). TBI and PTSD: Navigating the perfect storm. Brain Injury Magazine, 1.

Lemieux, T., & Card, D. (2001). Education, earnings and the Canadian G.I. Bill. Canadian Journal
of Economics, 34(2), 313-344.

Lin, M. J. (2008). Does unemployment increase crime? Evidence from US data 1974­2000.
Journal of Human Resources, 43(2), 413-436.



                                               33
Lindo, J. M., & Stoecker, C. (2014). Drawn into violence: Evidence on "what makes a criminal"
from the Vietnam draft lotteries. Economic Inquiry, 52(1), 239-258.

Lindquist, L. K., Love, H. C., & Elbogen, E. B. (2017). Traumatic brain injury in Iraq and
Afghanistan veterans: New results from a national random sample study. The Journal of
Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences, 29(3), 254-259.

Lochner, L., & Moretti, E. (2004). The effect of education on crime: Evidence from prison
inmates, arrests, and self-reports. American Economic Review, 94(1), 155-189.

Lyle, D. S. (2006). Using military deployments and job assignments to estimate the effect of
parental absences and household relocations on children's academic achievement. Journal of
Labor Economics, 24(2), 319-350.

Lyk-Jensen, S. V. (2018). Does peacetime military service affect crime? New evidence from
Denmark's conscription lotteries. Labour Economics, 52, 245-262.

Machin, S., Marie, O., & Vuji, S. (2011). The crime reducing effect of education. The
Economic Journal, 121(552), 463-484.

MacManus, D., Dean, K., Jones, M., Rona, R. J., Greenberg, N., Hull, L., ... & Fear, N. T.
(2013). Violent offending by UK military personnel deployed to Iraq and Afghanistan: A data
linkage cohort study. The Lancet, 381(9870), 907-917.

Martorell, P., & Bergman, P. (2013). Understanding the cost and quality of military-related
education benefit programs. Santa Monica, CA, RAND National Defense Research Institute.

McKee, A. C., & Robinson, M. E. (2014). Militaryrelated traumatic brain injury and
neurodegeneration. Alzheimer's & Dementia, 10, S242-S253.

Military DUI: Court Martial and Civilian Charges (2016). Retrieved October 24, 2019, from
https://military.findlaw.com/criminal-law/military-dui-court-martial-and-civilian-charges.html.

Mocan, N., & Tekin, E. (2010). Ugly criminals. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 92(1),
15-30.

National Center for State Courts (2012). Veterans Courts - Resource Guide. Retrieved April 25,
2012, from www.ncsc.org/Topics/Alternative-Dockets/Problem-Solving-Courts/Veterans-
Court/Resource-Guide.aspx

National Guard Association of the United States. (2018). Army defines deployability
requirements. Retrieved October 26, 2019, from https://www.ngaus.org/about-
ngaus/newsroom/army-defines-deployability-requirements.

National Research Council. (2008). Gulf War and health: Volume 7: Long-term consequences of
traumatic brain injury.


                                               34
Navy Results of Trial. (2019). U.S. Navy Judge Advocate General's Corps. Retrieved October
23, 2019, from https://www.jag.navy.mil/news/ROT.htm.

Okie S. (2005). Traumatic brain injury in the war zone. New England Journal of Medicine,
352(20), 2043-2047.

Orcutt, H. K., King, L. A., & King, D. W. (2003). Male-perpetrated violence among Vietnam
veteran couples: Relationships with veteran's early life characteristics, trauma history, and PTSD
symptomatology. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 16(4), 381-390.

Physicians for Social Responsibility. (2006). Fact sheet on U.S. Military casualties. Retrieved
August 6, 2019, from https://www.psr.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/body-count.pdf

Rohlfs, C. (2010). Does combat exposure make you a more violent or criminal person? Evidence
from the Vietnam draft. Journal of Human Resources, 45(2), 271-300.

Sabia, J. & Skimmyhorn, W. (2019). Beyond the draft: Modern warfare, veterans' benefits,
and labor market outcomes. San Diego State University Working Paper.

Seal, K. H., Cohen, G., Waldrop, A., Cohen, B. E., Maguen, S., & Ren, L. (2011). Substance use
disorders in Iraq and Afghanistan veterans in VA healthcare, 2001­2010: Implications for
screening, diagnosis and treatment. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 116(1-3), 93-101.

Siminski, P., Ville, S., & Paull, A. (2016). Does the military turn men into criminals? New
evidence from Australia's conscription lotteries. Journal of Population Economics, 29(1), 197-
218.

Simkins, J. D. (2018). Sarah Palin's son, an Army veteran, once again arrested and charged with
domestic violence assault. Retrieved October 23, 2019, from https://www.militarytimes.com/off-
duty/2018/10/01/sarah-palins-son-an-army-veteran-once-again-arrested-and-charged-with-
domestic-violence-assault/.

Sontag, D., & Alvarez, L. (2008). Across America, deadly echoes of foreign battles. New York
Times, 13.

Sreenivasan, S., Garrick, T., McGuire, J., Smee, D. E., Dow, D., & Woehl, D. (2013). Critical
concerns in Iraq/Afghanistan war veteran-forensic interface: Combat-related post-deployment
criminal violence. Journal of the American Academy of Psychiatry and the Law Online, 41(2),
263-273.

Stanley, M. (2003). College education and the midcentury GI Bills. Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 118(2), 671-708.

Stiglitz, J. E., & Bilmes, L. J. (2008). The three trillion dollar war: The true cost of the Iraq
conflict. WW Norton & Company.


                                                  35
Taft, C. T., Pless, A. P., Stalans, L. J., Koenen, K. C., King, L. A., & King, D. W. (2005). Risk
factors for partner violence among a national sample of combat veterans. Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology, 73(1), 151.

Tanielian, T. L. & Jaycox, L. (2008). Invisible wounds of war: Psychological and cognitive
injuries, their consequences, and services to assist recovery (Vol. 1). Rand Corporation.

Teeters, J.B., Lancaster, C.L., Brown, D.G. and Back, S.E. (2017). Substance use disorders in
military veterans: Prevalence and treatment challenges. Substance Abuse and Rehabilitation, 8,
69.

Thornton, R. (2007). Asymmetric warfare: Threat and response in the 21st Century. Wiley.
Found at https://books.google.com/books?id=T1ZKVo8bKkkC

Timko, C., Flatley, B., Tjemsland, A., McGuire, J., Clark, S., Blue-Howells, J., ... & Finlay, A.
(2016). A longitudinal examination of Veterans Treatment Courts' characteristics and eligibility
criteria. Justice Research and Policy, 17(2), 123-136.

Tsai, J., Finlay, A., Flatley, B., Kasprow, W. J., & Clark, S. (2018). A national study of Veterans
Treatment Court participants: Who benefits and who recidivates. Administration and Policy in
Mental Health and Mental Health Services Research, 45(2), 236-244.

United State Army. (2010). 220-1. Army Unit Status Reporting and Force Registration--
Consolidated Policies.

United States Code, Title 10, Subtitle A, Part II, Chapter 47 (UCMJ)

United States Congressional Budget Office. (2010). Potential costs of veteran's health care.
Prepared by Golding, H.

United States Department of Justice. (2015). Office of Justice Programs, Bureau of Justice
Statistics. Prepared by Bronson, J. E. Carson, A., Noonan, M. E., & Berzofsky, M.

Urbanic Law. (2017). What happens if someone in the military is charged with theft, burglary, or
robbery? Retrieved October 24, 2019, from https://www.urbanic.law/criminal-defense/what-
happens-if-someone-in-the-military-is-charged-with-theft-burglary-or-robbery/.

USCAAF: Annual Reports. (2019). United States Courts of Appeals for the Armed Forces.
Retrieved October 23, 2019, from https://www.armfor.uscourts.gov/newcaaf/ann_reports.htm.

Wallace, D. (2009). Improvised explosive devices and traumatic brain injury: The military
experience in Iraq and Afghanistan. Australasian Psychiatry, 17(3), 218­224.

Weldon, K. (2017). Suppose they gave a war and nobody came: Changing opinions on the draft.
Roper Center. https://ropercenter.cornell.edu/blog/suppose-they-gave-war-and-nobody-came-
changing-opinions-draft


                                                36
Wenger, J. W., O'Connell, C., & Cottrell, L. (2018). Examination of recent deployment
experience across the services and components (No. RR-1928-A). RAND, United States

Wilk, J. E., Bliese, P. D., Kim, P. Y., Thomas, J. L., McGurk, D., & Hoge, C. W. (2010).
Relationship of combat experiences to alcohol misuse among US soldiers returning from the Iraq
War. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 108(1-2), 115-121.

Williams, W. H., Chitsabesan, P., Fazel, S., McMillan, T., Hughes, N., Parsonage, M., & Tonks,
J. (2018). Traumatic brain injury: A potential cause of violent crime?. The Lancet Psychiatry,
5(10), 836-844.

Wilson, C. (2007). Improvised explosive devices (IEDs) in Iraq and Afghanistan: Effects and
Countermeasures. Washington, DC: Congressional Research Service. In Library of Congress.

Wolfe, M. (2013). From PTSD to prison: Why veterans become criminals. The Daily Beast.

Ziezulewicz, G. (2017). Court-martialing retirees? 'Fat Leonard' cloud still looms for many
current and former sailors. Retrieved October 28, 2019, from
https://www.navytimes.com/news/your-navy/2017/11/20/court-martialing-retirees-fat-leonard-
cloud-still-looms-over-hundreds/.

Zoroya, G. (2007). Scientists: Brain injuries from war worse than thought. USA Today.




                                              37
                             Table 1: Combat and Crime Measures, Add Health

                                               (1)         (2)       (3)        (4)        (5)
                                              Full       Combat     Non-      Combat     Combat
                                             Sample       Zone     Combat    Exposure    Service
                                                                    Zone                 without
                                                                                        Exposure

Combat Measures

Combat Zone Deployment                        0.755        --        --         --         --
                                             (0.430)       --        --         --         --

 Combat Exposure                              0.367       0.486      --         --         --
                                             (0.483)     (0.501)     --         --         --
 Combat Service without Exposure              0.388       0.514      --         --         --
                                             (0.488)     (0.501)     --         --         --

Dependent Variables

Property Crime                                0.098       0.113     0.051      0.114     0.112
                                             (0.298)     (0.317)   (0.221)    (0.319)   (0.317)
Violent Crime                                 0.242       0.257     0.195      0.297     0.219
                                             (0.429)     (0.438)   (0.398)    (0.458)   (0.415)
White Collar Crime                            0.040       0.041     0.034      0.034     0.048
                                             (0.195)     (0.200)   (0.182)    (0.183)   (0.215)
Drug Crime                                    0.035       0.036     0.034      0.046     0.027
                                             (0.185)     (0.186)   (0.182)    (0.210)   (0.162)
Arrested                                      0.038       0.030     0.059      0.029     0.032
                                             (0.190)     (0.172)   (0.237)    (0.167)   (0.177)

Observations                                  482         364       118        177        187
    Standard deviations in parentheses.




                                                    38
                       Table 2: Combat and Crime Measures, HRBADP Survey

                                 (1)       (2)          (3)         (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)
                                 All     Combat     Non-Combat     Army      Marines   Navy       Air
                                         Exposure    Exposure                                    Force

Combat Measure

Combat Exposure                 0.515       --             --       0.805     0.706     0.220     0.443
                               (0.500)                             (0.396)   (0.456)   (0.414)   (0.497)
High Intensity Combat           0.317     0.609           0.008     0.631     0.464     0.114     0.161
                               (0.466)   (0.488)         (0.087)   (0.483)   (0.499)   (0.318)   (0.368)
Number of Post-9/11             1.884     2.199           1.550     1.751     1.692     1.945     2.084
Deployments                    (1.674)   (1.562)         (1.725)   (1.452)   (1.302)   (1.748)   (1.979)
Average Deployment              2.808     3.561           2.007     3.623     3.111     2.475     2.250
Length                         (3.728)   (4.063)         (3.144)   (4.587)   (3.766)   (3.407)   (3.037)

Dependent Variables

UCMJ Punishment                 0.069     0.079           0.058     0.082     0.074     0.054     0.070
                               (0.253)   (0.270)         (0.234)   (0.275)   (0.262)   (0.227)   (0.255)
Trouble Police                  0.067     0.079           0.055     0.086     0.081     0.058     0.050
                               (0.251)   (0.270)         (0.228)   (0.281)   (0.273)   (0.235)   (0.218)
Arrested                        0.005     0.006           0.003     0.006     0.004     0.005     0.004
                               (0.068)   (0.079)         (0.053)   (0.074)   (0.063)   (0.069)   (0.065)
Fight                           0.067     0.085           0.048     0.096     0.089     0.060     0.032
                               (0.250)   (0.279)         (0.213)   (0.295)   (0.285)   (0.238)   (0.176)
Gang Member                     0.013     0.019           0.005     0.020     0.015     0.011     0.005
                               (0.111)   (0.138)         (0.072)   (0.141)   (0.123)   (0.106)   (0.070)

Observations                   11542      5948            5594      2563      2507      3374      3098
  Standard deviations in parentheses




                                                    39
              Table 3A: Evidence on the Exogeneity of Deployment Assignment (Add Health)

                                            Combat Deployment   Combat Exposure   Combat Exposure
                                                   vs                 vs                vs
                                               Non-Combat         No Combat         Non-Combat
                                               Deployment          Exposure         Deployment
                                                   (1)                (2)               (3)

Pre-Deployment Property Crime                    -0.056              0.024             -0.033
                                                 (0.049)            (0.052)            (0.072)
Pre-Deployment Violent Crime                      0.007              0.065              0.050
                                                 (0.042)            (0.049)            (0.058)
Pre-Deployment Drug Crime                        -0.073              -0.059            -0.088
                                                 (0.059)            (0.077)            (0.088)
Pre-deployment Arrest                             0.023              0.122              0.078
                                                 (0.101)            (0.127)            (0.109)

Joint F-test (p-value) for Pre-Deployment      0.78 (0.54)        0.64 (0.63)        0.63 (0.64)
Crime

Wave 1 Height                                    -0.002              0.002              0.001
                                                 (0.005)            (0.006)            (0.008)

Wave 1 Weight                                    -0.001              -0.000            -0.001
                                                 (0.001)            (0.001)            (0.001)

Wave 1 Protestant                                -0.013              0.011             -0.008
                                                 (0.066)            (0.090)            (0.099)
Wave 1 Catholic                                   0.056              0.001              0.008
                                                 (0.075)            (0.095)            (0.111)
Wave 1 Other Religion                             0.030              0.005              0.081
                                                 (0.133)            (0.159)            (0.237)
F-test (p-value) for Religion Indicators       0.65 (0.58)        0.02 (0.99)        0.08 (0.97)

Age in Years                                      0.232              0.181              0.429
                                                 (0.411)            (0.409)            (0.598)
Age in Years Squared                              -0.004            -0.003             -0.008
                                                 (0.007)            (0.007)            (0.011)
F-test (p-value) for Age                        0.29(0.75)        0.30 (0.74)        0.56 (0.57)

Race: Black                                       0.005              -0.060            -0.047
                                                 (0.052)            (0.058)           (0.073)
Race: Other                                     0.140**              -0.035             0.111
                                                 (0.062)            (0.070)           (0.118)
F-test (p-value) for Race                      2.63 (0.07)         0.54(0.58)        0.78(0.46)


                                                  40
                                               Combat Deployment   Combat Exposure   Combat Exposure
                                                       vs                 vs                vs
                                                  Non-Combat         No Combat         Non-Combat
                                                  Deployment          Exposure         Deployment
                                                       (1)                (2)              (3)
Ethnicity: Hispanic                                  -0.014           -0.161***          -0.084
                                                    (0.048)            (0.053)           (0.081)

Some College                                         0.027             -0.002             0.024
                                                    (0.054)            (0.056)           (0.075)
College                                              0.109             -0.001             0.074
                                                    (0.082)            (0.086)           (0.121)
F-test (p-value) for Education                    1.02 (0.37)        0.01 (0.99)       0.19 (0.83)

Wave 1 PPVTS                                         -0.001             0.000            -0.001
                                                    (0.001)            (0.002)           (0.002)

$19K=<Parental Income <$28K                          -0.011             0.005            -0.036
                                                    (0.086)            (0.095)           (0.134)
$28K=<Parental Income <$36K                          0.054              0.066             0.045
                                                    (0.075)            (0.097)           (0.119)
$36K=<Parental Income <$45K                          0.057              0.015             0.045
                                                    (0.083)            (0.081)           (0.123)
$45K=<Parental Income <$56K                          0.090              0.056             0.104
                                                    (0.073)            (0.080)           (0.102)
$56K=<Parental Income <$83K                        0.165**              0.098             0.190
                                                    (0.083)            (0.105)           (0.124)
$83K=<Parental Income                                0.110              0.146             0.234
                                                    (0.099)            (0.133)           (0.156)
F-test (p-value) for Parental Income              1.11 (0.36)        0.43 (0.86)       1.67 (0.33)

Parents: Married                                     -0.093             0.045            -0.107
                                                    (0.076)            (0.136)           (0.149)
Parents: Divorced, Separated or Widowed              -0.129             0.056            -0.140
                                                    (0.092)            (0.152)           (0.170)
F-test (p-value) for Parental Marital Status      0.99 (0.37)        0.07 (0.93)       0.34 (0.73)

Mothers Education: High School                       0.029              0.014             0.020
                                                    (0.097)            (0.074)           (0.116)
Mothers Education: Above High School                 0.023              0.060             0.075
                                                    (0.091)            (0.074)           (0.122)
F-test (p-value) for Parental Education           0.05 (0.96)        0.55 (0.57)       0.46 (0.63)

One sibling                                          0.048              0.085             0.077
                                                    (0.095)            (0.137)           (0.141)
Two siblings                                         0.029              0.094             0.037

                                                     41
                                                       Combat Deployment            Combat Exposure           Combat Exposure
                                                               vs                          vs                         vs
                                                          Non-Combat                  No Combat                 Non-Combat
                                                          Deployment                   Exposure                 Deployment
                                                              (1)                         (2)                        (3)
                                                            (0.099)                     (0.144)                   (0.161)
Three siblings                                               0.047                       0.094                      0.044
                                                            (0.107)                     (0.142)                   (0.164)
Four siblings                                                0.020                       0.089                      0.004
                                                            (0.103)                     (0.143)                   (0.155)
Five or more siblings                                        0.010                       0.076                     -0.013
                                                            (0.108)                     (0.133)                   (0.173)
F-test (p-value) for Number of Siblings                   0.189 (0.98)                0.109(0.99)               0.246 (0.87)


Jailed Father                                                   -0.063                    -0.026                     -0.080
                                                               (0.048)                    (0.051)                    (0.055)

Joint F-test (p-value) for all covariates                    1.01 (0.46)                0.77 (0.94)                1.17(0.28)

Observations                                                     482                        482                        295
      Notes: Standard errors clustered on the school are in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 Each model
      includes controls for military-specific variables, including binary indicators for current active-duty military service
      status, total service length, military rank, branch of service, timing of service, occupation, and the timing of the
      interview. Coefficient(s) and standard error(s) are separately estimated for each variable (group). Each specification
      also includes dummies for missing information. The sample is comprised of male servicemembers only.




                                                                42
      Table 3B: Evidence on the Exogeneity of Deployment Assignment (HRBADP Survey)

                                                                                                  Combat Exposure
                                                                                                        vs
                                                                                                 No Combat Exposure

Some College                                                                                              0.024
                                                                                                         (0.018)
College Education                                                                                         0.032
                                                                                                         (0.038)
Joint F-test (p-value) for Education                                                                   0.94 (0.40)
Age                                                                                                       0.002
                                                                                                         (0.008)
Age Squared                                                                                               -0.000
                                                                                                         (0.000)
Joint F-test (p-value) for Age                                                                         0.04 (0.96)
Black                                                                                                     -0.008
                                                                                                         (0.030)
Race Other                                                                                                0.001
                                                                                                         (0.033)
Joint F-test (p-value) for Race                                                                        0.04(0.95)
Hispanic                                                                                                  0.013
                                                                                                         (0.033)

Married                                                                                                   -0.008
                                                                                                         (0.023)
Divorced                                                                                                  -0.030
                                                                                                         (0.055)
Joint F-test (p-value) for Education                                                                   0.15 (0.86)

Joint F-test (p-value) for all covariates                                                              0.71(0.69)

Observations                                                                                              3,100
  Robust standard errors corrected for clustering on the stratum are in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical
  significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels respectively. The sample consists of a sample in which each active duty
  deployed serviceman is matched on military characteristics available in the HRB survey: military rank, branch of
  service, and branch specific major command. The final sample is that which has common support on these
  characteristics.




                                                            43
                                 Table 4: The Effect of Combat Deployments on Crime,
                                 by Whether Combat Exposure Occurred (Add Health)

                                                                  (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)          (5)
                                                                Property         Violent        White Collar        Drug        Arrested
                                                                 Crime           Crime            Crime             Crime
Panel I: Military Controls
Combat Deployment                                              0.092***            0.064           0.037**          0.023         -0.001
                                                                (0.034)           (0.053)          (0.017)         (0.021)       (0.018)
Panel II: Military Controls
Combat Exposure                                                 0.093**           0.118*           0.031*           0.037         0.001
                                                                (0.043)           (0.067)          (0.016)         (0.025)       (0.019)
Combat Deployment without Exposure                              0.091**            0.018           0.042*           0.010         -0.003
                                                                (0.035)           (0.057)          (0.022)         (0.022)       (0.023)
Panel III: Panel II + Background Controls
Combat Exposure                                                  0.076*           0.132*            0.031          0.048*         0.009
                                                                (0.043)           (0.068)          (0.020)         (0.025)       (0.021)
Combat Deployment without Exposure                              0.096**            0.006            0.031           0.023         -0.003
                                                                (0.038)           (0.056)          (0.023)         (0.028)       (0.027)
Panel IV: Panel III + Pre-Enlistment Crime
Combat Exposure                                                 0.076*           0.138**            0.029          0.049*         0.008
                                                                (0.043)          (0.069)           (0.020)         (0.025)       (0.022)
Combat Deployment without Exposure                             0.114***           0.020             0.037           0.027         0.002
                                                                (0.037)          (0.060)           (0.025)         (0.029)       (0.027)

Observations                                                       480              480              480             480           480
Robust standard errors corrected for clustering on the school are in parentheses. Number of observations is in brackets. *, **, and
*** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels respectively. Military Controls include binary indicators for
current active-duty military service status, total service length, military rank, branch of service, service exclusively after September
11, occupation, and the timing of the interview. Individual and family controls include height, weight, religion indicators, age, age
squared, race/ethnicity indicators, Wave 1 Picture Vocabulary Test Score, parental income dummies, parental marital status
indicators, maternal education, and number of siblings indicators. Models also include missing dummy categories for each of the
control variables with missing information. The sample is comprised of men only.




                                                                    44
    Table 5: Heterogeneity in Crime Effects of Combat Deployments, by Current and Prior
                               Active Duty Service (Add Health)

                                                      (1)            (2)             (3)               (4)          (5)
                                                    Property       Violent       White Collar         Drug        Arrested
                                                     Crime         Crime           Crime              Crime
Panel I: Current Active Duty Sample
Combat Exposure                                      -0.113          0.205           0.017            0.011        -0.006
                                                    (0.087)         (0.136)         (0.031)          (0.022)       (0.015)
Combat Deployment without Exposure                   -0.063          0.059           0.030            0.024        -0.013
                                                    (0.078)         (0.141)         (0.025)          (0.023)       (0.014)

Observations                                           194            194              194             194           196
Panel II: Past Active Duty Sample
Combat Exposure                                     0.112*           0.100           0.002            0.067         0.021
                                                    (0.060)         (0.086)         (0.031)          (0.041)       (0.036)
Combat Deployment without Exposure                 0.190***          0.031           0.022            0.004        -0.008
                                                    (0.052)         (0.089)         (0.042)          (0.047)       (0.053)

Observations                                           286            286              286             286           284
  Robust standard errors corrected for clustering on the school are in parentheses. Number of observations is in
  brackets. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels respectively. Military
  Controls include binary indicators for current active-duty military service status, total service length, military rank,
  branch of service, service exclusively after September 11, occupation, and the timing of the interview. Individual
  and family controls include height, weight, religion indicators, age, age squared, race/ethnicity indicators, Wave 1
  Picture Vocabulary Test Score, parental income dummies, parental marital status indicators, maternal education, and
  number of siblings indicators. Models also include missing dummy categories for each of the control variables with
  missing information. The sample is comprised of men only.




                                                             45
         Table 6: Estimated Effect of Combat Exposure on Crime (HRBADP Survey)

                                             (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)           (5)
                                           UCMJ             Trouble         Arrested          Fight         Gang
                                         punishment          Police                                        Member
 Panel I: Military Controls Only
 Pooled Sample                  0.025***  0.022***                          0.005***        0.035***       0.017***
                                 (0.006)   (0.006)                           (0.002)         (0.007)        (0.004)
 Observations                    11,542    11,511                            11,542          11,512         11,386
 Panel II: Military + Background Controls

 Pooled Sample                 0.026***    0.023***                         0.005***        0.037***       0.017***
                                (0.005)     (0.006)                          (0.002)         (0.006)        (0.004)
 Observations                   11,542      11,511                           11,542          11,512         11,386
 Panel III: Nearest Neighbor Matching Estimates
 Pooled Sample                 0.020***    0.024***                        0.0034***        0.036***       0.014***
                                (0.005)     (0.005)                         (0.0013)         (0.005)        (0.002)
 Observations                   [3,100]     [3,100]                          [3,100]         [3,100]        [3,100]
 Panel IV: Army
 Army Sample                   0.043**     0.045***                           0.003         0.051***       0.027**
                                (0.013)     (0.010)                          (0.003)         (0.010)       (0.007)
 Observations                    2,563       2,550                            2,563           2,556         2,525
 Panel V: Marines
 Marines                       0.036**       0.022                            0.002          0.035*          0.019
                                (0.012)     (0.014)                          (0.005)         (0.014)        (0.010)
 Observations                    2,507       2,501                            2,507           2,498          2,465
 Panel VI: Navy
 Navy                          0.023**     0.033***                           0.006         0.066***         0.022
                                (0.007)     (0.007)                          (0.003)         (0.013)        (0.013)
 Observations                    3,374       3,371                            3,374           3,367          3,328
 Panel VII: Air Force
 Air Force                       0.015       0.004                          0.008***        0.015***       0.008**
                                (0.011)     (0.010)                          (0.002)         (0.003)       (0.003)
 Observations                    3,098       3,089                            3,098           3,091         3,068
In Panels I, II, IV, V, VI, and VII Robust standard errors corrected for clustering on the stratum are in parentheses.
In Panel III, bootstrapped standard errors with 500 replications are in parentheses. Number of observations is in
brackets. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels respectively. Each model
controls for military rank, branch of service, branch specific major command indicators, education dummies, age,
age squared, and race/ethnicity dummies. The sample is comprised of men only.




                                                          46
                  Table 7: Heterogeneity in Crime Effects of Combat Exposure,
                           by Servicemen Characteristics (HRBADP)

                                          (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)           (5)
                                        UCMJ             Trouble         Arrested         Fight         Gang
                                      punishment          Police                                       Member
  Panel I: Age
  Ages 18-to-24                         0.034*           0.038*          0.009*        0.058***        0.031**
                                        (0.017)          (0.021)         (0.005)        (0.018)        (0.012)
                                         2,545            2,535           2,545          2,535          2,489

  Ages 25-to-32                        0.036***          0.019*          0.008**       0.041***       0.020***
                                        (0.007)          (0.010)         (0.003)        (0.011)        (0.005)
                                         3,872            3,859           3,872          3,860          3,826

  Ages 33 to 50                          0.007            0.007           0.001          0.014*         0.003
                                        (0.005)          (0.006)         (0.001)         (0.007)       (0.002)
                                         5,057            5,050           5,057           5,050         5,010
  Panel II: Gender
  Women                                 0.026**         0.021***          0.000         0.027**        0.008*
                                        (0.010)          (0.007)         (0.004)        (0.010)        (0.004)
                                         3,169            3,161           3,169          3,159          3,151
  Panel III: E vs O Rank
  Enlisted                             0.027***         0.025***        0.006***       0.039***       0.018***
                                        (0.007)          (0.008)         (0.002)        (0.009)        (0.005)
                                         8,792            8,764           8,792          8,764          8,667

  Officer                                0.008           -0.010           0.002           0.005         0.001
                                        (0.006)          (0.007)         (0.002)         (0.005)       (0.002)
                                         2,682            2,680           2,682           2,681         2,658
  Panel IV: Race/Ethnicity
  Non-Hispanic White                   0.025***          0.018**         0.004*        0.023***        0.008*
                                        (0.006)          (0.007)         (0.002)        (0.006)        (0.004)
                                         7,361            7,346           7,361          7,344          7,275

  Non-White                              0.018           0.012*         0.006***       0.024***        0.010**
                                        (0.012)          (0.006)         (0.002)        (0.006)        (0.004)
                                         3,075            8,378           8,399          8,378          8,300
Robust standard errors corrected for clustering on the stratum are in parentheses. Number of observations is in
brackets. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels respectively. Each model
controls for military rank, branch of service, branch specific major command indicators, education dummies, age,
age squared, race/ethnicity dummies, and marital status indicators. The sample is comprised of men only.



                                                        47
          Table 8: Disentangling Combat Exposure Effects from Number and Length
                             of Combat Deployments (HRBADP)

                                                              (1)         (2)          (3)             (4)
Panel I: UCMJ punishment
Combat Exposure                                               0.026***                                 0.022***
                                                              (0.006)                                  (0.006)
Number of Post-9/11 Deployments                                           0.003*                       0.002
                                                                          (0.002)                      (0.002)
Months Deployed Last Year                                                              0.002**         0.001*
                                                                                       (0.001)         (0.001)
Observations                                                  11,497      11,430       11,400          11,369
Panel II: Trouble Police
Combat Exposure                                               0.023***                                 0.019***
                                                              (0.006)                                  (0.006)
Number of Post-9/11 Deployments                                           0.005***                     0.003*
                                                                          (0.002)                      (0.002)
Months Deployed Last Year                                                              0.002*          0.001
                                                                                       (0.001)         (0.001)
Observations                                                  11,466      11,400       11,371          11,340
Panel III: Arrest
Combat Exposure                                               0.005***                                 0.005***
                                                              (0.002)                                  (0.001)
Number of Post-9/11 Deployments                                           0.000                        -0.000
                                                                          (0.000)                      (0.000)
Months Deployed Last Year                                                              0.000*          0.000
                                                                                       (0.000)         (0.000)
Observations                                                  11,497      11,430       11,400          11,369
Panel IV: Fight
Combat Exposure                                               0.036***                                 0.030***
                                                              (0.006)                                  (0.007)
Number of Post-9/11 Deployments                                           0.006***                     0.003*
                                                                          (0.002)                      (0.002)
Months Deployed Last Year                                                              0.002***        0.001*
                                                                                       (0.001)         (0.001)
Observations                                                  11,467      11,401       11,372          11,341
Panel V: Gang Member
Combat Exposure                                               0.016***                                 0.012***
                                                              (0.004)                                  (0.003)
Number of Post-9/11 Deployments                                           0.004***                     0.002**
                                                                          (0.001)                      (0.001)
Months Deployed Last Year                                                              0.001**         0.001
                                                                                       (0.000)         (0.000)
Observations                                                  11,341      11,281       11,252          11,222
Notes: Standard errors clustered on the stratum are in parentheses. Statistically significant at *10%, **5%, ***1%.
Regressions control for military rank, branch of service, branch-specific major command indicators, education
indictors, age, age squared, race/ethnicity dummies, and marital status indicators. The sample includes men only.

                                                         48
      Table 9: Estimates of Effect of Combat Exposure, by Intensity of Exposure (HRBADP)

                                                        (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)          (5)
                                                      UCMJ            Trouble         Arrest          Fight        Gang
                                                    punishment         Police                                     Member

Panel I: Intensity of Combat Exposure
Moderate Intensity Combat Exposure                     0.009           0.006          0.001        0.019***        0.005**
                                                      (0.006)         (0.006)        (0.001)        (0.005)        (0.002)
High Intensity Combat Exposure                       0.038***        0.035***       0.008***       0.068***       0.029***
                                                      (0.007)         (0.007)        (0.002)        (0.007)        (0.006)
Observations                                          11,542          11,511         11,542         11,512         11,386
Panel II: Battlefield Trauma
Injured in Combat                                    0.067***        0.069***        0.010*        0.091***       0.092***
                                                      (0.019)         (0.024)        (0.005)        (0.022)        (0.018)
Witnessed Ally Hurt                                   0.021**         0.012*          0.003        0.022***         0.004
                                                      (0.009)         (0.007)        (0.002)        (0.008)        (0.003)
Witnessed Enemy Death                                  0.019          0.023**         0.001        0.060***       0.020***
                                                      (0.011)         (0.009)        (0.002)        (0.009)        (0.007)
Observations                                          11,255          11,227         11,255         11,228         11,119
    Robust standard errors corrected for clustering on the stratum are in parentheses. Number of observations is in
    brackets. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels respectively. Each model
    controls for military rank, branch of service, branch specific major command indicators, education dummies, age,
    age squared, and race/ethnicity dummies. The sample is comprised of men only.




                                                            49
               Table 10: Descriptive Analysis of Possible Mechanisms (HRBADP)

                                           (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)           (5)
                                         UCMJ            Trouble         Arrest          Fight         Gang
                                       punishment         Police                                      Member
  Panel I
  Combat Exposure                       0.026***        0.023***       0.005***       0.037***        0.017***
                                         (0.005)         (0.006)        (0.002)        (0.006)         (0.004)
  Panel II
  Combat Exposure                       0.017***         0.017**        0.004**       0.023***        0.013***
                                         (0.006)         (0.007)        (0.002)        (0.007)         (0.004)
  TBI                                   0.027***         0.018*         0.004**       0.039***        0.014***
                                         (0.006)         (0.009)        (0.002)        (0.007)         (0.004)
  Panel III
  Combat Exposure                       0.021***        0.017***        0.004**       0.030***        0.014***
                                         (0.005)         (0.006)        (0.002)        (0.006)         (0.004)
  PTSD                                  0.063***        0.084***        0.007**       0.104***        0.050***
                                         (0.010)         (0.010)        (0.003)        (0.010)         (0.009)
  Panel IV
  Combat Exposure                       0.025***        0.022***       0.005***       0.035***        0.017***
                                         (0.005)         (0.006)        (0.002)        (0.006)         (0.004)
  Binge Drinking                        0.015***        0.037***         0.002        0.053***        0.010***
                                         (0.004)         (0.004)        (0.001)        (0.007)         (0.003)
  Panel V
  Combat Exposure                       0.023***        0.020***       0.004***       0.032***        0.015***
                                         (0.005)         (0.006)        (0.002)        (0.006)         (0.004)
  Drug Use                              0.074***        0.095***       0.010**        0.125***        0.057***
                                         (0.013)         (0.010)        (0.004)        (0.012)         (0.009)
  Panel VI
  Combat Exposure                        0.013**         0.012*          0.003        0.017**         0.010***
                                         (0.006)         (0.007)        (0.002)        (0.006)         (0.003)
  TBI                                   0.021***          0.009          0.003*       0.027***        0.009**
                                         (0.006)         (0.009)        (0.002)        (0.006)         (0.004)
  PTSD                                  0.051***        0.068***         0.005*       0.080***        0.041***
                                         (0.009)         (0.009)        (0.002)        (0.009)         (0.009)
  Binge Drinking                         0.009**        0.029***         0.001        0.043***        0.005**
                                         (0.004)         (0.003)        (0.001)        (0.006)         (0.002)
  Drug Use                              0.064***        0.080***        0.008**       0.105***        0.050***
                                         (0.013)         (0.009)        (0.004)        (0.011)         (0.008)

  Observations                            11,542          11,511        11,542          11,512         11,386
Robust standard errors corrected for clustering on the stratum are in parentheses. Number of observations is in
brackets. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels respectively. Each model
controls for military rank, branch of service, branch specific major command indicators, education dummies, age,
age squared, and race/ethnicity dummies. The sample is comprised of men only.




                                                        50
     Appendix Table 1: Descriptive Statistics for Control Variables by Combat Assignment
                                         (Add Health)

                                          Full     Combat      Non-    Combat      Combat
                                         Sample     Zone     Combat    Exposure   Service no
                                                               Zone               Exposure
Pre-Deployment Property Crime              0.40      0.38      0.45      0.44        0.32
                                          (0.49)    (0.49)    (0.50)    (0.50)      (0.47)
Pre-Deployment Violent Crime               0.42      0.41      0.43      0.49        0.34
                                          (0.49)    (0.49)    (0.50)    (0.50)      (0.47)
Pre-Deployment Drug Crime                  0.10      0.09      0.16      0.11        0.06
                                          (0.31)    (0.28)    (0.37)    (0.32)      (0.24)
Pre-Deployment Arrest                      0.04      0.04      0.03      0.06        0.02
                                          (0.19)    (0.19)    (0.18)    (0.23)      (0.13)
Height                                    68.60     68.39     69.21     68.58       68.21
                                          (3.86)    (3.84)    (3.89)    (4.05)      (3.62)
Weight                                   146.36    144.63    151.73    145.80      143.52
                                         (29.97)   (29.97)   (29.48)   (29.62)     (30.34)
Wave 1 Protestant                          0.62      0.60      0.68      0.63        0.57
                                          (0.49)    (0.49)    (0.47)    (0.49)      (0.50)
Wave 1 Catholic                            0.24      0.26      0.17      0.23        0.29
                                          (0.43)    (0.44)    (0.38)    (0.42)      (0.45)
Wave 1 Other Religion                      0.04      0.04      0.03      0.03        0.04
                                          (0.19)    (0.19)    (0.18)    (0.18)      (0.21)
Age in Years                              28.68     28.57     29.03     28.49       28.64
                                          (1.70)    (1.73)    (1.57)    (1.76)      (1.71)
Race: Black                                0.22      0.22      0.23      0.19        0.25
                                          (0.41)    (0.41)    (0.42)    (0.39)      (0.43)
Race: Other                                0.08      0.09      0.04      0.06        0.12
                                          (0.27)    (0.29)    (0.20)    (0.24)      (0.32)
Ethnicity: Hispanic                        0.16      0.17      0.15      0.12        0.22
                                          (0.37)    (0.37)    (0.36)    (0.32)      (0.41)
Some College                               0.66      0.67      0.64      0.66        0.68
                                          (0.47)    (0.47)    (0.48)    (0.47)      (0.47)
College                                    0.16      0.17      0.15      0.16        0.18
                                          (0.37)    (0.37)    (0.36)    (0.37)      (0.38)
Wave 1 PPVTS                             103.66    103.67    103.64    103.86      103.48
                                         (13.39)   (13.70)   (12.49)   (14.87)     (12.45)
$19K=<Parental Income <$28K                0.17      0.15      0.23      0.15        0.15
                                          (0.37)    (0.35)    (0.42)    (0.36)      (0.36)
$28K=<Parental Income <$36K                0.13      0.14      0.10      0.17        0.11
                                          (0.34)    (0.35)    (0.31)    (0.38)      (0.32)
$36K=<Parental Income <$45K                0.15      0.15      0.15      0.14        0.17
                                          (0.36)    (0.36)    (0.36)    (0.35)      (0.38)
$45K=<Parental Income <$56K                0.19      0.19      0.17      0.19        0.19
                                          (0.39)    (0.39)    (0.38)    (0.39)      (0.39)


                                             51
                                           Full    Combat     Non-    Combat      Combat
                                          Sample    Zone    Combat    Exposure   Service no
                                                              Zone               Exposure
$56K=<Parental Income <$83K                0.11     0.12      0.08      0.11        0.13
                                          (0.32)   (0.33)    (0.28)    (0.31)      (0.34)
$83K=>Parental Income                      0.06     0.07      0.05      0.07        0.06
                                          (0.24)   (0.25)    (0.21)    (0.26)      (0.24)
Parents: Married                           0.75     0.74      0.77      0.73        0.76
                                          (0.43)   (0.44)    (0.42)    (0.45)      (0.43)
Parents: Divorced, Separated or Widowed    0.21     0.21      0.22      0.23        0.20
                                          (0.41)   (0.41)    (0.42)    (0.42)      (0.40)
One sibling                                0.21     0.23      0.18      0.24        0.22
                                          (0.41)   (0.42)    (0.38)    (0.43)      (0.41)
Two siblings                               0.24     0.23      0.25      0.24        0.23
                                          (0.43)   (0.42)    (0.44)    (0.43)      (0.42)
Three siblings                             0.22     0.23      0.19      0.23        0.23
                                          (0.41)   (0.42)    (0.40)    (0.42)      (0.42)
Four siblings                              0.10     0.09      0.14      0.09        0.10
                                          (0.31)   (0.29)    (0.34)    (0.29)      (0.30)
Five or more siblings                      0.20     0.20      0.19      0.19        0.20
                                          (0.40)   (0.40)    (0.40)    (0.39)      (0.40)
Jailed Father                              0.19     0.17      0.25      0.19        0.16
                                          (0.39)   (0.38)    (0.44)    (0.39)      (0.37)
Army                                       0.41     0.44      0.32      0.54        0.35
                                          (0.49)   (0.50)    (0.47)    (0.50)      (0.48)
Marines                                    0.20     0.18      0.26      0.27        0.10
                                          (0.40)   (0.39)    (0.44)    (0.44)      (0.30)
Navy                                       0.25     0.23      0.29      0.11        0.35
                                          (0.43)   (0.42)    (0.45)    (0.31)      (0.48)
Air Force                                  0.16     0.17      0.12      0.12        0.22
                                          (0.37)   (0.38)    (0.32)    (0.32)      (0.42)
Rank E4-E6                                 0.85     0.86      0.81      0.88        0.85
                                          (0.36)   (0.34)    (0.39)    (0.33)      (0.36)
Rank E7-E8                                 0.02     0.02      0.01      0.02        0.02
                                          (0.14)   (0.15)    (0.09)    (0.15)      (0.15)
Rank W1-W2                                 0.01     0.01      0.00      0.01        0.01
                                          (0.08)   (0.09)     0.00     (0.11)      (0.07)
Rank O1-O3                                 0.06     0.07      0.04      0.07        0.07
                                          (0.25)   (0.26)    (0.20)    (0.25)      (0.26)
Observations                               482      364       118       177         187
  Standard deviations in parentheses




                                              52
 Appendix Table 2: Descriptive Statistics for Control Variables by Combat Exposure and
                         Branch of Service (HRBADP Survey)

                              All      Combat      Non-     Army     Marines   Navy       Air
                                      Exposure    Combat                                 Force
                                                 Exposure

 Some College                 0.47      0.47       0.48      0.48     0.35      0.48      0.56
                             (0.50)    (0.50)     (0.50)    (0.50)   (0.48)    (0.50)    (0.50)
 College Education            0.27      0.28       0.25      0.27     0.30      0.21      0.31
                             (0.44)    (0.45)     (0.44)    (0.44)   (0.46)    (0.41)    (0.46)
 Age                         31.61     31.79      31.41     31.36    30.78     31.51     32.59
                             (7.63)    (7.54)     (7.71)    (7.56)   (7.86)    (7.60)    (7.41)
 Black                        0.15      0.14       0.17      0.19     0.10      0.19      0.12
                             (0.36)    (0.35)     (0.37)    (0.39)   (0.30)    (0.39)    (0.33)
 Race Other                   0.12      0.10       0.13      0.10     0.09      0.17      0.09
                             (0.32)    (0.30)     (0.34)    (0.30)   (0.28)    (0.37)    (0.29)
 Hispanic                     0.13      0.13       0.12      0.14     0.15      0.13      0.09
                             (0.33)    (0.34)     (0.33)    (0.35)   (0.35)    (0.33)    (0.29)
 Army                         0.22      0.35       0.09       --       --        --        --
                             (0.42)    (0.48)     (0.29)      --       --        --        --
 Marine                       0.22      0.30       0.13       --       --        --        --
                             (0.41)    (0.46)     (0.34)      --       --        --        --
 Navy                         0.29      0.12       0.47       --       --        --        --
                             (0.45)    (0.33)     (0.50)      --       --        --        --
 Air Force                    0.27      0.23       0.31       --       --        --        --
                             (0.44)    (0.42)     (0.46)      --       --        --        --
 Rank E4-E6                   0.53      0.50       0.55      0.55     0.39      0.59      0.54
                             (0.50)    (0.50)     (0.50)    (0.50)   (0.49)    (0.49)    (0.50)
 Rank E7-E9                   0.17      0.17       0.17      0.14     0.15      0.18      0.19
                             (0.37)    (0.37)     (0.37)    (0.35)   (0.36)    (0.38)    (0.39)
 Rank W1-W5                   0.04      0.06       0.02      0.07     0.09      0.02      0.00
                             (0.19)    (0.23)     (0.15)    (0.26)   (0.28)    (0.12)     0.00
 Rank O1-O3                   0.10      0.10       0.10      0.10     0.12      0.07      0.10
                             (0.30)    (0.30)     (0.29)    (0.30)   (0.33)    (0.26)    (0.30)
 Rank 04-O10                  0.10      0.11       0.08      0.08     0.14      0.06      0.11
                             (0.29)    (0.32)     (0.27)    (0.26)   (0.35)    (0.25)    (0.31)

 Observations                11542     5948       5594      2563      2507     3374      3098
Standard deviations in parentheses




                                                 53
      Appendix Table 3: Sensitivity of Add Health Estimates to HRBADP Survey Controls

                                                                (1)           (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)
                                                             Property       Violent       White       Drug       Arrested
                                                              Crime         Crime         Collar      Crime
                                                                                          Crime
Panel I: Effect of Combat Service
HRBADP Controls Only
 Combat Zone Deployment                                      0.085***        0.077       0.036** 0.020            -0.003
                                                              (0.029)       (0.048)      (0.017) (0.022)          (0.018)
Full Controls
 Combat Zone Deployment
                                                             0.092***        0.064       0.037** 0.023            -0.001
                                                              (0.034)       (0.053)      (0.017) (0.021)          (0.018)

Panel II: Effect of Combat Engagement
HRBADP Controls Only
 Combat Exposure                                              0.071**       0.127**      0.035** 0.033             0.001
                                                              (0.034)       (0.062)      (0.018) (0.025)          (0.022)
 Combat Zone without Exposure                                0.098***        0.033        0.037* 0.009            -0.007
                                                              (0.035)       (0.054)      (0.022) (0.024)          (0.022)
Full Controls
 Combat Exposure                                              0.076*        0.138**       0.029      0.049*        0.008
                                                              (0.043)       (0.069)      (0.020)     (0.025)      (0.022)
 Combat Zone without Exposure                                0.114***        0.020        0.037       0.027        0.002
                                                              (0.037)       (0.060)      (0.025)     (0.029)      (0.027)

Observations                                                    480           480          480          480         480
  Standard errors corrected for clustering on the school are in parentheses. Number of observations is in brackets. *,
  **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels respectively. All models control for age,
  age squared, race/ethnicity indicators, education indicators, military rank, and branch of service. Models also include
  missing dummy categories for each of the control variables. In every model estimated those who are deployed to a
  non-combat zone constitute the comparison group.




                                                           54
     Appendix Table 4: Marginal Effects from Probit Estimates of the Effect of Combat
                        Exposure on Crime (HRBADP Survey)

                                            (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)           (5)
                                          UCMJ             Trouble         Arrested          Fight         Gang
                                        punishment          Police                                        Member
 Panel I: Military Controls Only
 Pooled Sample                 0.021***   0.019***                       0.001***         0.030***       0.003***
                               (0.004)    (0.006)                        (0.000)          (0.005)        (0.001)
 Observations                  11,542     11,511                         11,542           11,512         11,386
 Panel II: Military + Background Controls

 Pooled Sample                          0.020***         0.019***        0.001***         0.029***       0.001***
                                        (0.004)          (0.005)         (0.000)          (0.005)        (0.000)
 Observations                           11,542           11,511          11,542           11,512         11,386
 Panel III: Army
 Army Sample                            0.031***         0.035***        0.000            0.040***       0.000*
                                        (0.009)          (0.009)         (0.000)          (0.008)        (0.000)
 Observations                           2,563            2,550           2,563            2,556          2,525
 Panel IV: Marines
 Marines                                0.022***         0.014           0.000            0.021**        0.003***
                                        (0.005)          (0.009)         (0.000)          (0.009)        (0.001)
 Observations                           2,507            2,501           2,507            2,498          2,465
 Panel V: Navy
 Navy                                   0.012***         0.031***        0.000            0.040***       0.003
                                        (0.004)          (0.006)         (0.000)          (0.010)        (0.002)
 Observations                           3,374            3,371           3,374            3,367          3,328
 Panel VI: Air Force
 Air Force                              0.013            0.002           0.000            0.004***       0.000
                                        (0.009)          (0.009)         (0.000)          (0.001)        (0.000)
 Observations                           3,098            3,089           3,098            3,091          3,068
Standard errors corrected for clustering on the stratum are in parentheses. Number of observations is in brackets. *,
**, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels respectively. Each model controls for
military rank, branch of service, branch specific major command indicators, education dummies, age, age squared,
and race/ethnicity dummies. The sample is comprised of men only.




                                                         55
  Appendix Table 5: The Impact of Combat Zone Deployment with Engagement (Enemy
                     Firefight) on Selected Mechanisms (HRBADP)

                                                                (1)           (2)          (3)            (4)
                                                                                         Binge
                                                               TBI          PTSD        Drinking      Drug Use

 Combat Exposure                                             0.370*** 0.068*** 0.037***               0.032***
                                                              (0.015)  (0.010)  (0.011)                (0.008)

 Observations                                                 11,253       11,427        11,073         11,514
Robust standard errors corrected for clustering on the stratum are in parentheses. Number of observations is in
brackets. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels respectively. Each model
controls for military rank, branch of service, branch specific major command indicators, education dummies, age,
age squared, race/ethnicity dummies, and marital status indicators. The sample is comprised of men only.




                                                        56
