                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        EXPECTATIONS OF FUNDAMENTALS AND STOCK MARKET PUZZLES

                                       Pedro Bordalo
                                      Nicola Gennaioli
                                      Rafael La Porta
                                      Andrei Shleifer

                                     Working Paper 27283
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27283


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2020




Gennaioli thanks the European Research Council for Financial Support under the ERC
Consolidator Grant. We are grateful to Nick Barberis, Francesca Bastianello, John Campbell,
Kent Daniel, Paul Fontanier, Spencer Kwon, Yueran Ma, Peter Maxted, Dev Patel, Jesse Shapiro,
and Adi Sunderam for extremely helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Pedro Bordalo, Nicola Gennaioli, Rafael La Porta, and Andrei Shleifer. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Expectations of Fundamentals and Stock Market Puzzles
Pedro Bordalo, Nicola Gennaioli, Rafael La Porta, and Andrei Shleifer
NBER Working Paper No. 27283
May 2020
JEL No. G02,G12,G4

                                           ABSTRACT

We revisit several leading puzzles about the aggregate stock market by incorporating into a
standard dividend discount model survey expectations of earnings of S&P 500 firms. Using
survey expectations, while keeping discount rates constant, explains a significant part of "excess"
stock price volatility, price-earnings ratio variation, and return predictability. The evidence is
consistent with a mechanism in which good news about fundamentals leads to excessively
optimistic forecasts of earnings, especially at long horizons, which inflate stock prices and lead to
subsequent low returns. Relaxing rational expectations of fundamentals in a standard asset pricing
model accounts for stock market anomalies in a parsimonious way.


Pedro Bordalo                                     Rafael La Porta
Saïd Business School                              Brown University
University of Oxford                              70 Waterman Street
Park End Street                                   Room 101
Oxford, OX1 1HP                                   Providence, RI 02912
United Kingdom                                    and NBER
pedro.bordalo@sbs.ox.ac.uk                         rafael.laporta@brown.edu

Nicola Gennaioli                                  Andrei Shleifer
Department of Finance                             Department of Economics
Università Bocconi                                Harvard University
Via Roentgen 1                                    Littauer Center M-9
20136 Milan, Italy                                Cambridge, MA 02138
nicola.gennaioli@unibocconi.it                    and NBER
                                                  ashleifer@harvard.edu
I. Introduction

       In the dividend discount model, the price of a stock at time  is given by:

                                                     
                                                      ,
                                                    

where  is the constant required return and          is the rational expectation of the dividend per

share at time  . Research over the last few decades has shown that this model is a poor

description of stock market movements. There are three main problems. First, as originally

shown by Shiller (1981) and Leroy and Porter (1981), stock prices are much more volatile than

dividends or earnings. In the dividend discount model, all price volatility should be due to news

about these fundamentals. Second, the price dividend ratio has a low correlation with future

growth in dividends or earnings (Campbell and Shiller 1988). This is also inconsistent with the

dividend discount model, in which the price dividend ratio reflects rational forecasts of future

growth. Third, stock returns are predictable: a high price dividend ratio today predicts low stock

returns over a three to five year horizon (Campbell and Shiller 1988). This is inconsistent with

another key assumption of the dividend discount model: constant required returns.

       The Campbell-Shiller decomposition shows that these puzzles are related, in the sense

that they can be reconciled under rational expectations if the required return is time-varying.

Several models of time varying required returns have been proposed, based on disaster risk,

recursive utility, and habit formation (Rietz 1988, Barro 2006, Gabaix 2012, Bansal and Yaron

2004, Campbell and Cochrane 1999). This approach is not without problems. It relies on

changes in risk attitudes, which are hard to measure directly. It also predicts that investors

should expect low returns when stocks are expensive. In survey data, however, the opposite is

true: in good times investors expect high, not low, returns (Greenwood and Shleifer 2014).

Contrary to rational expectations, such optimism is systematically disappointed in the future.

       In this paper we address stock market puzzles by taking an orthogonal route: we hold

required returns constant and assess how far we can go by relaxing the rationality of beliefs. We

                                                2
 
discipline departures from rationality by using measured expectations of future growth of

fundamentals. Recent work shows the promise of using such data. Bordalo, Gennaioli, La Porta,

and Shleifer (BGLS 2019) find that analyst forecasts of firms' long-term earnings growth over-

react to news about firm-level performance, and that such over-reaction helps explain the cross

section of returns. De la O and Myers (2019) show that analyst short-term earnings forecasts for

S&P 500 firms have strong explanatory power for the price earnings ratio.

        These findings suggest that beliefs about growth in fundamentals may shape stock prices,

and raise three questions. First, do measured beliefs about aggregate earnings growth depart

from rationality, and if so how? Second, can these beliefs account for the stock market pricing

puzzles? Third, can we document the mechanism linking non-rational beliefs to prices and to the

predictability of returns?        In this paper, we show that analyst beliefs have remarkable

explanatory power for all of the pricing puzzles, that beliefs about long term growth over-react,

and that this over-reaction creates systematic forecast errors that help predict returns.

        To organize the analysis, Section 2 offers a formulation of beliefs about the growth of

cash-flows that nests several forms of non-rationality: noise, over-reaction, and under-reaction to

fundamentals. We show that, under constant required returns, the puzzles are reconciled if

beliefs at long horizons over-react to news. With over-reaction, beliefs are too volatile and

systematically revert, so that price booms are followed by busts, consistent with the data.

        The remainder of the paper empirically assesses this mechanism. Section 3 studies

analysts' expectations. We collect forecasts of short- and long-term earnings growth of S&P

500 firms over the period 1981-2018 and aggregate these forecasts into an index of market-level

expected earnings growth.2 Following the method of Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2015), we

show that errors in forecasted growth are predictable from forecast revisions, pointing to

systematic departures from rationality. We then examine expectations in light of the process



2
 Most of our analysis focuses on expectations of earnings, where data is available for a much longer period, and
crucially includes expectations of long term growth. We also examine dividend expectations where available.
                                                       3
 
followed by actual earnings growth. We document three facts. First, earnings growth displays

sharp short term reversals: after strong growth, earnings growth declines in the short run and

resumes in the long run. Second, expectations of short and long run growth are forward looking,

in the sense that they reflect these dynamics. Third, both short and long term expectations are

too optimistic after high earnings growth. Together, these facts imply that short term beliefs

under-react, while long term beliefs over-react, to news. In light of the model, long term beliefs

may be especially helpful to explain stock market puzzles. 3

        To assess whether measured beliefs can account for the puzzles, in Section 4 we compute

an expectations based stock price index by using survey expectations of short and long term

earnings growth and assuming a constant required return. The volatility of yearly changes in this

index is remarkably close to that of actual price changes, suggesting that analyst beliefs can

explain the excess volatility puzzle. On its own, however, this finding does not yet imply that

expectations of fundamentals help account for the other puzzles as well.

        We next check whether analyst beliefs co-move with prices. First, we show that our

index fits the stock price path remarkably well. Analyst beliefs do indeed appear to be a good

proxy for market beliefs. To support this interpretation, we offer evidence that expectations of

earnings are not backed out of market prices, but are formed independently by analysts.

        Second, we assess whether measured expectations can account for variation in the price

earnings ratio. We also assess the explanatory power for the price dividend ratio, in the period

where dividend expectations are available. Our analysis confirms the findings of De la O and

Myers (2019) that analyst expectations have strong explanatory power. Our expectations based

indices account for 62% of price earnings ratio variation and 72% of price dividend variation in

our sample. Importantly, relative to previous work we show that expectations about long term

earnings growth play a key role in increasing explanatory power.

3
  To document that forecasts over-react to news, we show that forecast revisions (and ensuing errors) are
predictable from recent growth of fundamentals. While easily available, past earnings are only one source of news
about future growth. Our mechanism continues to work when over-reaction is driven in part by intangible
information about future earnings growth prospects (Daniel and Titman 2006).
                                                       4
 
        Finally, we ask whether measured beliefs help explain return predictability. To begin,

Section 5 shows that expectations of long term earnings growth negatively predict future returns,

while expectations of short term earnings growth do not. This is consistent with over-reaction of

beliefs about long term growth: after strong fundamentals, long term beliefs become too

optimistic, which inflates stock prices, but also leads to future disappointment and low returns.

To directly assess this mechanism, we present three findings: i) high past earnings predict

upward revisions of long term earnings growth, but ii) the revised forecasts are systematically

disappointed, and iii) the entailed forecast errors predict low returns. This link from predictable

forecast errors to returns confirms our mechanism. As we show in BGLS (2019), the same

mechanism operates for individual firms. Over-reaction of beliefs about long term growth can

account for return predictability both in the aggregate market and in the cross section of stocks.

        Compare our analysis with models of time varying returns. Models of habit formation

(Abel 1990, Constatinides 1990, Campbell and Cochrane 1999) generate volatility in required

returns by linking risk aversion to recent consumption levels. Models of long run risk (Bansal

and Yaron 2004, Bansal, Kiku and Yaron 2010) obtain it through variation in consumption risk.

Time varying disaster risk (Gabaix 2012, Wachter 2013) generates volatility in the price to

dividend ratio, and in some models also in required returns (Gabaix 2012). These approaches

account neither for forecast errors nor for their explanatory power for returns.4 These models

are also inconsistent with survey evidence showing that expected returns are high in good times

and when perceived disaster risk is low (Greenwood and Shleifer 2014, Giglio et al. 2019).

        We are not the first to explore the link between non-rationality and stock market puzzles.

Our approach is closest to models featuring misspecified beliefs about the data generating

process (DeLong et al. 1990a, Barberis, Shleifer, and Vishny 1998, Daniel, Hirshleifer, and

Subrahmanyam 1998, 2001, Odean 1998). A growing literature has been bringing measured


4
  Models of time varying disaster risk may entail forecast errors in the short samples available because disasters are
rare events. However, such errors should materialize in the short term, not for long term growth, because in the long
run the probability of disaster reverts closer to the baseline. This is contrary to what we find in the data.
                                                          5
 
beliefs into the analysis of these questions (e.g., La Porta 1996, Frankel and Lee 1998, Lee,

Myers, and Swaminathan 1999, Lee and Swaminathan 2000, Bachetta et al 2009, Koijen and

Nieuwerburgh 2011). Relative to this work, we provide a unified framework for studying the

joint evolution of fundamentals and beliefs, and apply it to explaining multiple stock market

puzzles simultaneously, using direct evidence on over-reaction of beliefs to fundamental news.

        Earlier work also looks at the extrapolation of fundamentals as a source of excess

volatility, including the most directly related Barsky and DeLong (1993), but also Lakonishok et

al. (1994) or Greenwood and Hanson (2015). A recent advance in this literature is Nagel and Xu

(2019), who show that a weighted average of past stock payout growth is negatively correlated

with future returns. They explain this fact with a model of learning with recency effects, in

which investors overweight recent experiences and effectively hold adaptive expectations of

future dividends.5 Unlike this work, we focus on survey expectations of earnings growth and tie

predictable returns to measured corrections of expectation errors. Specifically, we show that

expectations are forward looking but over-react to news, leading to systematic forecast errors,

excessive price movements, and predictable price reversals. All the main stock market puzzles,

as well as the evidence on expectations, are captured by our approach.

        A related strand of work considers price extrapolation (e.g., DeBondt and Thaler 1985,

DeLong et al. 1990b, Cutler, Poterba, and Summers 1990), which can generate significant price

volatility and long run departures from rational prices (Barberis et al. 2015, 2018, Jin and Sui

2019). Here we show that measured expectations of fundamentals largely account for the

puzzles, with little need for additional variation in expectations of returns.




5
  Other papers that consider the implications of learning frictions for stock market excess volatility and return
predictability include Timmermann (1993), Alti and Tetlock (2014), Hirshleifer, Li and Yu (2015), Ravi and Liu
(2019) ,and Guo and Wachter (2020).
                                                       6
 
2. Non-Rational Beliefs and Stock Market Puzzles

       Following Campbell and Shiller (1987), the log return                         obtained at        1 is given by

the log linearized expression:

                                                     1                           ,                                 1

where  and          are the log stock prices at  and             1,       is the log dividend at             1,  is a

constant, and          / 1                 1 depends on the average log price dividend ratio  .

       By iterating Equation (1) forward and imposing the transversality condition, one obtains

the Campbell-Shiller decomposition:

                                           
                                                                                             ,                     2
                                       1      

where                               is the dividend growth between                    and              1. Variation in

the price to dividend ratio is due to expected variation in future dividend growth, required

returns, or in both. In the rational dividend-discount model, the required return is constant. Price

movements then only reflect rational expectations of future growth                               , and realized excess

returns cannot be predicted. This benchmark model does not explain observed price movements

(Shiller 1981, Campbell and Shiller 1988). Time varying expected returns can however address

the puzzles: changes in expected future returns                   move prices, accounting not only for

excess volatility and price dividend ratio variation, but also implying that current prices predict

future realized returns.

       Here we explore how, even if required returns are constant, non-rational beliefs may help

address the puzzles. To see this, denote the possibly non-rational market expectations by                          . .

Taking the expectation of Equation (2) yields the stock price:

                                                     
                                                                                         .                         3
                                                 1   

where  is the constant required return. Suppose market beliefs are given by:

                                                                                 ,   ,                             4

                                                         7
 
where  .            denotes rational expectations. In this convenient reduced form expression,

departures from rationality are due to the expectations shock                   ,   . It follows an AR(1) process

    ,          ,               ,   , where   0,1 captures the persistence of mistakes and                     ,   is i.i.d.

normal with mean zero and variance  . Beliefs have a forward-looking component, and are

rational when              0, but in general are contaminated by a persistent mistake             ,   .

           Equation (4) nests several departures from rationality as a function of how the

expectational shock                ,   correlates with news about dividend growth. To see this, assume that

dividend growth follows a covariance stationary process with moving average representation

                       , where  is a Gaussian shock with mean zero, variance  and independent

over time.  is the impulse response for  periods ahead, satisfying square summability

                    and                1 . 6 In this specification, realized performance is informative about

future cash-flow growth and thus feeds into expectations (4). In reality, information about

future growth also comes in the form of news not contained in recent performance, what Daniel

and Titman (2006) refer to as intangible news. Such news are entirely compatible with our

model of expectations; the key property is that news about future growth shape both the rational

expectations component                              and possibly also the distortion component        ,   .

           Specifically, denote by              ,   the covariance between the expectations shock             ,   and the

fundamental shock  . If the expectations shock is independent of fundamentals, i.e., if                                  0

but        ,       0 , forecasts at all horizons are distorted by persistent noise unrelated to

fundamentals. Some early noise trading models have this feature (Black 1986, DeLong et al.

1990a).

           If instead      ,           0 the belief distortion entails excess optimism at all horizons after high

growth             0. This can produce the over-reaction to news present in diagnostic expectations


6
  We use this very flexible specification because it allows for short term growth reversals. As mentioned above (see
also Section 3.1), much of our empirical analysis focuses on earnings growth, for which we have more detailed data
on beliefs (longer samples and forecasts at long horizons), and reversals are an important feature of that process.
                                                              8
 
(Bordalo et al. 2018, BGLS 2019),7 but also in different formats in earlier models (e.g., DeLong

et al. 1990b, Barberis et al. 1998). Equation (4) is not consistent with backward looking models

of mechanical extrapolation from past fundamentals. In fact, the expectations shock may be due

to entirely forward-looking intangible news. What matters for our analysis is that                           ,     0

captures the over-reaction of expectations to news about future growth.

        Finally, if     ,     0, the belief distortion is negatively correlated with the current news

 . This would temper the forward-looking component of expectations and, if                          ,   is not too

negative, yield a muted response to news such as that arising from rational inattention (Sims

2003, Huang and Liu 2007, Bouchaud et al. 2019).

        How does the model in Equations (3) and (4) speak to the three pricing puzzles? Excess

volatility refers to the fact that the variance of annual prices changes is too high relative to that

entailed by rational expectations and constant returns (Shiller 1981, LeRoy and Porter 1981,

Campbell and Shiller 1987). Define excess volatility by                                                   

                     , where         is the price prevailing under rational beliefs in Equation (4).

Shiller's finding is the statement that               0.

        Consider next the price dividend ratio puzzle. In the dividend discount model, regressing

future discounted growth                          on             should yield a coefficient of 1. This is

strongly rejected in the data, where the coefficient is well below 1 (Campbell and Shiller 1987,

Cochrane 2011). In our model, errors in beliefs can account for this finding if they lead to prices

                                                                                    ,
 such that the implied regression coefficient               ,                                is below 1.

        Finally, return predictability refers to the fact that when stocks are expensive (                        is

high) future discounted returns measured by                            are low (Campbell and Shiller 1987,

7
 We prove our main results under the more general assumption that the distortion differs across different horizons,
namely it is equal to   , , at  1. The basic diagnostic formulation falls in this case, as it assumes that 
equals the true impulse response function. Diagnostic expectations further assume that: i) the belief shock is
collinear with fundamentals,  ,       with           0, and ii) the belief distortion is transient,  0. Recent work
shows that an empirically more valid formulation of diagnostic expectations allows for persistent distortions  0,
and for stronger over-reaction in the long run (see BGLS 2019, and D'Arienzo 2019). This is confirmed by our
analysis here.
                                                        9
 
1988). This cannot happen in a rational dividend discount model with constant returns. In our

model, errors in beliefs help explain this finding if the regression coefficient                            ,

               ,
                        is negative.

       Under what conditions on beliefs do the three puzzles arise in the data?


Proposition 1 The non-rational dividend discount model in Equations (3) and (4) yields:

    a) Excess volatility                 0 when            1          ,    0.

    b) The price dividend ratio puzzle               ,    0,1 , and the return predictability puzzle        ,


       0 when          1                        0.


The model unifies stock market puzzles when departures from belief rationality  are large . If

    is positive and large enough, then ,                   0, so that higher    ,   helps explain the puzzles.


       All proofs are collected in Appendix A. Departures from rationality in Equation (4) can

account for excess volatility of prices, for price dividend ratio variation, as well as for

predictability of returns, if beliefs move sufficiently in excess of actual dividends (i.e., if  is

high enough). In principle, the puzzles can obtain if beliefs at all horizons are swayed by pure

noise, namely         0 and          ,     0 . But Proposition 1 also highlights the conditions under

which the puzzles can be unified if belief distortions are correlated with fundamentals: if the

rational price increases sufficiently with positive growth shocks ­ a realistic assumption ­ a

positive correlation       ,       0 helps account for the puzzles. Importantly, to the extent that

shocks to fundamentals are observable, this is a condition testable using expectations data.

       The condition that  and              ,    are large can be restated as "expectations overreact to

news." Good news cause rational beliefs about future payouts to rise on average, increasing the

rational price     . If        ,    0, market beliefs about the future become even more optimistic,

causing an even larger increase in  . The price change is excessive, the price to dividend ratio

                                                           10
 
is inflated, which leads to low returns when beliefs revert in the future. All puzzles can then be

reconciled if the market over-reacts, i.e., exaggerates the underlying rational patterns.8

        Proposition 1 specifies conditions on market beliefs, which we do not observe. We

instead observe analyst beliefs. In the next section we ask if and how these beliefs depart from

rationality. Later we spell out the conditions under which analyst beliefs can shed light on

pricing puzzles even if they imperfectly proxy for market beliefs.



3. Data and Evidence on Expectations

3.1 Data

        Forecasts of Dividends and Earnings. We gather monthly data on stock market analyst

forecasts for S&P500 firms from the IBES Unadjusted US Summary Statistics file, which

surveys analysts during the third Wednesday of each month. We focus on (median) annual

forecasts of dividends per share (), earnings per share (), and long-term earnings growth

(  ). IBES data on earnings is more extensive than on dividends, i.e. coverage starts on

3/1976 for EPS, 12/1981 for LTG, and on 1/2002 for DPS. Furthermore, forecasts for EPS are

available at longer horizons than for DPS. In principle, IBES tracks annual forecasts for fiscal

years one (typically, 4 months into the future) through five (typically 52 months into the future).

In practice, EPS (DPS) forecasts beyond the third (second) fiscal year are often missing. We fill

in for missing EPS forecasts by assuming that analysts expect EPS to grow at the rate 

starting with the last non-missing EPS forecast. This is a sensible assumption since IBES defines

 as the "...expected annual increase in operating earnings over the company's next full

business cycle. In general, these forecasts refer to a period of between three to five years." We

do not fill in missing values of DPS since forecasts for long-term growth in dividends are rare.



8
  The price to dividend ratio puzzle and the return predictability puzzle rely on the same condition, which follows
from the Campbell-Shiller decomposition. Excess volatility relies on a related but distinct condition. Intuitively,
excess volatility relies on the volatility of expectational shocks, while the price dividend ratio puzzle and return
predictability puzzles also depend on their persistence.
                                                        11
 
        We aggregate DPS and EPS forecasts for firms in the S&P500 index to compute

analogue measures for the index. In order to aggregate DPS (EPS) forecasts at the index level,

we begin by linearly interpolating DPS (EPS) forecasts for each firm i and focus on forecasts at

horizons ranging from one to five years (in one-year increments). Next, for each firm i and

month t, we compute forecasts for the level of dividends (earnings) by multiplying the DPS

(EPS) forecast by the number of shares outstanding at time  and we then sum these forecasts

across all firms in the index.9 Finally, we divide these forecasts for the level of dividends and

earnings by the total numbers of shares in the S&P500 index.

        Analysts may distort their forecasts due to agency conflicts. As we showed in previous

work (BGLS 2019), this is unlikely to affect the time series variation in forecasts, which is key

here. Furthermore, all brokerage houses typically cover S&P500 firms, so investment banking

relationships and analyst sentiment are less likely to play a role in the decision to cover firms in

the S&P500. 10 To further alleviate the concern about agency conflicts, and in particular to

reduce the impact of outliers, we focus on median forecasts across analysts.

        Bordalo et al (2020) show that consensus beliefs such as the median forecast are not ideal

to study departures from rationality because informational frictions bias the consensus forecast

toward under-reaction even if individual analysts over-react to their individual information. We

do not address this issue here, but stress that ­ if anything ­ it makes our results stronger.

        Earnings surprise/returns data. From the CRSP/COMPUSTAT merged file data, we

collect data on earnings (income before extraordinary items) and dates when the Wall Street

Journal published quarterly earnings releases (rdq). We aggregate earnings for the S&P500 in

the same way as EPS forecasts. Following La Porta et al. (1997), we define the stock return that

accrues over earnings' announcement dates as the compounded three-day stock return centered

on rdq. We then aggregate all event returns for S&P500 firms in a calendar quarter by value

9
  We set to missing observations if the market cap of the firms for which we have forecasts at a given horizon is less
than 90% of the market cap of the index. We otherwise compute expectations using all available firms.
10
   For example, in December of 2018, nineteen analysts followed the median S&P500 firm, while four analysts
followed the median firm not in index. Analysts are also less likely to rate as "buy" firms in the S&P500 index.
                                                         12
 
weighting each event return by the firm's market capitalization at the beginning of the quarter.

From CRSP, we get stock returns around Wall Street Journal dates, shares outstanding, stock

prices. We also gather from CRSP data on S&P500 index membership and returns.

       We obtain monthly data on price dividend and price earnings ratios and dividends for the

S&P500 from Shiller's website and seasonally-adjusted GDP from the Saint Louis Fed. Data on

expected returns for the S&P500 come from the quarterly survey of CFOs administered by John

Graham and Campbell Harvey. Starting in October 2010, the survey tracks, among other things,

the returns that CFOs expect for the S&P500 over the following 12 months and ten years.

       From the St. Louis Fed we gather data on the term spread and the credit spread. The term

spread is the log difference between the gross yield of 10-year and 1-year US government

bonds. The credit spread is the log difference between the gross yield of BAA and AAA bonds.



3.2 Evidence on Measured Expectations

       We first analyze measured expectations of earnings growth, which we use as a proxy for

market expectations of earnings growth. In the next section, we rewrite the dividend discount

model in terms of expectations of earnings growth, and assess whether the measured

expectations analyzed here account for the market price.

       We think about analysts' forecasts, denoted  (superscript O means observed), through

the lens of Equation 4 :

                                                                            ,   ,                            5

Just as for market beliefs, there is an expectations shock              ,       with persistence  and i.i.d.

Gaussian innovations with mean zero, variance  , and covariance                     ,   with  . Distortions to

analysts' beliefs may be distinct from those to market beliefs. We denote the covariance between

the analysts'    ,   and the market's    ,   by    ,   . This is a key parameter: the validity of using

analysts' beliefs as a proxy for market beliefs relies on a high covariance              ,   between them.


                                                       13
 
           Motivated by Proposition 1, we test the rationality of measured expectations. A test

introduced by Coibion and Gorodnichenko (CG 2015) assesses the predictability of forecast

errors, defined as realized minus expected growth, from the current forecast revision. A positive

regression coefficient indicates under-reaction to the news that prompted the revision: an

insufficient increase in optimism after good news predicts future positive surprise (a positive

forecast error). In contrast, a negative coefficient implies over-reaction: forecasts move too

much. An excessive increase in optimism after good news predicts future disappointment (a

negative forecast error).11 Proposition 1 links over-reaction of beliefs to excessive movement of

stock prices. It shows that over-reaction of expected earnings growth to news can help reconcile

all three stock market puzzles.

            Table 1 presents regressions of forecast errors on forecast revisions for earnings growth

at short and long horizons. For short horizons, we consider forecasts about one and two year

ahead earnings growth. For longer horizons, we use  forecasts. In line with its description,

we view  as the forecast of average yearly earnings growth in the next 3, 4, and 5 years.


                                                Table 1.
                                    Forecast Errors and CG Revisions
The dependent variables are the forecast errors in year t+1, t+2, t+3, t+4, and t+5. Forecast errors
beyond year t+2 are defined relative to forecast for earnings growth in the long run (LTGt). EOt(et+1-et)-
EOt-1(et+1-et) is the revision between year t and year t-1 in the forecast for the one-year earnings growth
rate in year t+1. EOt(et+2-et+1)-EOt-1(et+2-et+1) is the revision between year t and year t-1 in the forecast for
the one-year earnings growth rate in year t+2. Finally, LTGt is the change in LTG between year t and
t-1. We use monthly expectations data starting on December of 1982 (the first period with  ) and
data on realized earnings through December of 2018. Newey-West standard errors are reported in
parentheses (the number of lags ranges from 12 in the first column to 60 in the last column).
Superscripts: a significant at the 1% level, b significant at the 5% level, c significant at the 10% level.

                                   (et+1-et) -    (et+2-et+1) -   (et+3-et)/3 -   (et+4-et)/4 -    (et+5-et)/5 -
                                  EOt(et+1-et)   EOt(et+2-et+1)      LTGt             LTGt             LTGt
    EOt(et+1-et)-EOt-1(et+1-et)     0.0132
                                   (0.1454)
    EOt(et+2-et+1)-EOt-1(et+2-
    et+1)                                           3.2361
                                                   (1.9961)

11
   Here we are considering consensus (i.e. median) beliefs. A positive consensus coefficient is compatible with
rationality of individual forecasts when forecasters' information is noisy (CG 2015). Instead, a negative consensus
coefficient is unambiguously indicative of over-reaction (BGLS 2019).
                                                         14
 
    LTGt                                                            -10.0734a      -6.8184a        -5.1003a
                                                                     (2.6286)      (1.8928)        (1.8928)
    Observations                       412            400               397           385             373
    Adjusted R2                        0%             3%               25%           21%             19%

          In the case of short term expectations ­ one or two years ahead ­ the regression

coefficients are positive, though not statistically significant. This suggests that, if anything,

revisions at short term horizons are insufficient rather than excessive, and hence supports under-

reaction.12 At longer horizons, instead, there is strong evidence of excessive updating and hence

of over-reaction: upward revisions of LTG predict future disappointment, while downward

revisions predict positive surprises. Table 1 confirms, at the level of the S&P index, the over-

reaction of firm-level  forecasts originally documented by BGLS (2019).

          What does Table 1 tell us about belief distortions? In Appendix A we show that the CG

coefficient entailed by the beliefs in (5) at horizon              1 is negative, indicating over-reaction if:

                                             1              ,          0,                                         6

while it is positive when the sign is reversed. If distortions were due to noise alone,                  ,        0,

beliefs over-react at all horizons. This cannot deliver the short term under-reaction documented

in Table 1. Instead, if            ,         0, then the same belief distortion can account for both over-

reaction of  and mild under-reaction of short term earnings growth. This, of course, depends

on both the correlation between distortions and fundamentals and the impulse response                         .

          We find that at short horizons earnings growth displays reversals, namely  ,                       0, and

then a gradual convergence to the long run mean. Table 2 reports aggregate earnings growth in

the year after periods in the top and bottom 30% of cyclically adjusted earnings growth, 

         , which captures persistent movements in growth.




12
  Lack of predictability of forecast errors on the basis of short term revisions does not imply that short term
expectations are rational. The results on expectation-based price earnings ratio (Section 4.3) suggests short term
growth expectations are excessively volatile.
                                                         15
 
                                                 Table 2.
                                  Short Term Reversals in Earnings Growth
In December of each year t between 1981 and 2014, we rank observations into deciles based on et-caet-1
and report the average one-year growth rate of earnings in t+1, t+2, ..., t+5 for observations in the top
30% and bottom 30%.

                                et+1et       et+2et+1        et+3et+2       et+4et+3         et+5et+4 
     etcaet5      Low            0.30         0.22            0.13           0.06             0.01 
                  High           0.23         0.05            0.03           0.05             0.29 
                  HighLow        0.53         0.27            0.10           0.01             0.28 

              The evidence of short term reversals is clear. After strong fundamentals, short term

growth is very negative and then gradually recovers. After weak fundamentals, short term

growth is high and then returns to normal. The same finding emerges when we estimate the MA

model of Section 2 (Table C.6, Appendix C). This exercise shows, in line with Table 2, that

there is reversal in the first two years  ,        0, and then recovery,         0,     3.


              Proposition 2. For an earnings growth process that features short term reversals

( ,             0) and then recovery (      0,        3), the patterns of Table 1 can obtain if belief

distortions are positively correlated with fundamentals             ,    0 . In this case, after strong

fundamentals: i) short term growth is revised downward while long term growth is revised

upward, and ii) these revisions predict positive short term errors and negative long term errors.


              Our model shows how same analysts can under-react when forecasting short term growth

and over-react when forecasting long term growth. Figure 1 graphically illustrates the intuition.




                                                    16
 
Figure 1. Earnings growth impulse response (mean: black line, standard deviation: blue shade) and
schematic growth forecasts given by Equation (4) (red line). Data on the earnings impulse response is in
Table C.7 in Appendix C.


        The black curve represents the impulse response to a positive fundamental shock: a short

term growth reversal, followed by a recovery. The red curve plots the corresponding response

of beliefs. When        ,     0, beliefs are too optimistic after good news at all horizons (the red

curve is above the black one). Even though analysts revise short term prospects downwards,

their revision is insufficient, generating under-reaction. At long horizons, analysts revise up too

much and over-react. As a consequence, Proposition 1 suggests that beliefs about long run

growth can play a key role in accounting for the stock market puzzles.

        We test this mechanism by empirically assessing the two predictions of Proposition 2.

We perform a two-stage estimation exercise. In the first stage, we regress forecast revisions on

proxies for fundamental news (prediction i). In the second stage, we regress the forecast errors

on the predicted revisions (prediction ii). We proxy for fundamental news using earnings

surprise relative to cyclically adjusted earnings (                       ).13 Table 3 reports the estimation

results using expectations of short and long term growth.




13
  The results in Table 3 are very similar if we include other proxies such as changes in five years GDP growth, and
the average return on Wall Street Journal announcements, also averaged over years  5 to .
                                                        17
 
                                                   Table 3.
   The table presents results of IV regressions. The dependent variable in the first-stage regressions
   are revisions in growth forecasts. Specifically, EOt(et+1-et)-EOt-1(et+1-et) is the revision between year
   t and year t-1 in the forecast for the one-year earnings growth rate in year t+1. EOt(et+2-et+1)-EOt-
   1(et+2-et+1) is the revision between year t and year t-1 in the forecast for the one-year earnings
   growth rate in year t+2. Finally, LTGt is the change in the forecast for earnings growth in the
   long run (LTGt) between year t and t-1. The independent variables include: (a) the log of earnings
   in year t relative to the cyclically-adjusted earnings in year t-1, (b) the change between year t and t-
   1 in the 5-year growth rate of GDP per capita, and (c) the weighted average of the cumulative
   return earned by firms in the S&P500 during earnings announcement days in the preceding 20
   quarters. Please see text for details. The dependent variables in the second-stage regressions in
   Panel B are forecast errors in year t+1, t+2, t+3, t+4, and t+5. Forecast errors beyond year t+2 are
   defined relative to LTGt. The independent variables in the second-stage regressions are the
   instrumented values of EOt(et+1-et)-EOt-1(et+1-et) in column [1], EOt(et+2-et+1)-EOt-1(et+2-et+1) in column
   [2], and LTGt in columns [3]-[5]. We report results using quarterly data starting on December of
   1982 (the first period with  ) through December of 2018. Newey-West standard errors are
   reported in parentheses (with 4 lags). We report Newey-West standard errors in parentheses (with
   4 lags in columns 1 and 2, 12 in column 3, 16 in column 4, and 20 in column 5). Superscripts: a
   significant at the 1% level, b significant at the 5% level, c significant at the 10% level.
    
                         Panel A:  Predicting Changes in Growth Expectations  
                                  (1)                               (2)                          (3) 
                             EOt[et+1et]                        EOt[et+2et+1]                     LTGt 
                             Et1[et+1et]                        EOt1[et+2et+1] 
etcaet5                        0.5989a                            0.6120a                        0.5412a 
                               (0.1020)                           (0.0765)                       (0.1010) 
Obs                               424                                424                            433 
Adj R2                           35%                                37%                            29% 

                                 Panel B:  IV Regressions for forecast errors 
                                     (1)           (2)            (3)                 (4)              (5) 
                                   (et+1et)   (et+2et+1)        (et+3et)/3        (et+4et)/4      (et+5et)/5  
         
                                  EOt[et+1et]  EOt[et+2et+1]        LTGt              LTGt            LTGt 

       Et[FR1 | etcaet5]            0.2060                                                          
                                   (0.1547)                                                         
       Et[FR2 | etcaet5]                          0.5095                                            
                                                 (0.3114)                                           
       Et[LTGt | etcaet5]                                1.5311a      1.4731a                       1.4798a 
                                                         (0.3251)     (0.3079)                      (0.3355) 
       Obs                        412          400          397          385                           373 
       Modified Fstat           72.065       187.29       64.168       54.579                        37.326 
       AR Confidence Interval  [.08, .54]  [0.00,1.26]  [2.68,1.11]  [2.61,1.07]                   [...,1.04] 
       Reduced form Adj R2            2%           11%              53%              55%               59% 




                                                          18
 
        Panel A shows that short term beliefs are revised downward after good fundamental

shocks, while long term beliefs are revised upward, consistent with Proposition 2's prediction i.

Forecasts are forward looking, in line with the rational component of beliefs in Equation (5).14

Panel B then shows that after strong fundamentals the downward revision of short-term growth

is insufficient: predicted growth is above future realizations (Columns 1 and 2). In contrast, the

contemporaneous upward revisions of long-term beliefs is excessive (Columns 3-5), as

illustrated in Figure 1. This suggests that analysts become excessively optimistic after good

news at all horizons.




Figure 2. We plot the 5-year forecast error (green line) and the predicted one-year change in long term
growth in earnings using the specification in Column (3) of Table 3, Panel A (using the log ratio of
earnings to cyclically-adjusted earnings in year t-1, the one year change in the 5-year growth rate in
GDP, and the 5-year cumulative returns around earnings announcement days).


        To summarize, Tables 1 and 3 show that analysts' expectations systematically depart

from rationality. Beliefs are forward looking, but are characterized by excess optimism after

positive growth shocks,           ,     0 in Equation (5). This leads to over-reaction for long run

expectations which, according to Proposition 1, plays a key role in accounting for the stock

14
   The fact that the coefficients in Table 1 (and in Table 2 Panel B) have magnitudes above one reflects the fact that
movements in LTG are on average followed by movements in growth rates in the opposite direction. This is a non-
linear phenomenon concentrated in cases of strong recoveries after poor performance and drops in LTG. 
                                                         19
 
market puzzles. In contrast, under-reaction of short term expectations makes it unlikely to

explain those findings.15

        Exploring the cognitive foundations leading to beliefs of the type described in Equation

(5) is beyond the scope of this paper. However, the excess optimism after strong fundamentals is

consistent with the diagnostic expectations mechanism proposed by BGLS (2019). In that

model, a firm's strong earnings growth causes analysts to drastically revise up the probability

that it is a "Google", which entails excess optimism about earnings growth at all horizons. We

return to this connection in the Conclusion.



4. Excess Volatility and Price Dividend Variation

        We use analyst forecast data to construct the synthetic price:

                                                          
                                                                                      ,                            7
                                                     1    

obtained by plugging analyst forecasts of earnings growth in the dividend discount model. We

then assess whether  : i) displays time series volatility comparable to that of market prices, and

ii) is strongly correlated with variation in stock prices. We also address the concern that the

correlation between  and the market price may be spuriously due to the fact that analysts

mechanically infer one particular expectations measure,  , from market prices.

        We focus on earnings based price measures because expectations for earnings growth are

available for a longer sample period and also at longer horizons (i.e.  ). For robustness, we

also look at price dividend proxies constructed using expectations about future dividends.

        To build a synthetic (log) price  based on measured expectations, we first rewrite

Equation (7) in terms of expectations of future earnings growth:

                                                     
                                                                       
                                                1    

15
 The idea that expectations of short term growth display the reversals of Table 3, Panel A features in De la O and
Myers' (2019) theoretical analysis, but they do not connect it with the data generating process and systematic errors.
                                                         20
 
where                1        where  is the average log payout ratio. This expression holds in

the limit where  is close to 1. We next implement this expression using the formula:

                                                                                         
                                          ln                             e                                  8
                                1                                                       1 


where we set  to 8.48% (the sample mean),  to 0.9774 (i.e.,                         ), and  to 0.0927. We

measure expected growth between  and                    1 and between        1 and       2 using forecasted

earnings. For longer horizons we use  , which is analysts' expected growth for the next three

to five years. Forecasts for the longer term are not available but a reasonable hypothesis is that

growth expectations gradually revert from  toward an average long-run level  .

Accordingly, we use  to proxy for the expected growth rate between                        3 and        10, and

set growth expectations beyond                 11 to a level consistent with the average observed stock

price.16'17 In the main analysis we use nominal values, but in Appendix B (Figure B.1) we show

that our results are robust when we account for inflation.

          We compare our expectations-based index with a rational (log) price benchmark 

computed following Shiller's (2014) methodology.                Starting from the terminal price 

ln         at ,       is computed backwards, using the actual earnings over time, and setting 

5.81% and            8.48% to reflect sample averages. Setting          2019, we obtain:


                                                                                                    . 




4.1 Excess Volatility Puzzle



16
  We use LTG to capture growth until  10 because in our sample year the average duration of a business cycle is
about 10 years. We obtain virtually identical results if we infer growth expectations beyond  5 by applying the
observed decay of observed cyclically adjusted earnings to  . The results are in Appendix B. 
17
     Specifically, the long-term growth rate  is the average of the growth rate  which solves       
      
ln                              e               .

                                                        21
 
       Proposition 1 identifies a condition under which market expectations generate excess

volatility of asset prices. Corollary 1 shows that the price index  displays excess volatility if

measured beliefs satisfy the same condition.



Corollary 1. Define                                                   . Analyst beliefs reduce excess

volatility relative to rational beliefs, namely               if and only if        1           ,    0,

where  is as in Proposition 1.a.


       Recall from Tables 1 and 2 that analyst beliefs are too optimistic after good

fundamentals, suggesting       ,   is positive and the condition of Corollary 1.a holds. To assess

whether this is the case, we compare the standard deviation of price changes computed using

    and      to the standard deviation of actual price changes. Table 4 below reports the results.

                                                Table 4.
                                    Volatility of log price changes
The standard deviation of one-year change in: (1) the log of the price of the S&P500 index (p), (2) the
rational benchmark index ( ), (3) the long-term index ( ) as defined by equation 8 in the text, and
(4) the short-term index that incorporates one-year ahead expectations and assumes constant growth after
that ( ). The sample period ranges from 12-1982 to 12-2018 and has 424 monthly observations.
                                        p               pRE              pO             pOS
                                      15.2%             0.7%            14.6%          12.0% 



       The large gap between volatility of actual prices (Column 1) and the volatility of rational

prices (Column 2) is Shiller's puzzle. Our expectations-based index  dramatically improves

the prediction for price volatility (Column 3), explaining nearly all of the observed volatility.

       To what extent is year on year price volatility driven by short versus long term

expectations? We compute a short-term index, denoted  , that incorporates one year ahead

expectations in Equation (6) and assumes constant growth after that. This index accounts for a

price volatility of 12% (Column 4), which is sizable. Short term expectations are indeed quite

volatile. Still, adding long term expectations significantly increases price volatility, by another



                                                  22
 
20%. Table B.2 in Appendix B shows that results are similar if we use a dividends-based price

index (in which we continue to use LTG to proxy for long term dividend growth).

        One concern on Table 4 is that the price process is non-stationary (Marsh and Merton

1986). To address this issue, we compute the variance of price changes following Shiller

(2014). Campbell and Shiller (1987) offer a more systematic approach. They note that under

plausible assumptions, dividends and prices are co-integrated. Thus,        is stationary, for:

                                        1          1
                                                                   .
                                               1       

       The logic of Proposition 1 can now be used to compare the volatility                to that

obtained using           . Table B.3 in Appendix B presents the results for the different

specifications above. Similarly to Table 4, incorporating expectations of long-term earnings

growth captures a significant share of observed variation in                , and incorporating

expectations of dividend growth accounts for a significant share of variation in       .

       The finding that analyst beliefs are sufficiently volatile to account for Shiller's puzzle

does not on its own imply that such beliefs are highly correlated with market beliefs. We next

assess whether this is the case, comparing our expectations-based index  to actual price levels

 . Figure 2 plots the market price (green line) and the synthetic price  (red line) against the

rational price    (blue line).




                                               23
 
Figure 3. We plot the S&P500 index (green line), the rational benchmark index ( , blue line) and the
long-term index ( , red line) as defined by equation 8 in the text.


         The actual and the synthetic prices are remarkably well aligned. The high frequency

volatility of the synthetic index and of the actual price is comparable. Crucially, they also move

in tandem relative to the rational price: when the price is above the rational benchmark, so is the

synthetic price; and vice versa when the price is below the rational benchmark. This is an

indication that observed beliefs may proxy well for market beliefs. Formally:


Corollary 2.                   ,               0 if and only if       0.


         With constant discount rates,  and  display correlated departures from the rational

price      only if measured beliefs correlate with market beliefs. The fact that these departures

are persistent further suggests that expectations errors are persistent,    0.

         One concern here is that analyst beliefs are indirectly capturing time varying discount

rates rather than market beliefs. While financial analysts are unlikely to confuse earnings growth

with rates of return, a connection between estimated earnings growth and discount rates may

spuriously arise if analysts use stock prices to infer market expectations of fundamentals. This
                                                   24
 
concern does not apply to short term forecasts, which track well documented short term

reversals, but it may be more relevant for  forecasts. We consider this concern next.



4.2 Are Analysts Inferring LTG from Stock Prices?

       Inferring expectations from prices requires information on, or assumptions about,

required returns. We consider two cases. In the first, analysts know the market expected return

                   , and can recover the true discounted dividend growth the market expects:

                                                         
                                                                                          .
                                                     1      

In this case, analyst beliefs coincide with market expectations,               ,      ,   , and  captures

exactly the market expectations about long term growth.

       In the second, more problematic case, analysts fit growth expectations to justify market

prices assuming that the rate of return is constant at , but that assumption is erroneous. In this

case, the analyst discounted expected dividend growth is given by:

                                                                         
                                                                               .                       9
                                                                     1      

       The key implication here is that any price movement causes a revision of analysts'

earnings growth, regardless of whether the price movement reflect changes in beliefs or in

required returns. To assess this possibility, we perform two exercises.

       First, we consider time variation in the aggregate  for S&P500 firms. We exploit the

finding in Table 3 that  is partly driven by fundamentals such as GDP growth, earnings

above their cyclically adjusted value, and cumulative announcement returns as covered by the

WSJ. Does LTG also respond to stock price movements that are not predicted by fundamentals?

If the answer is no, there is little evidence that LTG mechanically responds to changes in the

aggregate stock index driven by changes in required rates of return.



                                                25
 
        To assess this possibility, we perform a two stage exercise. In the first stage we regress

the market log price dividend ratio on the same measure of fundamentals used in Table 3, i.e.

earnings surprise relative to cyclically adjusted earnings. We then check whether the first stage

residuals help explain  .

                                                     Table 5.
The dependent variable in Panel A is the log price-to-dividend ratio. The independent variable is the log
of earnings in year  relative to the cyclically-adjusted earnings in year  5. The dependent variable in
Panel B is the forecast for long-term growth in earnings (  ). The independent variables are the
residuals generated by the matching regression in Panel A. We report results using quarterly data starting
on December of 1981 through December of 2018. We adjust standard errors for serial correlation using
the Newey-West procedure (with 12 lags). Superscripts: a significant at the 1% level, b significant at the
5% level, c significant at the 10% level.

                                                      Panel A 
                                                       Price Dividend Ratio 
                                                                   
                                      etcaet1                  0.3945b 
                                                               (0.1894) 
                                      Observations               149 
                                      Adjusted R2                15% 

                                                     Panel B 
                                                                         LTG 
                                                                             
                                 Residuals from first stage (etcaet5)  0.4002 
                                                                       (0.2951) 
                                 Observations                             149 
                                 Adjusted R2                             10% 


        Panel A shows that recent growth in fundamentals predicts 15% of price dividend ratio

variation. Panel B shows that residuals from the first stage, which still exhibit substantial

variation, cannot predict contemporaneous changes in  , contrary to the hypothesis that

analyst mechanically fit  to match prices.18



18
  One concern with this exercise is that the price dividend ratio may display large high frequency movements while
LTG is slower moving, reducing the explanatory power of extrinsic price movements for LTG. We thus perform a
version of this same exercise using as explanatory variable a variable that is slower moving than the price dividend
ratio, namely stock returns in the past five years. This exercise addresses the possibility that analysts fit high LTG
after a sustained increase in stock prices. The results, which are reported in Appendix C, Table C2, show that LTG
is uncorrelated with return residuals from the first stage. This finding confirms that LTG is unlikely to be
mechanically fitted by analysts using price variables.
                                                         26
 
        The second exercise uses survey measures of expectations of returns, which can be taken

as an observable proxy for discount rates. If analysts mistakenly attribute changes in required

returns to changes in market expectations,  would be negatively correlated with

contemporaneous expectations of returns elicited from market participants. Table 6 presents the

correlations between  and the measures of expectations of returns discussed in Section 2.1.

                                                      Table 6.
Partial correlation between the forecast for long-term growth in earnings (LTGt) and expected returns
from the survey of CFOs using 73 quarterly observations between 10/2001 and 12/2018.                    is the
log of one plus the one-year expected return.                is the log of one plus the one-year expected
return. Superscripts: a significant at the 1% level, b significant at the 5% level, c significant at the 10%
level. Significance levels have the Bonferroni adjustment.
                                                                           
                                                       0.3692b            
                                                       0.3087a       0.3901b 

        Market expectations of returns are positively, not negatively, correlated with expectations

about long term earnings growth. This is reminiscent of Greenwood and Shleifer's (2014)

finding that expectations of returns are positively correlated with past returns. 19 Moreover, after

controlling for fundamentals (listed in Table 5), expectations of long term growth and of returns

are uncorrelated (Table B.4 in Appendix B).

        In sum, LTG moves with fundamentals, and it does not seem to be mechanically inferred

from prices. This occurs both at the firm level (see BGLS 2019) and at the aggregate level. This

finding strengthens the confidence that analyst beliefs are a good proxy for market beliefs.20



4.3 Variation in the Price Dividend Ratio




19
    Cochrane (2011) offers an alternative interpretation of Greenwood and Shleifer's (2014) results in which analysts
report risk neutral expectations. Greenwood and Shleifer (2014) argue that such an interpretation is inconsistent
with the data, not only because the surveys ask explicitly about returns, but also because under a risk neutral
interpretation respondents would answer the risk free rate, which does not match the data.  
20
    In fact, analyst beliefs are a much better predictor of aggregate investment than measures of firm-level  based on
market prices (Cummins, Hasset, Oliner 2006).
                                                         27
 
          The fact that the synthetic price  closely tracks the market price (Figure 2) and in

particular matches its volatility (Table 3) suggests that it may also help account for the variation

in valuation ratios such as price dividend or price earnings ratios. Formally:


Corollary 3. Regressing                on            has a higher coefficient than regressing                 

on            if and only if      ,     1                    0, where  is as in Proposition 2.


Analyst beliefs help account for the price dividend ratio provided they are positively correlated

with market beliefs,        ,      0, or they over-react sufficiently strongly,              0, or both.

          To assess the prediction in Corollary 3, we use the earnings-based synthetic prices of the

previous section to build valuation ratios                     ,        as well as               , which are

expressed in terms of earnings growth expectations alone.21 We then regress these ratios on the

contemporaneous price earnings ratio. Similarly, we build synthetic price dividend ratios using

expectations of dividends, available starting in 2003, according to Equation (7), e.g.

                ,                                                                      
                                      ln                               d                 
                           1                                                          1 

where we assume that expectations of long run dividend growth are also described by  , and

regress these ratios on the contemporaneous price dividend ratio. Table 7 reports the results:

                                                     Table 7.
    In Panel A, the dependent variable are: (1) the log of the ratio of the rational benchmark index ( ) to
    earnings (et), (2) the log of the ratio of the short-term index to earnings, (3) the log of the ratio that
    incorporates one-year ahead expectations ( ) to earnings, (3( the log of the ratio of the long-term
    index ( to earnings, (4) the log of one plus the one-year expected return (                  , and (5) the
    discounted value of future expected discounts based on an AR(1) model for                 and            .
    The dependent variables in Panel B are the same as in Panel B except that the variables in columns [1]-
    [3] are scaled by dividends rather earnings. The independent variable is the log price-to-earnings ratio
    in Panel A and the log price-to-dividend ration in Panel B. Forecasts for earnings and dividends are
    available monthly while data on expected returns is quarterly. Each regression uses as many
    observations as possible. In each panel, the last row reports the sample period for each regression.
    Standard errors are not adjusted for serial correlation. Superscripts: a significant at the 1% level, b
    significant at the 5% level, c significant at the 10% level.

                                           Panel A: Price earnings ratio

21
  Using earnings-based prices to match the price dividend ratio would require adding a dividend term, which would
generate a mechanical correlation between the resulting ratios.
                                                        28
 
                        (1)               (2)              (3)            (4)             (5)
                        RE
                      pt -et              OS
                                         pt -et             O
                                                          pt -et                           
    pet               0.5446a           0.5232a           0.6257a       0.0025          0.0069
                     (0.0771)          (0.0605)          (0.0511)      (0.0054)        (0.0146)
    Observations        445               440               440           73              73
    Adjusted R2        0.392             0.548             0.645        -0.008          -0.008
    Sample           1981:12-          1981:12-          1981:12-      2010:10-        2010:10-
    period           2018:12           2018:12           2018:12       2018:12         2018:12

                                       Panel B: Price dividend ratio
                        (1)               (2)              (3)            (4)             (5)
                     ptRE,D-dt          ptOs,D-dt        ptO,D-dt                          
    pdt               0.1534a           0.3454a           0.7178a       0.0516a         0.1411a
                     (0.0106)          (0.0485)          (0.0872)      (0.0087)        (0.0237)
    Observations        445               178               134            73              73
    Adjusted R2        23%               42%               42%           46%             46%
    Sample           1981:12-          2002:10-          2005:11-      2010:10-        2010:10-
    period           2018:12           2018:12           2018:11       2018:12         2018:12


          Measured expectations of earnings growth account for a large part of the variation in the

price earnings and price dividends ratios. In panel A, the synthetic index             constructed

using long term growth expectations captures 63% of price dividend ratio variation. Nearly one

fifth of this comes from expectations of long-term growth. Figure 3 illustrates these results. In

Panel B, the index             explains roughly 72% of price dividend ratio variation, about half of

which comes from LTG.




                                                    29
 
Figure 3. We plot the log price-to-earnings ratio (green line) and the difference between the long-term
index (  , red line) as defined by Equation (8) in the text and log earnings, i.e.                      
     
ln                             e                   .



        We also assess the explanatory power of measures of expectations of future stock returns

in driving the contemporaneous price dividend ratio. Expectations of returns do not co-vary

with the price earnings ratio, and display positive co-movement with the price dividend ratio, the

opposite of what one should expect based on rational models of time varying return (this may

suggest a role for price extrapolation).22 The evidence in Table 7 that expectations of cash flow

growth have strong explanatory power for valuation ratios lines up with the results of De la O

and Myers (2019), but crucially shows that expectations of long term earnings growth

significantly increase the explanatory power relative to short term beliefs.

        In sum, analyst expectations have strong explanatory power for stock prices and help

reconcile Shiller's excess volatility puzzle and the price dividend ratio puzzle. Beliefs about

both short and long term growth contribute to the explanatory power. However, only long term

beliefs over-react. We next show that this feature is key to obtaining return predictability.

22
   Overall, measured expectations of fundamentals and of returns fall short of accounting for 100% of price
variation. This could be in part due to measurement error in expectations, and in part to genuine variation in market
attitudes toward risk not captured by measures of expectations of returns.
                                                         30
 
5. Predictability of Returns

        By the Campbell Shiller decomposition, the condition of Corollary 3 ensures that

measures of expectations should help predict future returns. In particular, high values of our

price indices should signal excess market optimism about future fundamentals, inflated stock

prices, and hence low future returns. Table 8 below assesses this explanatory power for both the

price earnings ratio and the price dividend ratio. We separately assess the ability of short and

long term expectations to predict future returns. We use raw returns but the results are similar if

we use excess returns (Table B.5 Appendix B). We also assess directly the predictive power of

fundamentals, which may arise through the link between fundamentals and forecast errors (and

hence mispricing) documented in Section 3.


                                                 Table 8.
                                           Return Predictability
The dependent variable is the log return between year t and t+1 in column [1] and the discounted value
of the cumulative return between year t and t+h in columns h=2,...,5. The independent variables are the:
(a) the log of the ratio the long-term index based on dividend forecasts to dividends (pO,D-d), (b) the log
of the ratio the long-term index based on earnings forecasts to earnings (pO,E-e), (c) the forecast for
earnings growth in the long run (LTGt), (d) the time-t forecast for one-year growth in earnings in year
t+1 (Et[et+1et]),  (e)  the time-t forecast for one-year for growth in earnings in year t+2 (Et[et+2et+1]).    We
report results using monthly expectations data for the period 1981:12-2018:12. The last period with stock
return data ranges from December of 2017 in column [1] to December 2013 in column [5]. We adjust
standard errors for serial correlation using the Newey-West correction (the number of lags ranges from
12 in the first column to 60 in the last one).
                                             (1)                 (3)                 (5)

                                                                                           
                                          


                                        Panel A: Returns and pO,D-d
                ptO,D-dt               -0.6497b              -0.9561c             -1.3618a
                                       (0.3238)              (0.5642)             (0.4210)
                Adjusted R2              17%                   19%                   37%
                Observations              80                    80                    80
                                         Panel B: Returns and pO-e
                ptO,E-et                -0.0692              -0.0621               0.0624
                                       (0.0860)              (0.1521)             (0.1689)
                Adjusted R2               2%                   0%                    0%
                Observations              380                  380                   380
                                        Panel C: Returns and LTG
                LTGt                   -3.3411a              -8.7214a             -10.8570a
                                                       31
 
                                         (1.1390)               (1.9357)               (2.1247)
                                2
                Adjusted R                  11%                   25%                    26%
                Observations                385                   385                    385
                              Panel D: Returns and Short Term Earnings Growth I
                Et[et+1-et]               -0.0273                0.0545                 0.2072b
                                         (0.0731)               (0.0878)               (0.0842)
                Adjusted R2                 380                    380                    380
                Observations                0%                     0%                     3%
                          Panel E: Returns and Short Term Earnings Growth II
                Et[et+2-et+1]             -0.3605                0.5896                 2.9468
                                         (0.6106)               (1.7653)               (2.1259)
                Adjusted R2                 0%                     0%                     7%
                Observations                380                    380                    380
Note: a significant at the 1% level, b significant at the 5% level, c significant at the 10% level. Standard errors are
corrected for serial correlation using Newey and West (1987).


         Panel A shows that the synthetic price dividend ratio                             negatively predicts

realized returns. A high                today means disappointing returns in the future, suggesting

that overly optimistic expectations about future earnings growth may indeed cause overpricing

of stocks that subsequently reverses.             Predictability of returns is especially strong at long

horizons. Panel B performs the corresponding analysis for the price earnings ratio. There is no

evidence of predictability here, in line with the fact that price earnings ratios do not predict

returns in the same sample.

         The most interesting results are in Panels C, D and E. Panel C shows that high current

expectations of long run earnings growth  strongly predict low future returns.  can

account for 26% of variation in realized returns over the next five years, or roughly two thirds of

the return variation accounted for by                at the same horizon.23

         Panels D and E show that, in contrast, expectations of short-term earnings growth do not

predict returns. This is consistent with the fact that short term beliefs capture high frequency




23
   The predictive power of current long-term growth forecasts for subsequent returns comes from the persistent
movements of the  time series. A decomposition of  into components with different persistence levels,
following Ortu, Tamoni and Tebaldi (2013), reveals that shocks to  that have a half-life of 5 quarters or more
predict returns at all horizons, while higher frequency oscillations do not predict returns.
                                                          32
 
variation and, if anything, under-react to news (Table 2). The mispricing associated with short

term beliefs may be small, and swamped by the persistent over-reaction induced by  .24

        To make progress, we next assess the link between fundamental news, belief revisions

and predictability of returns. Table 9 uses the predicted forecast revisions of short and long term

growth from Table 2 to predict future returns.


                                                    Table 9.
                                   Predicted Expectation Revisions and Returns
We report second-stage results for IV regressions using two- and five-year stock returns as the dependent
variable. The independent variables are the instrumented values of: (1) revision between year t and year
t-1 in the forecast for the one-year earnings growth rate in year t+1 (EOt(et+1-et)-EOt-1(et+1-et)), (2) the
revision between year t and year t-1 in the forecast for the one-year earnings growth rate in year t+2
(EOt(et+2-et+1)-EOt-1(et+2-et+1)), and (3) is the change in the long-term growth forecast between year t and t-
1 (LTGt). The instruments are: (1) the log of earnings in year t relative to the cyclically-adjusted
earnings in year t-1, (2) the change between year t and t-1 in the 5-year growth rate of GDP per capita,
and (3) the weighted average of the cumulative return earned by firms in the S&P500 during earnings
announcement days in the preceding 20 quarters. See Table 3:A for first-stage estimates. We report
results using quarterly expectations data for the period 1982:4-2018:4. Data on returns between t and t+2
ends on December of 2017 while data on returns between t and t+5 ends on December of 2013. We
adjust standard errors for serial correlation using the Newey-West correction (with 8 lags in the first two
columns and 20 in the last one). Superscripts: a significant at the 1% level, b significant at the 5% level, c
significant at the 10% level.
                                                       Dep Variable: Log return between years t and:
                                                              t+2            t+2             t+5

         E[Et[et+1-et] - Et-1[et+1-et] | et-caet-5]         0.4201
                                                           (0.2735)
         E[Et[et+2-et+1] ­ Et-1[et+2-et+1] | et-caet-5]                     0.4321
                                                                           (0.2753)
         E[LTGt | et-caet-5]                                                                 -0.9073a
                                                                                             (0.2670)
         LTGt- E[LTGt | et-caet-5]

         Obs                                                  400             400              373
         Modified F-stat                                     53.95           135.58           42.01
         AR Confidence Interval                           [-.05, 1.08]    [-.06, 1.05]     [-1.60,-.39]
         Reduced form Adj R2                                  6%              6%               23%




24
  Table C.5 in Appendix C shows that surprise relative to cyclically adjusted earnings also predicts lower future
returns, but only at the five year horizon. This evidence is consistent with the mechanism highlighted in Section 3
whereby strong fundamentals help predict future growth, and lead to overly optimistic expectations about long term
growth. Crucially, according to the model, only the fundamental news that lead to a revision of expectations should
help predict returns.
                                                          33
 
        Revisions of short run expectations predicted from fundamental shocks do not predict

future returns (Columns 1 and 2). This is consistent with the finding of Section 3 that such

revisions do not help predict forecast errors. In contrast, Column 3 shows that predicted

revisions of long run earnings growth account for a significant share of return predictability. An

increase in the predicted value of  by one standard deviation entails a reduction in 5-year

log returns of 0.28 (=.7857 x 0.35; the standard deviation of 5-year log returns is 0.35). Given

the average yearly log return of 8.1% this corresponds to losing roughly 42 months' worth of

returns over the five years. Expectations of long-term growth thus take the center stage in

explaining stock market puzzles.25

        We conclude by tracing the mechanism of over-reacting expectations, from fundamental

news to predictable forecast errors to returns.                 To this end, we perform a three-stage

decomposition, and check whether the forecast errors predicted from the excessive forecast

revisions in response to fundamental shocks (Table 2, Panel B), in turn predict future realized

returns. Table10 reports the results.

                                               Table 10.
                                 Predicted Forecast Errors and Returns
We report results for regressions using two- and five-year stock returns as the dependent variable. The
independent variables are the predicted values of the: (1) revision between year t and year t-1 in the
forecast for the one-year earnings growth rate in year t+1 (EOt(et+1-et)-EOt-1(et+1-et)), (2) revision between
year t and year t-1 in the forecast for the one-year earnings growth rate in year t+2 (EOt(et+2-et+1)-EOt-
1(et+2-et+1)), and (3) change in the long-term growth forecast between year t and t-1 (LTGt). In turn, we
predict revisions in earnings forecasts and changes in LTG using the following three variables: (1) the log
of earnings in year t relative to the cyclically-adjusted earnings in year t-1, (2) the change between year t
and t-1 in the 5-year growth rate of GDP per capita, and (3) the weighted average of the cumulative
return earned by firms in the S&P500 during earnings announcement days in the preceding 20 quarters.
We report results using quarterly expectations data for the period 1982:4-2018:4. Data on stock returns
between t and t+2 ends on December of 2017 while data on stock returns between t and t+5 ends on
December of 2013. We adjust standard errors for serial correlation using the Newey-West correction
(with 8 lags in the first two columns and 20 in the remaining ones). Superscripts: a significant at the 1%
level, b significant at the 5% level, c significant at the 10% level.
                                             Dependent Variable: Log return between years t and:  
                                           t+2           t+2         t+5         t+5             t+5 

25
  We can assess to what extent the component of LTG revision not predicted by fundamentals helps predict returns.
We find that this "non-fundamental" LTG revision does not predict returns (regression coefficient 0.08, standard
error 0.24). In part, non-fundamental LTG revisions may reflect the sluggishness inherent in the consensus 
when analysts receive noisy information (Bordalo et al. 2020), and may embody information already reflected in
prices. More broadly, this result suggests that strong fundamentals may play a significant role in propelling excess
optimism. Of course, this result is fully consistent with softer information also helping create over-reaction.
                                                        34
 
Predicted (et+1et)EOt[et+1et]             1.9280 
                                         (1.1755) 
Predicted (et+2et+1)EOt[et+2et+1]                      0.8481b 
                                                       (0.3941) 
Predicted (et+5et)/5LTGt                                            0.6131a 
                                                                    (0.2044) 
Predicted (et+5et+1)/4LTGt                                                        1.5537a 
                                                                                  (0.5023) 
Predicted (et+5et+2)/3LTGt                                                                         20.4041 
                                                                                                  (123.5484) 
Obs                                        400           400          373          373               373 
Modified Fstat                             7.12         12.93        64.29         7.66              0.14 
AR Confidence Interval                 [entire grid]   [.04,...]  [0.22, 1.01]  [ .81, ...]  [ . ,8.1] U [8.2, . ] 
Reduced form Adj R2                        6%             6%           23%           23%              23% 


        Short term beliefs display modest under-reaction to fundamentals (Table 3 Panel B) and

naturally the entailed forecast errors do not account for future returns (Column 1). In contrast,

there is a positive and significant association between predicted long-term forecast errors and

subsequent returns (columns 4 and 5), further validating the over-reaction mechanism.

According to Table 10, this mechanism explains nearly all the predictability of 5 year ahead

returns from  (23% vs 26% in Panel C of Table 8) and over half of that predicted from the

price dividend ratio.

        The results in this section close the loop of the argument laid out in the Introduction:

expectations of long term growth over-react, particularly to fundamental shocks, and

corresponding forecast errors predict returns. Belief dynamics drive the puzzling price

movements.



6. Conclusion.

        We showed that measured expectations of fundamentals help explain in a parsimonious

way leading stock market puzzles even with constant discount rates. Expectations of short and

long term earnings growth both contribute to generating excessively volatile prices and realistic


                                                          35
 
time variation in the price dividend ratio. Expectations of long term growth over-react to news,

and thus account for persistent boom bust patterns in stock prices and return predictability.

       A sceptic may question our measurement of beliefs, arguing that it surreptitiously

embodies variation in discount rates. We consider this possibility, but do not find support for it.

This is in line with many other studies that have validated the use of survey expectations. At a

minimum, beliefs data can help advance our understanding of asset prices. Theories based on

discount rate variation may also benefit from external measurement of changing risk attitudes.

       The analysis of this paper raises many questions about the role of beliefs. An important

next step is to assess how the logic of over-reaction to news can unify cross-sectional and

aggregate puzzles based on a single belief distortion, by introducing a psychologically-founded

model of non-rational beliefs into an economy with heterogeneous firms or sectors, in the spirit

of BGLS (2019). Expansion of high growth sectors or periods of outstanding aggregate

performance may create excess optimism for many firms, leading to an excessive compression

in their cost of capital, but also to a reduction in the equity premium for the market as a whole.

       The major open area here is psychological foundations of beliefs. Diagnostic

expectations (BGLS 2019) provide a micro-foundation for the forward looking over-reaction to

news that is central here. They do not yet incorporate the short term persistence of beliefs, which

is related to their short term under-reaction. Models in which updating is sluggish due to limited

attention or persistent memory signals, but the accumulation of signals eventually creates over-

reaction and then reversals, offer promising avenues to develop a realistic yet manageable

account of beliefs that can help asset pricing research make progress.




                                                 36
 
                                       REFERENCES
Abel, Andrew, 1990, Asset prices under habit formation and catching up with the joneses,
       American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings 80, 38-42.

Alti, Aydogan, and Paul Tetlock, 2014, Biased beliefs, asset prices, and investment: a
       structural approach, Journal of Finance 69, 325-361.

Bacchetta, Philippe, Elmar Mertens, and Eric van Wincoop, 2008, Predictability in
      financial markets: What does survey expectations tell us? Journal of
      International Money and Finance 28, 406-426.

Bansal, Ravi, and Amir Yaron, 2004, Risks for the long run: A potential resolution of asset
       pricing puzzles, Journal of Finance 59, 1481-1509.

Bansal, Ravi, Dana Kiku, and Amir Yaron, 2010, Long run risks, the macroeconomy, and asset
       prices, American Economic Review 100, 542-46.

Barberis, Nicholas, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 1998, A model of investor
       sentiment, Journal of Financial Economics 49, 307-343.

Barberis, Nicholas, Robin Greenwood, Lawrence Jin, and Andrei Shleifer, 2015, X-CAPM: An
       extrapolative capital asset pricing model, Journal of Financial Economics 115, 1-24.

Barberis, Nicholas, Robin Greenwood, Lawrence Jin, and Andrei Shleifer, 2018, Extrapolation
       and bubbles, Journal of Financial Economics 129: 203-227.

Barro, Robert, 2006, Rare disasters and asset markets in the twentieth century, Quarterly
       Journal of Economics 121, 823-866.

Robert B. Barsky, and J. Bradford DeLong, 1993, Why Does the Stock Market Fluctuate,
       Quarterly Journal of Economics 108, 291-312.

Ben-David, Itzhak, John Graham, and Campbell Harvey, 2013, Managerial miscalibration,
       Quarterly Journal of Economics 128, 1547-1584.

Black, Fischer, 1986, Noise, Journal of Finance 41, 528-543.

Bordalo, Pedro, Nicola Gennaioli, and Andrei Shleifer, 2018, Diagnostic expectations and credit
       cycles, Journal of Finance 73, 199-227.
Bordalo, Pedro, Nicola Gennaioli, Rafael La Porta, and Andrei Shleifer, 2019, Diagnostic
       expectations and stock returns, Journal of Finance 74, 2839-2874.




                                              37
 
Bordalo, Pedro, Nicola Gennaioli, Yueran Ma, and Andrei Shleifer, 2020, Over-reaction in
       macroeconomic expectations, American Economic Review, forthcoming.

Bouchaud, JeanPhilippe, Philipp Krueger, Augustin Landier, and David Thesmar, 2019, Sticky
       expectations and the profitability anomaly, Journal of Finance 74, 639-674.

Campbell, John, and John Cochrane, 1999, By force of habit: A consumption-based explanation
       of aggregate stock market behaviour, Journal of Political Economy 107, 205-251.

Campbell, John, and Robert Shiller, 1987, Cointegration and tests of present value models,
       Journal of Political Economy 95, 1062-1088.

Campbell, John, and Robert Shiller, 1988, Interpreting cointegrated models, Journal of
       Economic Dynamics and Control 12, 505-522.

Cochrane, John, 2011, Presidential address: Discount rates, Journal of Finance 66, 1047-1108.

Coibion, Olivier, and Yuriy Gorodnichenko, 2015, Information rigidity and the expectations
       formation process: A simple framework and new facts, American Economic Review 105,
       2644-2678.

Constantinides, George, 1990, Habit formation: a resolution of the equity premium puzzle,
       Journal of Political Economy 98, 519-543.

Cummins, Jesse, Kevin Hassett, and Stephen Oliner, 2006, Investment behaviour, observable
       expectations, and internal funds, American Economic Review, 96, 796 ­ 810.

Cutler, David, Jim Poterba, and Lawrence Summers, 1990, Speculative dynamics and the role of
       feedback traders, American Economic Review 80, 63­68.
Daniel, Kent, David Hirshleifer, and Avanidhar Subramanyam, 1998, Investor psychology and
    security market under- and over-reaction, Journal of Finance 53, 1839 ­ 1885.

Daniel, Kent, David Hirshleifer, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, A., 2001, Overconfidence,
    arbitrage, and equilibrium asset pricing, Journal of Finance 56, 921-965.

Daniel, Kent and Sheridan Titman, 2006, Market reactions to tangible and intangible
    information, Journal of Finance 61, 1605­1643.
D'Arienzo, Daniele, 2019, Excess volatility from increasing overreaction, Working paper.
De la O, Ricardo and Sean Myers, 2019, Subjective cash flow and discount rate expectations,
       Working paper.
De Bondt, Werner, and Richard Thaler, 1990, Do security analysts overreact? American
       Economic Review 80, 52-57.

                                               38
 
De Long, J. Bradford, Andrei Shleifer, Lawrence Summers, and Robert Waldmann, 1990a,
       Noise trader risk in financial markets, Journal of Political Economy 98, 703-738.

De Long, J. Bradford, Andrei Shleifer, Lawrence Summers, and Robert Waldmann, 1990b,
       Positive feedback investment strategies and destabilizing rational speculation, Journal of
       Finance 45, 379-395.

Frankel, Richard, and Charles Lee, 1998. Accounting valuation, market expectation, and cross-
       sectional stock returns, Journal of Accounting and Economics 25, 283-319.

Gabaix, Xavier, 2012, Variable rare disasters: An exactly solved framework for ten puzzles in
       macro-finance, Quarterly Journal of Economics 127, 645-700.

Giglio, Stefano, and Bryan Kelly, 2017, Excess volatility: Beyond discount rates, Quarterly
       Journal of Economics 133, 71-127.
Greenwood, Robin, and Samuel Hanson, 2015, Waves in ship prices and investment, Quarterly
       Journal of Economics 131, 55-109.
Greenwood, Robin, and Andrei Shleifer, 2014, Expectations of returns and expected returns,
       Review of Financial Studies 27, 714-746.
Guo, Hongye, and Jessica Wachter, 2020, `Superstitious' Investors, NBER w25603.

Hirshleifer, David, Jun Li, and Jianfeng Yu, 2015, Asset pricing in production economies with
       extrapolative expectations, Journal of Monetary Economics 76, 87-106.

Huang, Lixin, and Hong Liu, 2007, Rational inattention and portfolio selection, Journal of
       Finance 62, 1999-2040.

Jagannathan, Ravi, and Binying Liu, 2019, Dividend dynamics, learning, and expected stock
       index returns, Journal of Finance 74, 401-448.

Jegadeesh, Narasimhan, and Sheridan Titman, 1993, Returns to buying winners and selling
       losers: implications for stock market efficiency, Journal of Finance 48, 65-91.

Koijen, Ralph S J, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, 2011, Predictability of returns and
       cash flows, Annual Review of Financial Economics 3, 467-491.

Kothari, S. P., Jonathan Lewellen, and Jerold Warner, 2006, Stock returns, aggregate earnings
       surprises, and behavioral finance, Journal of Financial Economics 79, 537-568.

Kozak, Serhiy, Stefan Nagel, and Shrihari Santosh, 2018, Interpreting factor models, Journal of
       Finance 73, 1183-1223.



                                               39
 
Jin, Lawrence J., and Pengfei Sui, 2019, Asset pricing with return extrapolation,
       Working paper.
La Porta, Rafael, 1996, Expectations and the cross-section of stock returns, Journal of
      Finance 51, 1715-1742.

La Porta, Rafael, Josef Lakonishok, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 1997, Good news for
       value stocks: Further evidence on market efficiency, Journal of Finance 52, 859-874.

Lee, Charles M.C., James N. Myers, and Bhaskaran Swaminathan, 1999, What is the intrinsic
       value of the Dow? Journal of Finance 54, 1693-1741.

Lee, Charles, and Bhaskaran Swaminathan, 2000, Price momentum and trading volume, Journal
       of Finance 55, 2017-2069.

LeRoy, Stephen, and Richard Porter, 1981, The present-value relation: Tests based on implied
       variance bounds, Econometrica 49, 555-574.

Lettau, Martin, and Sydney Ludvigson, 2001, Consumption, aggregate wealth, and expected
       stock returns, Journal of Finance 56, 815-849.

Marsh, Terry, and Robert Merton, 1986, Dividend variability and variance bounds tests for the
       rationality of stock market prices, American Economic Review 76, 483-498.

Nagel, Stefan, and Xu, Zhengyang, 2019, Asset pricing with fading memory, Working paper,
    National Bureau of Economic Research No. w26255.

Newey, Whitney. K., and Kenneth D. West. 1987. A simple, positive semi-definite
    heteroscedasticity and autocorrelation consistent covariance matrix, Econometrica 55.
    703­708.

Odean, Terrance, 1998, Volume, volatility, price, and profit when all traders are above
    average, Journal of Finance 53, 1887-1934.

Ortu, Fulvio, Andrea Tamoni, and Claudio Tebaldi, 2013, Long-Run Risk and the
    Persistence of Consumption Shocks, Review of Financial Studies 26, 2876­2915.
Rietz, Thomas A, 1988, The equity risk premium: A solution, Journal of Monetary
       Economics 22, 117-131.

Shiller, Robert, 1981, The use of volatility measures in assessing market efficiency, Journal of
       Finance 36, 291-304.

Shiller, Robert, 2014, Speculative asset prices, American Economic Review 104, 1486-1517.


                                              40
 
Sims, Christopher, 2003, Implications of rational inattention, Journal of Monetary
    Economics 50, 665­690.
Timmermann, Allan, 1993, How learning in financial markets generates excess volatility and
       predictability in stock prices, Quarterly Journal of Economics 108, 1135-1145.

Wachter, Jessica, 2013, Can timevarying risk of rare disasters explain aggregate stock market
       volatility? Journal of Finance 68, 987-1035.




                                              41
 
                                                     Appendix A. Proofs.


Proof of Proposition 1. The MA representation of the data generating process implies that:

                                                                                 .


which in turn implies:

                                                                                                                  .


Likewise, the expectations shock admits a moving average representation:

                                                        ,                ,   ,


Using the more general formulation of expectational errors:

                                                                                           ,


allowing differential impact                     ,   at different horizons , we obtain:

                                                                                                       ,      .


Expectations have two components: a rational part which responds to current and past shocks

    , with a propagation coefficient                        , and a distortion part which responds to current and

past expectational shocks             ,      with propagation coefficient                                  .      This means that an

expectational shock has an initial term structure given by                              which is persistent over time 

but decays at a rate .

       By Equation (5), then, the log stock price at time  is equal to:

                                
                                                                                                                          ,   ,
                         1      

which can be written as:
                                
                                                                                                   ,                   
                         1      

                                                        
                                                                                               ,
                                             1          

                                                                42
 
where we have defined                                      and                               as the "average" fundamental
impulse response for time j, and the "average" impulse response for expectational distortions. In
particular, rationality corresponds to the case                     0.
        Consider now the Propositions part i). The log price change is then equal to:


                                                                                                 ,                        ,



                                                               1                                         ,




                                1                      ,




                       1                   1                                      ,            1                              ,



where we used                                         as well as            1 and

                                                                                      1                      

We then have:
                   


                             1                    1                                    1             1                            



                          2 1                              1 1                         

                                                               2
                                                                       
                                                           1       


                          2 1                     1         1                          


So there is excess volatility if:

                      1      
                                                  1        1         1                                             0
                          

In the benchmark case where                    1 for all , we have                           and the condition above can

be rewritten:

                                                               43
 
                                                     1                         0
where          1                      1          1       1                                     . The condition       0 is
then equivalent to:
                                                                 1
                                  1                                     1      1       ,
                                                                 

which is fulfilled provided the rational price response to a fundamental shock                                 1    is

large enough. Because            0 and because the long run impulse response converges to zero, so

that          is low, the condition              0 is satisfied provided                   is not much above zero.


        Consider now the Proposition's part ii). The log price dividend ratio is equal to:
                                                 
                                                                                           ,       ,
                                       1         

which in conventional tests is used as an explanatory variable for future realized dividend
growth rates:

                                                                                                       ,

where  is a combination of future shocks. Then:


                       ,                                                                       ,       ,    


                                                           

while
                                                                 
                                                                                      2          
                                                             1       

So the coefficient from regressing the future discounted dividend growth on the log price
dividend is:
                                                                              
                       
                                                  
                                                                            2            
                                                 1 
Note that under rational expectations,               0, we have                1. Instead, the coefficient is smaller
than 1 if
                                                                  
                                             1                                        0
                                                                 
                                                         44
 
Again, in the benchmark case where                  1 for all , we have:
                                                1                         0
with         1                .


          Finally, consider the predictability of returns. By Equation (1), the one period stock
return is equal to:
                                                                                     ,
where we have set         0 for convenience. By iterating the equation forward until                       we
obtain:

                                                                                             .

By using the price rule (where for convenience we have also set                      0), it is immediate to
obtain:

                                                                                                          ,

which can be written as:

                                                                                                                 ,

so that  -period ahead returns combine the forecast revisions up until  as well as the term
structure of forecast errors made at time . Note that:

                                                                      ,                               ,       

                                                                  ,              

where  captures shocks that occur after time . From the perspective of time , realized future
returns are:




                                                       45
 
         


                                                                            ,




                                                       ,                                                                     ,



                             1                     ,


This implies that regressing the -period return on the current price dividend ratio                                  
yields a coefficient                      ,                     /                              , where

                          ,       



                                      1                                 ,       ,                                ,



                          1                                              
                                               1                                       ,            
                              1                                         

The coefficient is negative provided
                                                    
                                  1                                 ,                      0
                                                   
Again, in the benchmark case where                 1 for all , we have:
                                               1                                0
with       1                .



Proof of Proposition 2.

We begin by deriving the Coibion Gorodnichenko coefficient that links forecast errors to

forecast revisions. From Equation (4), the expected forecast error at time  is:


                                                                ,                               ,                        ,




                                                           46
 
while the revision at  is has two components, one driven by the shocks at t (both fundamental

and to expectations) and another driven by the change in the impact of past expectation shock on

the forecast:

                                                                                                   
                                                                           ,                                           ,    .
                                                                                                

so that:

                                         ,                                        

                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                            1       

                                      

                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                        .
                                                                                                            1       

The CG coefficient is negative provided:

                                                         1                                                   0

which is equivalent to:

                                             1                                                        0.

In the benchmark case where                  1 for all , this becomes:
                                         1                                              0.
which is reminiscent of the conditions in Propositions 1 to 3. Belief updating at horizon                                       1 is

excessive when the distortion co-moves with rational updating (                                       0 and            0) or when

beliefs are noisy (large  ). In the first case analysts over-react to fundamental news, in the

second they over-react to noise.

           We can now interpret the results of Table 1. Predictability of forecast errors depends on

the combination of analyst optimism in reaction to a good shock,  , with the impact of that

shock on subsequent growth,           . The results in Table 1 can be reconciled if a positive shock

to earnings growth displays short term reversal, namely  ,                                            0 , and long-term higher

growth, namely             0 for         2. In short, the patterns for short and long term forecasts are


                                                                47
 
reconciled if analysts become too optimistic after a good growth shock,                              0. According to

Equation (5), after a positive shock analysts revise their forecasts downward, anticipating mean

reversion, but because            0 they do not revise enough. Insufficient reversion of beliefs

creates short term under-reaction. On the other hand, after the same positive growth shock,

analysts revise up their long run beliefs due to both the rational and irrational components in

Equation (5), causing over-reaction of long term forecasts.

        We now turn to Table 2, where          is assessed following a two-stage approach. In a first

stage we regress the revision of growth forecasts on our news proxies (Table 2, Panel A). In a

second stage, we regress the forecast error on the revision predicted from the first stage (Table 2,

Panel B).

        We now show that a positive first stage coefficient                        0 at horizon          1 means that

               ,      0 : expectations move in the direction of the shock provided the shock is

persistent (           0) and expectational distortions correlate with the shock itself (                     ,       0).

Recall that the forecast revision is:

                                                                                   
                                                              ,                                           ,       .
                                                                                

It follows that:

                                                                  ,                              ,
                                                                                                     .
                                                                                        

The predicted forecast revision is then equal to:

                                                                           

If news proxies indeed predict forecast revisions, the second stage coefficient is given by:

                                           ,                                                   
                                                                                                .
                                                                                               

To derive this equation, we use the forecast error:


                                                       ,                            ,                             ,


                                                  48
 
The analysis yields                 0 if, for horizons  such that news positively predict revisions, 

0, the second stage is negative. Intuitively, in this case analysts become too optimistic after

good shocks, as suggested by Table 1 for beliefs about long run growth. But                                        0 also holds

if the first stage coefficient is negative,                       0 and the second stage coefficient is positive. In

this case, after a positive shock beliefs get revised downwards, as in the case of mean reversion,

but insufficiently so. Insufficient mean reversion after good news is also a sign of excess

optimism, which entails                   0.





Proof or Corollary 1. From Proposition 1 we have:

                                                                        

                                    
                            2                     2                        1          1       1                        
                                1      


This holds provided there is excess volatility under measured expectations, namely:

                     1      
                                                  1           1       1                                       0.
                         






Proof or Corollary 2. From Proposition 1 we know that:

                                                                                  ,



and similarly for                   . It follows that:

                                                                                      
                                                         ,                                   
                                                                               1          





                                                                  49
 
Proof of Corollary 3. From Proposition 1, we have

                                                 
                                                                                          ,   .
                                        1        

and analogously for         and                   (where the last term drops out). If follows that
                                                                
                    ,                                                     ,                           ,      ,
                                                           1       

while

                                  ,                                                               ,


Thus,              ,                                    ,                 if and only if
                                                1      
                                    ,                                         ,       0
                                                    

since the denominator                           is the same in both cases. In the benchmark case where
        1 for all , the condition becomes:
                                            ,          1              ,           0
with       1               .





                                                           50
 
                        Appendix B. Robustness and Further Results on Price Indices

In this Appendix, we collect several results that complement the analysis of the synthetic price

indices in the text.



Correlations across indices. 

                                    p-d        pRE,D-d         pO,D-d         pOS,D-d       p-e       pRE,E-e   pO,E-e
            pRE,D-d                0.4850                                                                           
             O,D
            p      -d              0.6489      0.3119                                                               
             OS,D
            p -d                   0.6500      0.0392          0.7367                                               
            p-e                    0.5765      0.2308          0.5664         0.6455                                
            pRE,E-e                0.2248      0.0972          0.6947         0.7084      0.6275                    
             O,E
            p   -e                 0.0874      0.0717          0.4927         0.6257      0.8034     0.8603         
             OS,E
            p      -e              0.0402      0.1341          0.6076         0.6316      0.7412     0.9446     0.9392 




Alternative definitions and excess volatility. Here we consider an alternative definition of price

where expectations at time  of growth beyond year                                       5 is inferred by applying the observed

decay of observed cyclically adjusted earnings to  . Regressing                                                             on

                                      yields a slope coefficient of roughly 0.4. Thus, for a ten-year forecasting

horizon we set:

                               ,                                     
                                                               ln                                     e
                                                1                    


                                                                                                      
                                                                    ln 1      0.4   e                    .
                                                                                                     1 

and similarly for a 15 and 20-year forecasting horizon, as well as for an alternative dividend
                        ,
based index                        (where long term growth is assumed to be described by LTG). Table B.2

shows the results.

                                                           Table B.2
                                             Panel A: Dividend based synthetic price
                                     p                      pO,D                pO,D10              pO,D15         pO,D20

                                                                         51
 
                         15.2%           18.2%                  15.9%                16.5%                        16.7% 

                               Panel B: Earnings based synthetic price
                          p              pO,E               pO,E10                   pO,E15                   pO,E20
                         15.2%           14.6%              12.7%                    13.2%                    13.4% 


Volatility of cointegrated series. Finally, following Campbell and Shiller (1987) we assess the

volatility of the cointegrated series         for different measures of prices. The first column in

Table B.3 reproduces the volatility of changes in log prices from Table 3. The remaining

columns assess the volatility of the co-integrated series                   for different measures of prices.


                                              Table B.3

                                                   ,                         ,                            ,
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                     
                      
                                           
                                                                     
                                                                                               
                                                                                                        
                               427                211                       561                      390 
            N                  440                440                       440                      440 
                                                                                  

                                                                                                               




                                                   ,                        ,                             ,
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                     
                               550                378                       446                      437 
            N                  440                440                       440                      440 
                                                                                  

                                                                                                               




                                                   ,                        ,                             ,
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                     
                               363                223                       268                      234 
            N                  440                440                       440                      440 




Next, we expand on the link between LTG and expectations of returns of Table 6, introducing

further measures of expected returns, and showing that controlling for fundamentals, LTG is

uncorrelated with expectations of returns.



                                              Table B.4

                                                         (1)             (2)             (3)                       (4) 
                                                          Dependent Variable: LTG                      

                                                   52
 
etcaet1                                                     0.0075a          0.0078a       0.0086c        0.0026 
                                                            (0.0028)         (0.0028)     (0.0044)        (0.0041) 
                                                                                                                
1year Change in GDP growth (gGDPt)                           0.2207           0.2219       0.3289          0.5470 
                                                            (0.3991)         (0.3906)     (0.3749)        (0.4751) 
                                                                                                                
5year event returns (5yr WJS)                                  0.4432a       0.4309a      0.2815a         0.3559a 
                                                              (0.1473)      (0.1070)      (0.0809)        (0.0695) 
       ]                                                       0.0002                                           
                                                              (0.1737)                                          
  
            ]                                                                0.0605                             
  
 
                                                                            (0.2754)                            
      ]                                                                                    0.0559               
  
 
                                                                                          (0.0401)              
          ]                                                                                               0.1938 
                                                                                                          (0.1803) 
Constant                                                    0.1034a          0.0994a      0.1031a         0.1182a 
                                                            (0.0092)         (0.0226)     (0.0059)        (0.0130) 
Obs                                                            69               69           57              27 
Adj R2                                                          31%            31%          40%             38% 




We next reproduce Table 8, which examines the predictability of returns on the basis of

expectations, using excess (as opposed to raw) returns.



                                                     Table B.5


                                                                                                                           
                                                

                                                                                                                   
                                 (1)                 (2)                  (3)               (4)                 (5) 
                                                             Panel A:  Returns and pO,Dd 
ptO,Ddt                    0.7056b                 1.0571c             1.0671             1.3133b            1.4787a 
                           (0.3406)                (0.5734)            (0.6531)           (0.5867)           (0.5373) 
Adj R2                       19%                     18%                  17%               25%                30% 
                                                                                                                  
                                                               Panel B:  Returns and pO,Ed 
ptO,Eet                    0.0446                   0.0012              0.0002             0.0607             0.1499 
                           (0.0866)                (0.1226)            (0.1534)           (0.1702)           (0.1654) 
Adj R2                           1%                  0%                   0%                0%                  2% 

                                                            53
 
                                                                                                   
                                                       Panel C:  Returns and LTG  
LTGt                         3.7290a          7.5329a         9.6691a          11.1317a     12.0825a 
                             (1.0799)         (1.6616)        (1.6631)         (1.9254)     (2.5059) 
Adj R2                           14%            27%             31%            33%              34% 
                                                                                                   
  
 
                                          Panel D:  Returns and LTG net of expected inflation  
                             2.2707b          4.4494b         6.0472b          7.0270a       7.6013a 
                             (1.1006)         (2.0635)        (2.3795)         (2.5105)      (2.7102) 
Adj R2                           8%             15%             19%            21%             21% 
                                                                                                  
                                               Panel E:  Returns and Shortterm growth  
 
                             0.3245            0.1585          0.5243         1.5456          2.6627 
                             (0.6524)         (1.2784)        (1.8276)       (2.1985)        (2.1747) 
Adj R2                           0%             0%               0%               2%           6% 
                                                                                         
                                    Panel F:  Returns and Shortterm growth net of inflation   
                             0.2627         0.2204          0.4249        1.2858           2.2613 
                             (0.6289)      (1.1049)        (1.5969)      (2.0282)         (2.0845) 
Adj R2                           0%             0%               0%               2%           5% 




                                                Figure B.1
                                       Prices adjusted for inflation.
We plot the S&P500 index (green line), the rational benchmark index ( , blue line) and our benchmark
expectations based price index ( , red line). All values are adjusted for inflation using the CPI index.




                                                      54
 
    55
 
                                                 Appendix C. Other robustness checks


           In this Appendix, we collect two sets of robustness checks: i) on the analysis of whether analyst
           expectations are inferred from prices, and ii) on the predictability of returns from expectation-
           based synthetic prices.


           Prices and analyst expectations. Table C.1 generalizes Table 5 in the text by including several
           other proxies for fundamental news. We also use two standard proxies for risk: the surplus
           consumption ratio (Campbell and Cochrane 1999) and the consumption-wealth ratio (cay)
           (Lettau and Ludvigson 2001).26
                                                          Table C.1
                                       Panel A: Dependent variable is dividend price ratio
                         (1)              (2)              (3)          (4)            (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)        (9) 
                                                                                                                                            
Term Spread            2.0114                                                                                                          0.2461 
                      (6.0444)                                                                                                        (3.6722) 
Credit Spread                          47.1636a                                                                                        4.6921 
                                       (14.7006)                                                                                     (13.0758) 
spc (Cochrane & 
Campbell)                                                 2.9513                                                                     8.0017b 
                                                         (6.4096)                                                                    (3.2712) 
cay                                                                  7.2134b                                                         12.4786a 
                                                                     (2.9067)                                                        (1.7969) 
5year Div. growth                                                                0.3209                                              0.9857b 
                                                                                 (0.2713)                                            (0.4831) 
                                                                                                  a
5year EPS growth                                                                           0.2176                                     0.0519 
                                                                                           (0.0773)                                  (0.0603) 
5year WSJ return                                                                                     5.4363a                         5.5172a 
                                                                                                     (1.6753)                        (1.3792) 
5year growth in 
GDP pc                                                                                                                  13.3910b      6.9125 
                                                                                                                        (5.1701)     (5.9754) 
Observations             445              445              445         144             445          445      145          149           140 
Adjusted R2              0.0%            23.9%             0.4%       10.7%        1.9%        10.1%       31.0%         22.0%        73.0% 


                                                     Panel B: Dependent variable is LTG
                                (1)         (2)            (3)        (4)        (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)          (9) 
                                                                                                                                        
           Error Term 
           Spread         0.0194b                                                                                                       

           26
            The data are available at https://faculty.chicagobooth.edu/john.cochrane/research/Data_and_Programs/index.htm
           and at sites.google.com/view/martinlettau/data respectively.
                                                                      56
            
              (0.0085)                                                                                                 
Error Credit 
Spread                  0.0212b                                                                                        
                        (0.0087)                                                                                       
Error spc 
(Cochrane 
Campbell)                         0.0193b                                                                              
                                  (0.0085)                                                                             
Error cay                                   0.0219                                                                     
                                            (0.0143)                                                                   
Error 5yr 
Div growth                                            0.0213b                                                          
                                                      (0.0085)                                                         
Error 5yr 
GDP                                                             0.0205b                                                
                                                                (0.0090)                                               
5year WSJ 
return                                                                    0.0136                                       
                                                                          (0.0112)                                     
5yr growth 
in GDP pc                                                                           0.0123                             
                                                                                    (0.0136)                           
Error Using 
All Vars                                                                                                          0.0136 
                                                                                                                  (0.0143) 
Observatio
ns               445      445       445        144       445       445       145       149                          140 
          2
Adjusted R         19%         17%         18%         25%          22%         19%          5%             5%      2% 
               Note: Standard errors are corrected for serial correlation using Newey and West (1987).


Return Predictability. Here we separately assess the predictability of returns from the
components of the dividend price ratio that are predicted from, or orthogonal to, LTG.


Table C.2 repeats the exercise in Table 5, showing that LTG is not explained by movements in
5-year cumulative returns that are not explained by fundamentals.


                                                    Table C.2
                   Panel A:  Dependent Variable is Cumulative Return between t5 and t 
                                                       (1)         (2)        (3)                        (4) 
     etcaet1                                                0.1872                                 0.0537 
                                                           (0.1519)                                (0.1718) 
     5year WSJ return                                                    0.2447c                    0.1875 
                                                                        (0.1358)                   (0.1331) 
      5year GDP pc growth                                                              0.5115a     0.4896a 
                                                                                       (0.1429)    (0.1409) 

                                                         57
 
       Observations                                              149                 149         149       149 
                      2
       Adjusted R                                      3%          5%          26%         27% 
                                                                                   
       Panel B:  Dependent Variable is LTG; Independent variable is prediction error from Panel A 
                                                       (1)         (2)          (3)         (4) 
       Residual from etcaet1                         0.3707                                    
                                                    (0.2412)                                   
       Residual from 5year WSJ return                            0.3889                        
                                                                (0.2473)                       
       Residual from  5year GDP pc growth                                     0.1577           
                                                                             (0.2234)          
                                                                                          0.1528 
       Residual using All Vars                                                           (0.2235) 
       Observations                                    149         149          149         149 
                  2
       Adjusted R                                     13%         14%           1%          1% 




                Table C.3 Return predictability from LTG and price to dividend ratio
                Panel A: Returns and the component of dp that is orthogonal to LTG
                                             Dependent Variable: Log return between years t and:  
                                  t+1              t+2               t+3            t+4                    t+5 
                                         b                  b                    a                   a
dpt  E[dpt | LTGt]              0.1255            0.2049                0.3283              0.4567       0.5700a 
                                (0.0499)          (0.0882)              (0.1116)            (0.1363)     (0.1695) 
                                                                                                               
Observations                      385                385                  385                 385          385 
Adjusted R2                        7%                9%             16%             24%                    31% 
Note: Standard errors are corrected for serial correlation using Newey and West (1987).


                Panel B: Returns and the predicted and orthogonal components of dp  
                                             Dependent Variable: Log return between years t and:  
                                  t+1                t+2                  t+3                 t+4          t+5 
                                         b                  b                    a                   a
dpt  E[dpt | LTGt]             0.1113             0.1750                0.2905              0.4138       0.5239a 
                               (0.0491)           (0.0774)              (0.0971)            (0.1157)     (0.1336) 
                                                                                                               
E[dpt| LTGt]                   0.3024a            0.6365a               0.8057a             0.9148a      0.9821a 
                               (0.1084)           (0.1718)              (0.1616)            (0.1721)     (0.2361) 
                                                                                                               
Observations                      385               385                   385                 385          385 
Adjusted R2                        16%               29%             37%             45%                   52% 
 Note: Standard errors are corrected for serial correlation using Newey and West (1987).




                                                            58
 
                                                         Table C.4
                 Revisions about short term growth expectations do not predict returns
                                 Panel A: Returns and growth forecast for year 1  
                                                 Dependent Variable: Log return between years t and:  
                                       t+1             t+2               t+3            t+4                  t+5 
Etet+1et                              0.0084            0.0519         0.0734           0.1599c          0.2286b 
                                     (0.0444)          (0.0702)       (0.0837)         (0.0905)          (0.0904) 
                                                                                                               
Observations                      380                380            380             380                      380 
Note: Standard errors are corrected for serial correlation using Newey and West (1987).


                                 Panel B: Returns and growth forecast for year 2  
`                                                Dependent Variable: Log return between years t and:  
                                       t+1             t+2               t+3            t+4                  t+5 
Et[et+2et+1]                          0.3605            0.1771         0.6216           1.8153            3.1773 
                                     (0.6106)          (1.1817)       (1.8082)         (2.2459)          (2.1957) 
                                                                                                               
Observations                      380                380            380             380                      380 
Note: Standard errors are corrected for serial correlation using Newey and West (1987).



                                                         Table C.5
                                 Return predictability from recent earnings growth

                                                 (1)                  (3)                   (5)

                                                                                                   
                                                 


                     et-caet-5                 -0.0997              -0.2757              -0.4226a
                                              (0.1071)              (0.1740)             (0.1518)
                     Adjusted R2                 1%                    8%                  20%
                     Observations                385                  385                   385




                                                   Table C.6
                                 Moving average representation of earnings growth

                                       (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)              (5) 
                get1                1.0000a         0.5794a        0.6069a        0.8893a          0.8421a 
                                    (0.0819)        (0.1583)       (0.2189)       (0.2182)         (0.2290) 
                get2                                0.4206a        0.4321a        0.6381a          0.6519a 
                                                    (0.1436)       (0.1558)       (0.1833)         (0.1894) 

                                                              59
 
    get3                                0.0390        0.0287      0.0469 
                                       (0.2161)       (0.2478)    (0.2425) 
    get4                                              0.5687a      0.4664c 
                                                      (0.1834)    (0.2686) 
    get5                                                           0.0904 
                                                                  (0.1674) 
    Observatio
    ns           38         38           38               38        38 



                             Table C.7
                 Impulse response of earnings growth

                 Step                           
                 0              1                  0
                 1          0.36921            0.117794
                 2          0.44205            0.124752
                 3          0.15424            0.144386
                 4          0.174766           0.164236
                 5          0.071086           0.110311




                                  60
 
