                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  WHAT'S DRIVING ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND INNOVATION IN THE TRANSPORT
                             SECTOR?

                                      Derrick Choe
                                     Alexander Oettl
                                     Robert Seamans

                                    Working Paper 27284
                            http://www.nber.org/papers/w27284


                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   May 2020




We thank Michael Andrews, Aaron Chatterji, Mercedes Delgado, Gilles Duranton, Jeff Furman,
Adam Jaffe, Ben Jones, Shane Greenstein, David Popp, Scott Stern, Joel Waldfogel, and Kate
Whitefoot for helpful comments and suggestions. Seamans acknowledges generous support from
Google's Tides Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

 2020 by Derrick Choe, Alexander Oettl, and Robert Seamans. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including  notice, is given to the source.
What's Driving Entrepreneurship and Innovation in the Transport Sector?
Derrick Choe, Alexander Oettl, and Robert Seamans
NBER Working Paper No. 27284
May 2020
JEL No. L26,L90,O18,O30,R40

                                         ABSTRACT

In this chapter we draw from existing literature and a range of statistics to describe economic,
entrepreneurial and innovative activities in the transportation and warehousing sector of the U.S.
economy. We suggest multiple avenues for future work, and argue for more research on the role
of warehousing in particular. Recent trends suggest that the warehousing and storage subsector is
experiencing rapid economic and technological changes, likely reflecting shifts in how consumers
purchase goods. We also review several other recent innovations, including ride-sharing and
autonomous vehicles, that are starting to affect this sector of the economy.


Derrick Choe                                    Robert Seamans
NYU Stern School of Business                    NYU Stern School of Business
44 West 4th Street                              44 West 4th Street, KMC 7-58
New York, NY 10012                              New York, NY 10012
dc3738@stern.nyu.edu                            rseamans@stern.nyu.edu

Alexander Oettl
Scheller College of Business
Georgia Institute of Technology
800 West Peachtree Street NW
Atlanta, GA 30308
and NBER
alexander.oettl@scheller.gatech.edu
1. Introduction
         The transportation sector--including the movement and storage of physical goods and the
movement of people--is an important contributor to the U.S. economy. It directly accounts for
3.2% of U.S. gross domestic product (GDP), and indirectly affects many other sectors (Figure 1).
Personal transportation makes up a large portion of American consumption; according to the
Bureau of Transportation Statistics, households spent an average of $9,737 on transportation in
2017, the second largest household expenditure category after housing.1 Economists have
highlighted the multiple ways in which transportation affects innovation and growth, including
opening up geographically distant markets for entrepreneurs (Donaldson 2018), linking together
people and thereby increasing the recombination of ideas (Agrawal, Galasso, Oettl 2017), sparking
new innovations by the arrival of a new product (Sohn, Seamans, Sands 2019), and more.
         Across the U.S. economy, firms are increasingly adopting new technologies, including
artificial intelligence (AI), robots, sensors, and others, and the transportation sector is no different.
For example, Uber bought autonomous trucking startup Otto for $680M in 20162 and Amazon
bought warehouse robotics company Kiva for $775M in 2012.3 While fully autonomous vehicles
are still some ways off in the future--a topic we discuss later in this chapter--Kiva has led to
dramatic changes in the way that Amazon organizes some of its fulfilment centers. Whereas in the
past a human picker would go up and down aisles of shelving units to pick the order, now the Kiva
robots bring the shelving units to a central location in which the human picker is located (CEA,
2016).
         The costs associated with moving goods and individuals differ greatly. While the real cost
of moving goods is 90% less than it was at the beginning of the 20th century, transporting
individuals remains costly (Glaeser and Kohlhase 2004). In this chapter we review recent trends
in the transportation sector and conduct deeper investigations into recent changes and innovations
in the movement (and storage) of a) goods and b) people.
         The key takeaways from this chapter include:




1
  https://www.bts.gov/browse-statistical-products-and-data/transportation-economic-trends/tet-2018-chapter-6-
household
2
  https://techcrunch.com/2016/08/18/uber-acquires-otto-to-lead-ubers-self-driving-car-effort-report-says/
3
  https://techcrunch.com/2012/03/19/amazon-acquires-online-fulfillment-company-kiva-systems-for-775-million-in-
cash/

                                                                                                              2
          Despite the rapid expansion of internet-enabled services and the digital economy, the
           importance of transporting physical goods has not diminished.
          In aggregate, the transportation sector has grown (20% employment growth over five
           years), but this average increase masks large differences in the composition of the
           transportation sector (rail and sea transport are down, couriers and warehousing are
           up).
          Transportation's share of value added in the economy has also increased (an absolute
           increase of 0.3% over five years).
          As such, warehousing and the automation contained therein (robots, autonomous
           vehicles, drones) will play a critical role in this increasingly important component of
           the transportation supply chain.
       In the sections that follow we first describe what we currently know about the sector from
prior academic research and aggregate government statistics. We then highlight recent innovations
in the transportation and storage of goods, with a deep dive into the warehouse sector -- an area
of increasing activity. We then review existing work in the personal mobility domain, focusing on
the impact of ride-sharing platforms and the potential for autonomous vehicles to transform the
economy. How these new innovations affect the sector and the economy more broadly will
ultimately depend on a variety of factors including government regulation, technological
advancement, and customer demand. In our final section, we conclude and discuss opportunities
for future work.

2. What Do We Know?
2.1. Prior Literature
       Prior literature has highlighted the many ways in which transportation can affect innovation
and economic growth. As the exchange of goods and services is contingent on the movement of
materials and workers, transportation plays a key role in economic output. Investments in
infrastructure and transportation technologies transform the urban landscape, and spur productivity
growth and innovative activity.
       Innovations in transportation infrastructure directly impact the spatial distribution of
workers. Baum-Snow (2007) finds that the development of interstate highways contributed to the
post-World War II sub-urbanization of the United States. Along with contributing to population


                                                                                                 3
shifts within cities, transportation influences the distribution of work across cities. Duranton and
Turner (2012) estimate that a 10% increase in a city's initial stock of highways leads to a 1.5%
increase in employment over a period of two decades. Taken together, these results indicate that
transportation infrastructure has two distinct effects on input reorganization and growth: it can
increase urban employment growth while also leading to population growth in surrounding areas
(Redding and Turner 2015).
           In addition to this work estimating the long-run effects of interstate highway development,
other researchers have focused on the localized effects of within-city transportation infrastructure.
In particular, studies have investigated the value of these transportation networks through
estimating the proximal effects of subway line development on real estate prices. Billings (2011)
finds that access to light rail transit increased single-family property values by 4%, and
condominium values by 11%. Gibbons and Machin (2005) study the London subway network and
find that homes near newly developed stations experienced price increases of around 9% relative
to those unaffected by transportation changes. The authors compare the price effects of proximity
to subway stations to the price estimates of other local amenities such as primary school
performance and find that households seem to value transportation higher relative to other local
factors.
           Changes to the flow of people are accompanied with innovative activity; transportation's
positive impacts on economic performance through worker movement are also the product of
resulting positive knowledge externalities. Agrawal, Galasso, and Oettl (2017) find that the stock
of regional highways increases inventive productivity not only through its labor agglomeration
effects but also through improvements to knowledge flows--increasing output beyond that
explained by the influx of new innovators. Perlman (2016) provides historical evidence that the
19th century "transportation revolution"--marked by the development of railroad networks--
increased patenting activity through increased market access, among other covariates.
           In addition to its impact on the geography of labor, transportation infrastructure serves as
a catalyst to firm growth and productivity. Gains in accessibility to new roads lead to increases in
the number of establishments, employment, and output per worker (Gibbons et al. 2019). Baum-
Snow et al. (2017) further decompose the effects of highway growth on economic activity in China;
they find that areas most proximal to dense highway networks show increased output, employment,



                                                                                                     4
and wages, and shift towards business services and manufacturing. Distal areas from these clusters
demonstrate an opposite effect; they grow more slowly, and specialize in agriculture.
        These economic benefits to transportation may rely on improvements to the transfer of
physical goods. The development of colonial India's railroad system transformed agricultural
trade; through decreasing the cost of transporting origin-destination products and increasing trade
flows, this expansive change in transportation infrastructure increased per-capita agricultural
incomes (Donaldson 2018). Additionally, economic gains to transportation may require sufficient
ease of transporting capital along with goods. In examining the effects of railway access on
economic growth, Banerjee, Duflo, and Qian (2012) find suggestive evidence that production
factor immobility may limit the localized economic benefits to transportation infrastructure. These
studies highlight the distinction between worker and capital flows; the regional benefits to
government investment in transportation networks may be limited by the movement of physical
production factors.
        Historically, waterways have played a crucial role in determining market access, economic
development, and innovation. Sokoloff (1988) finds evidence that navigable waterways explain
early regional variation in patent activity across the United States. The author suggests that during
the Industrial Revolution, areas like Southern New England and New York exhibited high growth
in patenting due to increased access to low-cost river and canal transportation. The economic
changes attributable to transportation infrastructure are persistent long after initial natural
advantages afforded by geography become obsolete. Bleakley and Lin (2012) find that despite the
decline in portage in the south-eastern United States, original portage cities remain denser than
comparable regional counterparts, suggesting a degree of path dependence resulting from
historical transportation activity.
        More recent work has begun to focus on a more basic form of transportation infrastructure:
the walkability of streets. In Roche (Forthcoming), the author examines how the physical layouts
of street networks facilitate idea exchange amongst knowledge workers. The paper demonstrates
that neighborhoods that are easier to traverse by foot also produce more patents (even after
controlling for population and other density related measures) and are more likely to build upon
geographically proximate knowledge inputs.


2.2. Basic Statistics


                                                                                                   5
           In the United States, the transportation sector (NAICS codes 48-49) contributes
approximately 3% to U.S. GDP and comprises multiple sub-industries including air, rail, water,
truck, pipeline, and passenger transport. It also includes couriers, messengering, warehousing, and
storage businesses. Descriptive statistics of select sub-industries are presented in Table 1. Between
2013 and 2018 sector-wide employment grew by over 20% and real wages grew by 1.7%.
However, this aggregate growth masks significant heterogeneity. Over the same period, rail and
water transport saw 7% and 1% declines in employment, respectively. Conversely, the
warehousing and storage (NAICS 493) and couriers and messengers (NAICS 492) sub-industries
experienced the largest employment growth of all sub-industries with 59% and 33% employment,
respectively. These two industries also saw real wage growth of 3% for warehousing and 15% for
couriers and messengers. Providing a deeper understanding of the antecedents and consequences
of this rapid growth in the warehousing sector will be an important point of focus for this chapter.
           Figure 1 presents data on employment by transportation sub-industry over a longer time
period. Using data from the BLS Current Employment Statistics (BLS CES) survey to provide
employment by transportation sub-industry, we see that the growth in warehousing started in 2010.
Drawing from Bureau of Economic Analysis data, Figure 2 plots value-added by transportation
sub-industry, as a fraction of national GDP. We see that all transportation/warehousing industries
make up an increasing share of aggregate economic activity, increasing from 2.8% in 2005 to 3.2%
in 2018. Figure 3, using data from BLS CES, provides real average weekly earnings from 2006
onwards,4 by transportation sub-industry. On average, wages in the industry appear relatively flat
over this entire time period. However, there is some heterogeneity across sub-industries. These
data suggest that as demand for transportation services increases, the industry is able to adjust
relatively quickly at the margin by employing more individuals, such that wages do not rise much.
           Figure 4 plots labor productivity by transportation sub-industry, measured with BLS's
Annual Index of Labor Productivity. The figure shows changes in output per hour relative to 2007
levels. Most sub-industries appear to have relatively flat productivity, although air transport has
increased steadily over the almost 30-year times series between 1990 and 2018. As such, the
employment growth in the sector appears to not be a result of changes in labor productivity and
instead may stem from broader changes in market structure (Combes and Lafourcade 2005).



4
    The BLS CES only publishes wage estimates at the industry level from 2006 onwards.

                                                                                                   6
       Figure 5 plots trends in the relative number of establishments by transportation sub-
industry. The data come from the BLS Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages. The series
are normalized to show establishment levels relative to 1990. While the number of establishments
has increased in all sub-sectors, we find that growth in the Couriers and Messengers sub-industry
outpaces that of all other sub-industries, followed by Warehousing and Storage.
       Next we study two measures of innovative activity--patenting and venture capital
investment. Figures 6 and 7 compare patent activity by transportation sub-industry over time. The
data come from PatentsView. We find that from 1980 onwards, the number of vehicle-related
patents outpaces the number of conveying, packing, storing, and other warehousing-related
patents. Additionally, among less-frequently patented codes, non-rail land vehicle and aircraft-
related patents outpace other categories, including those for ships and railways.
       Figure 8 plots transportation-related funding over time (in U.S. Dollars). The data come
from CrunchBase. We find that relative to other activities, funding for warehousing companies
shows dramatic growth later in our timeframe. Whereas funding for autonomous vehicles (AV),
shipping, and general transportation-related companies increases beginning in 2012, warehousing
funding picks up in 2015 in our sample.
       Finally, we consider adoption patterns from automotive technologies in the past. In Figure
9 we plot technology adoption s-curves for various automobile transmission technologies. Our
data come from the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). We define advanced
transmission as having six or more gears. These data show that advanced transmissions were
adopted by the majority of manufacturers faster than automatic transmission with lockup.
       In Figure 10, we plot technology adoption s-curves for various engine technologies. These
data come from the EPA. Variable valve timing (VVT) and gasoline direct injection (GDI)
demonstrate considerable growth in production share. Multi-valve engines demonstrate a longer
period of adoption, reaching around 90% of production share over a period of 37 years. Stop/start
and turbocharged engines do not yet make up a majority of engine production in our timeline. The
broad takeaway from Figures 9 and 10 is that new technologies can take many years before
achieving widespread use, and there is heterogeneity across technologies. We keep these patterns
in mind as we consider the potential effects of new technologies.


3. Moving and Storing Physical Goods


                                                                                               7
3.1. Literature
       As noted, transportation's most aggregate industry classification (NAICS code 48-49)
includes both transportation and warehousing-related activities. While transportation has received
considerable interest from economists, warehousing has received less attention. One reason for
this may be the larger impact that air and truck transport have in contributing to GDP (Figure 1)
relative to warehousing and storage. Yet, over the past five years, growth in employment and in
new establishments has been markedly higher in the warehousing sector than the overall transport
sector (Table 1). In this section we examine this trend more deeply by exploring the changing role
of warehousing and its interface with transportation and its relationship with the economy at large.
       The effects of transportation on economic growth has been extensively documented in the
economics literature and well summarized in Redding and Turner (2015). Much less has been
written on the role of warehousing in the transport supply chain. One exception is a recent paper
by Chava et al. (2019) where the authors find that when Amazon opens a fulfillment center in a
county, employment levels at transportation and warehousing establishments in the same county
grow by 2.1% while worker wages at transportation and warehousing establishments in the same
county grow by 1.7%. This provides suggestive evidence of the complements that may exist
between geographic co-location of warehousing/fulfillment centers of e-commerce players and
local demand for additional transportation and warehousing services. It is unlikely, however, that
the significant growth in warehousing employment is entirely attributable to the changing nature
of retail. Figure 11 presents the warehousing employment plot first shown in Figure 1 alongside
retail employment growth.
       More broadly, as others have noted, there may have been a shift in consumer purchase
behavior. For example, Lafontaine and Sividasan (2020) find marked growth in restaurant
establishments and employment, which they attribute to an increase in consumer expenditure share
for restaurant food. The authors also note that DoorDash and Instacart, two of the top delivery
businesses, received substantial venture capital investments ($2.1B and $1.8B, respectively). As
we indicate below, Instacart was the top hiring firm in the "transit and ground passenger" sector
in 2017 and 2018 (Table 3). As another example, Relihan (2020) shows that consumers using
online grocery delivery platforms change their consumption patterns by shifting time away from
grocery shopping and toward visits to coffee shops. Relihan finds that early adopters of online



                                                                                                  8
grocery platforms reduce spending at grocery stores by 4.5% and increase spending at coffee shops
by 7.6%.
        Mandel (2020) points out that the shift from off-line retail purchases to online purchases
requires a substantial change in the architecture of supply chains. Notably, firms like Amazon and
Walmart that want to engage with consumers on a large-scale basis need to invest in warehousing
to hold merchandise, fulfilment systems to organize and pack orders, delivery infrastructure to
ship packages to customers, and a complementary returns infrastructure to handle orders that are
sent back or dropped off at physical locations. Some of these functions need to be available at local
levels, in order to serve customers quickly and efficiently, and others can be located far from
customers.


3.2. Geography
        The changes in employment documented in Table 1 vary by geography. The majority of
warehousing employment growth has come in rural counties which have employment levels seven
times higher than in 1990 (Figure 12). However, growth in warehousing employment is not solely
a rural phenomenon. Urban counties have not grown at the same pace as rural ones, but
employment levels are 3.5 times higher than they were in 1990. Indeed, Chava et al. (2019) note
that Amazon opens fulfillment centers in counties with population densities 2.5 times higher than
the average across all U.S. counties. This trend is also in line with growth of transportation
companies, in particular truck transport. Figure 13 decomposes truck transport growth for
establishments in urban and rural counties. As can be seen, truck transport employment growth
follows similar patterns to those observed in Figure 12 but at a much smaller scale. Rural truck
transport has increased by 40% from 1990 levels, while urban truck transport has increased by
25% from 1990 levels. The extent to which this increase in warehousing activity is a complement
or substitute for long- and short-haul trucking is difficult to fully assess but time series data provide
some suggestive relationships.
        Figure 14 presents time series of warehousing and trucking employment relative to total
US employment scaled to 1990 levels. As can be seen, general warehousing has increased the most
wherein it has taken a 3.5 times larger share of US employment since 1990. Employment shares
of used household and office goods moving as well as general freight trucking are unchanged since
1990. Conversely, couriers and express delivery services, and local messengers and local delivery


                                                                                                       9
employment are both up, with local messengers up significantly since 2015--a possible reflection
of the increasingly important role e-commerce is playing in the retail industry. It may seem strange
for us to observe such large increases in both urban-focused warehousing and transportation given
the higher real estate costs of urban areas compared to rural ones. Yet, urban dwellers
disproportionately make use of e-commerce retail and, as such, this demand pull has strongly
affected the way in which technology is deployed and the impact it has had on entrepreneurial
activity.
           Figure 15 plots the changes in rank of the top counties employing warehouse and storage
workers. There have been some notable shifts between 2007 and 2017, with Cook County (IL),
Franklin County (OH), and Harris County (TX) experiencing drops in their rank and San
Bernardino County (CA), Riverside County (CA), San Joaquin County (CA) and Dallas County
(TX) experiencing rises in their rank. The results in Figure 15 mirror, at a broad level, an
observation made by Michael Mandel (2018) that California and Texas have been among the
biggest gainers in the shift to what he calls "consumer distribution" (e-commerce and brick and
mortar retail).5 Future research could investigate the causes and consequences of this shift.


3.3. Role of Incumbents and Entrants
           Accompanying the change in economic activity for transportation and warehousing is an
increase in startup activity. Much of this startup activity has been in logistics-focused firms
attempting to reduce transport frictions and solving problems associated with delivering goods the
`last-mile.' One example is Fourkite, an e-commerce logistics company headquartered in Chicago
that has received over $100M in venture backed funding through a Series C round of funding.
Fourkite has built a supply chain platform alongside a predictive shipment arrival time algorithm
to lower shipping times and costs. Technologies like these are enabling new forms of warehousing
to develop in urban areas, often referred to as `micro-fulfillment centers' that allow quicker
delivery to urban customers. Another company that is working in the space of micro-fulfillment
centers is Fabric. Founded in 2015, Fabric makes heavy use of robotics and small fulfillment
centers in urban areas to fulfill order requests within an hour of purchase. They have raised $136M
through a Series B venture round and are growing rapidly.



5
    https://www.progressivepolicy.org/blog/the-geography-of-ecommerce-industries/

                                                                                                 10
           As Fabric has demonstrated, technology--both in the form of AI predictive algorithms and
robotics--is playing a critical role in the development of these new warehousing forms. The
company Nuro is focused on developing autonomous vehicles with the explicit purpose of
delivering local goods and aiming to reduce the costs of the aforementioned last-mile delivery.
They recently received $940M in financing from Softbank. While Nuro is one of the most high-
profile startups in this space, a number of startups also exist including Startship Technologies,
Marble, Boxbot, Robby Technologies, Kiwi Campus, Dispatch, and Unsupervised AI.6 These
technology trends may have divergent effects both for larger retailers continuing to vertically
integrate into warehousing by operating ever more efficient fulfillment centers and the arrival of
technology-enabled specialized micro-warehouses lowering the cost of developing viable e-
commerce business models for fledging direct-to-consumer startups.
           Another technology that has the potential to impact last-mile delivery is that of unmanned
aerial vehicles, also sometimes referred to as drones. According to the CrunchBase database there
are at least 329 drone startups operating in late 2019.7 While some of these startups will
undoubtedly not focus on logistics and transportation (and focus more on leisure applications,
military, etc.), this figure may also undercount numerous companies that are still in `dark mode.'
Apart from startups, many incumbents are also increasingly thinking about the impact of drones
to their businesses and a growing number of transportation companies have received clearance
from the FAA to run pilot programs. As an example, in October of 2019, UPS's subsidiary UPS
Flight Forward, Inc., was granted approval by the FAA to deliver medical packages by unmanned
drone.8 Not to be outdone, Amazon has launched a program named `Prime Air' with the express
intent of delivering items in under 30 minutes from purchase. In both of these instances, the
geographic location of warehouses will continue to be critical as will advances in autonomous
vehicle technologies. We examine the implications of improvements in the viability of autonomous
vehicles on the transportation and warehousing sector next.
           Despite all the excitement about new firms and technologies, it appears that most of the
employment activity by firms in this sector is by established, incumbent firms. Table 2 uses data


6
    https://news.crunchbase.com/news/robot-couriers-scoop-up-early-stage-cash/
7
    https://www.crunchbase.com/hub/drones-startups
8

https://pressroom.ups.com/pressroom/ContentDetailsViewer.page?ConceptType=PressReleases&id=156993396547
6-404

                                                                                                     11
from job postings, collected by Burning Glass, to list the top five "courier and messenger" firms
by year. The top three in each year are UPS, FedEx and DHL Express -- this is no surprise, these
are currently the dominant firms in the sector. Table 3, again using job posting data from Burning
Glass, lists the top five "transit and ground passenger" firms by year. While most of the firms are
engaged in transportation of people (covered in the next section), it is notable that in 2017 and
2018 the firm with the most listings was Instacart, a rapidly growing startup that specializes in
same-day grocery store delivery.
        Table 4 uses Burning Glass data to list the top five "warehouse and storage" firms by year.
While the rank changes year to year, it is interesting to note that most of the top firms are the same
each year. For example, Exel is in the top five each year except 2018. Exel is a subsidiary of DHL,
one of the world's largest courier and messenger firms. As another example, Americold, the owner
and operator of a network of temperature-controlled warehouses used for storage of fruits,
vegetables, meats, dairy and other perishable products, is the top employer in 6 out of 9 years.
Americold owned 160 such warehouses in the U.S. in 2019.9



4. Entrepreneurship and Innovation in the Movement of People
4.1. Introduction
        As Section 3 demonstrates, the nature by which physical goods are moved and stored has
changed significantly over the three decades. Yet, media focus and public attention has centered
disproportionately on the movement of people. Figure 16 presents Google Trends data of internet
search activity over the past 2 decades for the terms "Uber" and "Warehouse". As can be seen,
warehousing has done little to change the attention (or internet query interest) of internet users,
while interest in Uber and related ridesharing firms has grown significantly since the arrival of
these services over the past ten years. This section will focus on the movement of people with a
focus on personal mobility, the implications for autonomous vehicles, and provide a brief
discussion on the externalities that will arise as a result of the increased movement of people due
to entrepreneurship and innovation in the transportation sector.




9
 Americold Annual Report 2019, Form 10-K. Available: https://ir.americold.com/financials/sec-filings/sec-filings-
details/default.aspx?FilingId=13971750

                                                                                                               12
4.2. Personal Mobility
          One of the biggest changes to personal mobility has been the rise of ride-sharing firms such
as Lyft and Uber, particularly in certain urban areas. These firms differ from standard taxi firms
in at least two ways. First, unlike a traditional taxi company that manages a fleet of taxicabs which
either search for passengers on city streets or wait for a dispatcher to tell them where to go, ride-
sharing firms rely on a digital application interface to manage the interaction between drivers and
riders. Perhaps not surprisingly, then, ride-sharing is more popular among younger generations.
According to the DOT's National Household Travel Survey (2019), Millennials are almost twice
as likely to use ride-sharing services than Generation X or Baby Boomers.10 In addition, ride-
sharing firms rely on complex, dynamic pricing models to "manage" the number of drivers and
riders. As such, the interactions between drivers and riders are similar to those in other two-sided
market settings (Rochet and Tirole 2006, Parker and Van Allstyne 2005). Second, given the
prominent role played by technology used by ride-sharing firms, they have argued that they should
be regulated as technology firms and not as traditional taxi companies. This regulatory arbitrage
has led to the seeming proliferation of ride-sharing services in a number of cities, arguably to the
detriment of taxi companies. In some cases, cities have responded by banning ride-sharing
altogether (Paik, Kang and Seamans 2019).
          Recent research has sought to understand various economic and societal effects of these
changes in personal mobility. To start, ride-sharing apps provide efficiency benefits. Cramer and
Krueger (2016) attribute Uber drivers' capacity utilization rates premiums of 30-50% to the
company's matching rates, larger scale, freedom from inefficient regulation, and flexible labor and
pricing models. These technologies also show social benefits. For example, Greenwood and Wattal
(2017) find evidence that ride-sharing has led to a decrease in vehicular fatalities associated with
drunk driving. Burtch, Carnahan and Greenwood (2018) provide evidence that driving for ride-
sharing firms may substitute for low-quality entrepreneurial activity. Gorback (2020) provides
evidence that ridesharing's entry is associated with a doubling of net restaurant entry, and an
increase in housing prices. A number of papers use incredibly rich and detailed data from ride-
sharing firms to study other economic issues. For example, Cook et al. (2018) use ride-level data
from a ride-sharing platform to study the determinants of gender earnings gap and Liu et al. (2018)



10
     https://nhts.ornl.gov/assets/FHWA_NHTS_Report_3E_Final_021119.pdf

                                                                                                   13
compare taxi and ride-sharing ride-level data to study the extent to which digital monitoring via
the ride-sharing platform reduces moral hazard on the part of drivers.
        To study competitive effects of ride-sharing on traditional taxi businesses we consider how
ride-sharing may affect taxi medallion sales. The 2016 Economic Report of the President (CEA
2016) shows that taxi medallion sales prices peaked in New York City in 2013 at over $1 million
and in Chicago in 2013 at over $350,000. In Figure 17 we extend this analysis with updated data
through 2018 and find that medallion prices in both cities have continued a dramatic decline. In
New York, medallions are now below $200,000 and in Chicago below $50,000. These dramatic
changes provide suggestive evidence that ridesharing has substituted for traditional taxi service in
many cities. Berger, Chen, and Frey (2018) decompose the resulting labor market effects; they
find that Uber's entry coincides with a 10% decrease in relative taxi earnings. However, the authors
note that the supply and composition of the taxi labor market has remained largely the same.
Additionally, research suggests that ridesharing may have spurred adaptive changes in product
quality among taxi drivers; Wallsten (2015) finds that increases in Uber's popularity are associated
with decreases in taxi customer complaints in New York and Chicago.


4.3. Autonomous Vehicles
        Automation of driving can take multiple forms. The current standards for autonomous
driving were developed by the Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE International). According
to the standard, autonomous driving ranges from Level 0, with no autonomy, to Level 5, which is
full automation (see Figure 18). Many vehicles sold today have features that would qualify as
"Level 1" including park assist, lane assist and adaptive cruise control. A few vehicles claim to
qualify as Level 2 or 3, including Tesla's vehicles, the Nissan Leaf and Audi A8.11 Google's
Waymo would be considered Level 4 or 5. No Level 4 or 5 cars are certified for use on regular
roads.12




11
   https://www.pocket-lint.com/cars/news/143955-sae-autonomous-driving-levels-explained;
https://techcrunch.com/2019/04/22/teslas-computer-is-now-in-all-new-cars-and-a-next-gen-chip-is-already-halfway-
done/;
https://www.forbes.com/sites/lanceeliot/2019/08/01/eyes-on-hands-off-for-nissans-propilot-2-0-rouses-level-3-self-
driving-tech-misgivings/#60e628627558;
https://www.wired.com/story/audi-self-driving-traffic-jam-pilot-a8-2019-availablility/
12
   https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/R/R45985

                                                                                                               14
        There is lots of excitement around autonomous vehicles (AVs). Some have referred to it as
the "AI killer app".13 However, there is lots of disagreement around how long it will take for AVs
to become widespread, and also lots of uncertainty about the ultimate effect of AVs on the
economy. On one hand, in 2018 Elon Musk predicted that there would be a Tesla driverless taxi
fleet by 2020.14 On the other hand, Chris Urmson, who was a DARPA challenge winner, head of
Google's Waymo autonomous vehicle unit, and now CEO of a self-driving vehicle software
company, argues it may take up to 30-50 years before widespread adoption of autonomous
vehicles.15 To put these predictions into perspective, recall from Figures 8 and 9 that historically
widespread adoption of new innovations in the auto sector can take several decades, as automobiles
are long-lived, durable assets. Ultimately, a number of factors will affect the timing of adoption,
including technological development, consumer preferences and tastes, and regulatory landscape.
        Researchers have begun to explore the economic and behavioral outcomes that may result
from these technologies. Gelauff, Ossokina, and Teulings (2019) model two components of
automation which lead to differing outcomes on population distribution: improved use of time
during car trips, which lowers the cost of living at a distance from cities, and improved door-to-
door public transit, which has the countervailing effect of lowering the costs of living in urban
environments and may lead to increased population clustering within cities. Finding considerable
welfare benefits resulting from these technologies, the authors suggest that these effects may lead
to overall population shifts towards large, attractive cities at the expense of smaller urban, as well
as non-urban, areas. Additionally, Kroger, Kuhnimhof, and Trommer (2019) project the adoption
of autonomous vehicle technologies in the U.S. and Germany, and estimate that the introduction
of AVs will increase vehicle traffic by 2-9%, as a result of new automobile user groups, as well as
lower generalized costs of car travel. However, others have argued that the conversion of all drivers
into passengers may result in a substantial reduction in travel costs and thus increase vehicle traffic
substantially more (Duranton 2016).


4.4. Regulation



13
   https://www.forbes.com/sites/chunkamui/2013/08/23/google-car-uber-killer-app/#2620f33d600a
14
   https://www.theverge.com/2019/4/22/18510828/tesla-elon-musk-autonomy-day-investor-comments-self-driving-
cars-predictions
15
   https://www.theverge.com/2019/4/23/18512618/how-long-will-it-take-to-phase-in-driverless-cars

                                                                                                         15
        The speed of adoption of new technologies such as autonomous vehicles will depend in
large part on federal rules and regulations. We highlight two notable developments in this section.
One notable development on the regulatory landscape is the U.S. House and Senate nearing
compromise language on legislation that would provide NHTSA with the authority to regulate
AVs. This is significant as it would allow NHTSA to develop nationwide federal regulations for
AVs, rather than allowing a patchwork of state-level AV regulations, which could slow down mass
adoption. Federal regulation would provide clarity to a number of stakeholders, including car
manufacturers and insurance companies, which should then lead to the development of AV
vehicles and other technologies, and insurance products to complement these vehicles.
        Another notable development is the FCC's recent announcement of its plan to split the use
of the 5.9 GHz spectrum between unlicensed Wi-Fi and vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) communications
standards.16 This spectrum, a 75mhz band, had initially been set aside for use for vehicle-to-vehicle
communications in 1999, and NHTSA, car manufacturers and device manufacturers spent the
ensuing two decades working on a standard for V2V communications. However, the standard that
emerged, called DSRC, faced lots of resistance, including from a competing standard called C-
V2V. Separately, Wi-Fi demands were growing, and the 5.9GHz spectrum was increasingly used
for unlicensed Wi-Fi. A recent study by Rand Corporation estimates that the value of the consumer
and producer surplus from using the entire band for Wi-Fi to be between $82.2 billion and $189.9
billion.17 The FCC announced that 45mhz at the lower end of the band will be for Wi-Fi, the next
20 mhz for C-V2V, and the top 10mhz potentially for C-V2V or DSRC. While it is too early to
predict the ultimate outcome, the FCCs announcement seems to throw a lot of weight behind the
C-V2V standard. The upshot is that this may hasten resolution of what has been a standards battle.
Resolving this uncertainty over standards should then lead to the development of AV vehicles and
other technologies.
        In addition, the federal government will also play a role in addressing any externalities that
may arise from these new technologies. We discuss some of these externalities, and potential role
for government to address them, in the next sub-section.




16
   https://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-spectrum/u-s-regulator-proposes-splitting-auto-safety-spectrum-to-boost-
wi-fi-idUSKBN1XU2BJ
17
   https://www.rand.org/content/dam/rand/pubs/research_reports/RR2700/RR2720/RAND_RR2720.pdf

                                                                                                                 16
4.5. Spillovers
        Sections 4.2 and 4.3 highlight just two advances spurred by entrepreneurial entry and
technological innovation and while ride sharing and autonomous vehicles certainly provide
numerous benefits, they may, too, usher in costs and unintended consequences. These spillovers
are discussed in more detail below starting with the effect of AV on jobs, followed by a broader
discussion of ancillary spillovers that are unlikely to be properly priced.


4.5.1 Jobs
        Scholars and pundits have speculated on a range of outcomes from autonomous vehicles,
including lower transport costs due to fewer drivers, better fuel efficiency, and better safety. The
effect on driving jobs has garnered lots of attention. For example, the Guardian reports that
autonomous driving puts 2 million U.S. truck drivers at risk of losing their job.18 However, as
Gittleman and Monaco (2017) point out, there are a variety of types of drivers, and autonomous
driving will affect some more than others. The use of autonomous vehicles is more likely for heavy
and tractor trailer truck drivers (aka "long haul") rather than local delivery, given how difficult it
would be to automate driving in a local or urban environment, and given all the other tasks
associated with local delivery. According to analysis by Gittleman and Monaco, some of the other
tasks performed by drivers include freight handling, paperwork and customer service. Gittleman
and Monaco estimate that Level 4 automation may ultimately displace 300,000 to 400,000 drivers.
But, the authors highlight that there are many practical limitations to automation. For example,
they highlight that one of the important functions of a truck driver is to serve as a security guard
for the freight.19
        Expected benefits to autonomous trucking may need to be tempered in the event that the
most likely application for autonomous trucking is in long haul and not local delivery. For
example, most emissions and most accidents occur in urban environments (where local delivery is
more common). Gately, Hutyra and Wing (2015) report that urban vehicle emissions account for
60% of total emission, and account for 80% of growth in emissions since 1980. In other words,
the most polluted areas are potentially the very areas where there will be little penetration of



18
   https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/oct/10/american-trucker-automation-jobs
19
   The authors also cite an estimate of $175 million in losses to truck theft per year
https://www.trucks.com/2016/01/29/truck-thefts-result-in-large-losses/

                                                                                                   17
autonomous vehicles. The Insurance Institute for Highway Safety (IIHS) reports that most
accidents occur in urban and local roads, not rural interstates, and that 67% of fatalities occur
outside of the interstate system.20 Again, the most dangerous areas are potentially the very areas
where there will be little penetration of autonomous vehicles.
        Ultimately the costs and benefits of autonomous trucking will likely depend on the shape
of government regulation. For example, one could imagine that consumer fear of autonomous
vehicles leads to regulations requiring humans to be in the cab of any autonomous vehicle, just in
case the vehicle encounters unforeseen problems (in fact, in a 2018 survey 71% of U.S. drivers
said they don't trust self-driving vehicles).21 Such a regulation would attenuate any cost savings
from replacing drivers. While the job displacement risk stemming from the arrival of autonomous
vehicles is but one of the many consequences of the changes in transportation arising from new
products and services, numerous other spillovers also arise as result.22


4.5.2. Congestion and Vehicular Accidents
        The effect of increased vehicle traffic on congestion, pollution, and the rate of accidents
will depend on the source of increased vehicle usage. On the one hand, ride sharing has been shown
to lead to an increase in congestion23 (and in turn pollution) in addition to an increase in accidents
(Barrios, Hochberg, and Yi 2020). Autonomous vehicles (AVs), however, may overcome these
negative externalities as AVs with improved response times (compared to humans) can more safely
drive close together.24 These safety improvements should, in turn, reduce fatalities, and assuming
the increase in capacity is greater than the reduction in transport costs, reduce congestion as well
(Duranton and Turner, 2011). Technologies that facilitate this vehicle-to-vehicle coordination,
solutions that spread usage to off-peak hours, or improve passenger safety will all be important
areas of both innovation and entrepreneurship. Policy makers will also need to strike the
appropriate balance between usage patterns and how to allocate public space for various
transportation modes.



20
   https://www.iihs.org/topics/fatality-statistics/detail/large-trucks
21
   https://www.theverge.com/2018/5/22/17380374/self-driving-car-crash-consumer-trust-poll-aaa
22
   We thank our discussant, Gilles Duranton, for articulating many of these.
23
   As acknowledged by Chris Pangilinan, Uber's Head of Global Policy for Public Transportation,
https://medium.com/uber-under-the-hood/learning-more-about-how-our-roads-are-used-today-bde9e352e92c
24
   https://www.economist.com/finance-and-economics/2018/01/20/why-driverless-cars-may-mean-jams-tomorrow

                                                                                                       18
4.6. Long-run effects
       Ultimately, the successful proliferation of new transportation technologies will affect the
geographic distribution of economic activity but the impacts are likely to be heterogenous. As
previously discussed, autonomous vehicles will reduce the costs of transport which in turn may
reduce the need to live in proximity to one's place of work. This will have implications not only
for the location of offices but also domiciles, with commuters potentially moving to cheaper areas
far from city centers. On the other hand, the wide adoption of electric vehicles may reduce the
costs associated with living in urban areas (e.g., pollution) as well as heighten the value of face-
to-face interactions and thus may lead to more densification/urbanization. There are surely many
other changes that will emerge from the unanticipated interactions between individuals and new
transportation technologies. These long-run effects are sure to be large, but at present it is difficult
to anticipate what equilibrium-level outcomes will look like, especially given the role that will be
played by government regulators as indicated in the prior sub-section.


5. Conclusion
       The transportation sector, which includes warehousing, plays a critical role in economic
activity. In this chapter, we describe economic, entrepreneurial and innovative activities in this
area of the U.S. economy. Recent trends suggest a shift underway in this sector, with warehousing
playing an increasingly important role. Prior economic research has focused primarily on
innovations affecting the movement of goods (e.g., building new roads or railways), and there has
been comparatively little research on innovations in storing goods. Thus, one takeaway from this
chapter is for economists to conduct more research on the role of warehousing in the economy.
       We also highlight several new transportation technologies, including ride-sharing and
autonomous vehicles. There is much speculation about how these technologies will affect the
sector, and eventually the economy as a whole. We note that prior innovations in this sector
experienced heterogeneous rates of adoption. We believe this lesson from history suggests we
exercise much caution when speculating about the speed of adoption and impact of any new
technology. Ultimately, the rate of adoption will depend on a range of factors including
technological development, consumer preferences and tastes, and regulatory landscape.
       We believe there are a number of areas for follow-on research including addressing the
following questions:


                                                                                                     19
   Which firms are adopting new technologies in this sector, what are barriers to adoption, if
    any, and what are the implications for the industrial organization of the sector?
   What accounts for the recent, rapid rise of employment in the warehousing sector? How
    much of this shift is attributable to online purchasing behavior or other shifts in consumer
    behavior?
   What is underlying the rapid growth in warehousing employment in certain geographies of
    the U.S.? What are the implications of this for the economic vitality of those regions that
    are gaining or losing employment in the sector?
   How much growth in the warehousing sector is coming from new firms versus established
    incumbents? If, as appears to be the case, most growth is from established firms, what entry
    barriers are new firms facing?
   How will autonomous vehicles affect employment and the economic geography of jobs?
   What are the implications of autonomous vehicles for congestion, pollution, safety, and
    other by-products?
   How will transportation technologies interact with existing information technologies and
    the existing digital infrastructure?
    On the first point, we note that the U.S. statistical agencies can play a critical role in
measuring the adoption and use of new technologies. The U.S. Census Bureau has started to
collect data on firm-level adoption of robots (Buffington, Miranda and Seamans, 2018) and
other new technologies such as machine learning, computer vision, and autonomous-guided
vehicles. It appears that these technologies are primarily used by larger firms (Beede et al,
2020). This U.S. data will soon be available for researchers to study the impact of these
technologies on workers, firms, communities and industries, including warehousing and
transport. Consequently, the improved collection and increased availability of these data will
play a critical role in answering many of the questions outlined in this chapter.




                                                                                             20
References

Agrawal, A., Galasso, A., & Oettl, A. (2017). Roads and Innovation. The Review of Economics
    and Statistics, 99(3), 417434. https://doi.org/10.1162/REST

Banerjee, A., Duflo, E., & Qian, N. (2012). On the Road: Access to Transportation Infrastructure
    and Economic. NBER Working Paper, (17897).

Barrios, J. M., Hochberg, Y., & Yi, H. (2020). The Cost of Convenience: Ridehailing and Traffic
     Fatalities. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper #26783.

Baum-Snow, N. (2007). Did Highways Cause Suburbanization? The Quarterly Journal of
    Economics.

Baum-Snow, N., Henderson, J. V., Turner, M. A., Zhang, Q., & Brandt, L. (2018). Does
    investment in national highways help or hurt hinterland city growth? Journal of Urban
    Economics, 000(September 2017), 103124. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jue.2018.05.001

Beede, D., Brynjolfsson, E., Buffington, C., Dinlersoz, E., Foster, L., Goldschlag, N.,
    McElheran, K., and Zolas, N. (2020) Measuring Technology Adoption in Enterprise-Level
    Surveys: The Annual Business Survey. US Census Bureau working paper.

Billings, S. B. (2011). Estimating the value of a new transit option. Regional Science and Urban
     Economics, 41(6), 525536. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.regsciurbeco.2011.03.013

Bleakley, H., & Lin, J. (2012). Portage and path dependence. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
    127(2), 587644. https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjs011

Buffington, C., Miranda, J., & Seamans, R. (2018). Development of Survey Questions on
     Robotics Expenditures and Use in US Manufacturing Establishments (No. 18-44).

Burtch, G., Carnahan, S., & Greenwood, B. N. (2018). Can you gig it? An empirical examination
     of the gig economy and entrepreneurial activity. Management Science, 64(12), 5497-5520.

Chava, S., Oettl, A., Singh, M., & Zhang, L. (2019). Creative Destruction? Assessing the Impact
    of E-Commerce on Employees at Brick-and-Mortar Retailers. Working Paper.

Combes, P-P., Lafourcade, M. (2005). Transport costs: measures, determinants, and regional
   policy implications for France. Journal of Economic Geography, 5(3), 319349.

Cook, C., Diamond, R., Hall, J., List, J. A., & Oyer, P. (2018). The gender earnings gap in the
    gig economy: Evidence from over a million rideshare drivers (No. w24732). National
    Bureau of Economic Research.

Donaldson, D. (2018). Railroads of the Raj. American Economic Review, 108(45), 899934.
    https://doi.org/10.2307/1251838

                                                                                                  21
Duranton, G. (2016). Transitioning to Driverless Cars. Cityscape, 18(3), 193-196.

Duranton, G., & Turner, M. A. (2011). The fundamental law of road congestion: Evidence from
    US cities. American Economic Review, 101(6), 2616-52.

Duranton, G., & Turner, M. A. (2012). Urban growth and transportation. Review of Economic
    Studies, 79(4), 14071440. https://doi.org/10.1093/restud/rds010

Gately, C. K., Hutyra, L. R., & Wing, I. S. (2015). Cities, traffic, and CO2: A multidecadal
    assessment of trends, drivers, and scaling relationships. Proceedings of the National
    Academy of Sciences, 112(16), 4999-5004.

Gelauff, G., Ossokina, I., & Teulings, C. (2019). Spatial and welfare effects of automated
    driving: Will cities grow, decline or both? Transportation Research Part A: Policy and
    Practice, 121(October 2017), 277294. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tra.2019.01.013

Gibbons, S., Lyytikinen, T., Overman, H. G., & Sanchis-Guarner, R. (2019). New road
    infrastructure: The effects on firms. Journal of Urban Economics, 110(January), 3550.
    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jue.2019.01.002

Gibbons, S., & Machin, S. (2005). Valuing rail access using transport innovations. Journal of
    Urban Economics, 57(1), 148169. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jue.2004.10.002

Gittleman, M., & Monaco, K. (2017). Truck-Driving Jobs: Are They Headed for Rapid
     Elimination? ILR Review, 0019793919858079.

Glaeser, E. L., & Kohlhase, J. E. (2004). Cities, regions and the decline of transport costs. In
    Fifty Years of Regional Science (pp. 197-228). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.

Gorback, C. (2020) Your Uber has Arrived: Ridesharing and the Redistribution of Economic
    Activity. Wharton working paper.

Greenwood, B. N., & Wattal, S. (2017). Show Me the Way to Go Home: An Empirical
    Investigation of Ride-Sharing and Alcohol Related Motor Vehicle Fatalities. MIS
    quarterly, 41(1), 163-187.

Krger, L., Kuhnimhof, T., & Trommer, S. (2019). Does context matter? A comparative study
    modelling autonomous vehicle impact on travel behaviour for Germany and the USA.
    Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice, 122(April 2018), 146161.
    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tra.2018.03.033

Lafontaine, F., Sividasan, J. (2020). The Recent Evolution of Physical Retail Markets: Online
    Retailing, Big Box Stores, and the Rise of Restaurants. NBER working paper

Liu, M., Brynjolfsson, E., & Dowlatabadi, J. (2018). Do digital platforms reduce moral hazard?
     The case of Uber and taxis (No. w25015). National Bureau of Economic Research.

                                                                                                   22
Mandel, M. (2020). Pre-Pandemic Retail and Warehouse Productivity and Hours Growth, and
   Post-Pandemic Implications. Brookings Institute working paper

Paik, Y., Kang, S., & Seamans, R. (2019). Entrepreneurship, innovation, and political
     competition: How the public sector helps the sharing economy create value. Strategic
     Management Journal, 40(4), 503-532.

Parker, G. G., & Van Alstyne, M. W. (2005). Two-sided network effects: A theory of
    information product design. Management science, 51(10), 1494-1504.

Perlman, E. (2016). Connecting the Periphery: Three Papers on the Developments Caused by
     Spreading Transportation and Information Networks in the Nineteenth Century United
     States.

Redding, S. J., & Turner, M. A. (2015). Transportation Costs and the Spatial Organization of
    Economic Activity. In Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics (1st ed., Vol. 5).
    https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-444-59531-7.00020-X

Relihan, L. 2020. Is Online Retail Killing Coffee Shops? Estimating the Winners and Losers of
     Online Retail Using Customer Transaction Microdata. LSE working paper.

Roche, MP (Forthcoming). Taking Innovation to the Streets: Microgeography, Physical Structure
    and Innovation. The Review of Economics and Statistics.

Rochet, J. C., & Tirole, J. (2006). Twosided markets: a progress report. The RAND journal of
    economics, 37(3), 645-667.

Sohn, E., Seamans, R., & Sands, D. (2019). Technological Opportunity and the Locus of
    Innovation: Airmail, Aircraft, and Local Capabilities. NYU Stern working paper.

Sokoloff, K. L. (1988). Inventive Activity in Early Industrial America: Evidence from Patent
    Records, 1790-1846. NBER Working Paper, (2707).




                                                                                               23
Figure 1. Employment by Transportation Sub-industries




Note: These data come from the Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Employment Statistics
survey (BLS CES).




                                                                                          24
Figure 2. Value Added as a Fraction of GDP




Note: These data come from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA).




                                                                    25
Figure 3. Real Average Weekly Earnings by Transportation Sub-industry




Note: These data come from BLS CES. We plot average weekly earnings by transportation sub-
industry, adjusted for inflation using the CPI-U.




                                                                                       26
Figure 4. Labor Productivity by Transportation Sub-industry




Note: These figures come from the BLS's Annual Index of Labor Productivity and show changes
in output per hour relative to 2007 levels.




                                                                                         27
Figure 5. Growth in Establishments by Transportation Sub-industry




Note: These data come from the BLS Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages. The series
are normalized to show establishment levels relative to 1990.




                                                                                          28
Figure 6. Patenting Activity: Vehicles in General and Conveying




Note: These data come from PatentsView. We plot total patents per year for CPC codes B60
(vehicles in general) and B65 (conveying, packing, storing, etc.), as well as all patents.




                                                                                             29
Figure 7. All Other Transportation Patents




Note: These data come from PatentsView. We plot patents per year for the remaining
transportation CPC codes (B60-B68), excluding vehicles in general and conveying/packing.




                                                                                           30
Figure 8. Venture Funding by Transportation Sub-industry




Note: These data come from CrunchBase. Figures report annual funding by company type;
amounts are reported in US Dollars.




                                                                                        31
Figure 9. Automobile Transmission Technology Adoption




Note: These data come from the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). We
define advanced transmission as having six or more gears.




                                                                                   32
Figure 10. Automobile Engine Technology Adoption




Note: These data come from EPA.




                                                   33
Figure 11. Retail and Warehousing Employment Over Time




Note: These data come from the BLS Current Employment Statistics.




                                                                    34
Figure 12. Warehouse Employment Growth: Urban vs. Rural




qcew_warehousing_and_storage_urbanrural_scaled.png
Note: These data come from BLS QCEW. Rural counties are defined as counties with more than
half of their population living in rural areas as designated by the Census Bureau.




                                                                                        35
Figure 13. Truck Transport Employment Growth: Urban vs. Rural




Note: These data come from BLS QCEW. Rural counties are defined as counties with more than
half of their population living in rural areas as designated by the Census Bureau.




                                                                                        36
Figure 14. Increasing Importance of Warehousing Employment in the US




Note: These data come from BLS QCEW. We plot employment shares by transportation sub-
industry (5-digit NAICS), normalized to 1990 levels.




                                                                                   37
Figure 15. Top County-level Employers: Warehousing and Storage




Note: These data come from BLS QCEW. Here is a bump chart plotting the county ranks in terms
of raw (not per-capita) warehousing and storage employment. We include the top 10 counties in
2017 over a 10 year period (2008-2017).




                                                                                          38
Figure 16. Google Trends: Uber vs. Warehouse




                                               39
Figure 17. NYC and Chicago Taxi Medallion Prices




Note: These data come from the NYC Taxi and Limousine Commission, as well as the Chicago
Department of Business Affairs and Consumer Protection.




                                                                                     40
Figure 18.




             41
Table 1: Industry Summary Statistics
              Industry Title               NAICS        2018         2018 Real Avg       Five Year         Five Year
                                           Code     Employment in    Weekly Wage       Employment         Real Wage
                                                      Thousands                           Growth            Growth
                                                                                       (2013-2018)       (2013-2018)
 All Transport/Warehousing               48/49              5419.1          $940.0              20.3%            1.7%
 Air Transport                           481                 501.4         $1,107.1             12.8%            1.2%
 Rail Transport                          482                 214.3                               -7.4%
 Water Transport                         483                  64.7                               -0.9%
 Truck Transport                         484                1491.3         $1,004.6               7.9%          0.7%
 Transit/Ground Passenger Transport      485                 487.4          $663.0                8.7%          8.7%
 Pipeline Transport                      486                  48.6                                9.3%
 Scenic/Sightseeing Transport            487                  34.3                              17.3%
 Support Activities for Transport        488                 711.8          $955.5              18.9%           0.6%
 Couriers and Messengers                 492                 725.5          $784.6              33.4%          14.9%
 Warehousing and Storage                 493                1139.9          $845.2              59.2%           3.5%
Note: These data come from BLS Current Employment Statistics. We omit the Postal Service, as well as wage data for rail, water,
pipeline, and scenic/sightseeing transportation, as these aggregate data are not available from BLS CES.




                                                                                                                            42
Table 2: Top Couriers and Messengers Companies by Job Postings
        2010          2011          2012               2013     2014        2015        2016        2017              2018
 1   UPS           UPS           UPS           UPS            UPS        UPS         UPS         UPS          UPS
 2   FedEx         FedEx         FedEx         FedEx          FedEx      FedEx       FedEx       FedEx        FedEx
 3                                                            DHL        DHL         DHL         DHL
     DHL Express   DHL Express   DHL Express   DHL Express    Express    Express     Express     Express      DHL Express
 4   Republic      Republic      Midnite       Publisher's    Xpo Last   Spee Dee    Spee Dee    Spee Dee
     Beverage      Beverage      Express       Circulation    Mile Inc   Delivery    Delivery    Delivery     Shipt
 5                               Republic      Ameriflight    Spee Dee   Midnite     Midnite     Midnite      Ameriflight
     Courier       Courier       Beverage      Incorporated   Delivery   Express     Express     Express      Incorporated
Notes: These data come from Burning Glass. We report the top 5 companies by number of job postings (NAICS 492). Burning Glass
does not report employer data for every single job posting.




                                                                                                                             43
Table 3: Top Transit/Ground Passenger Transport Companies by Job Postings

         2010              2011            2012            2013            2014           2015         2016         2017         2018
 1                                                                                     Durham
     MV Trans.,                        MV Trans.,      MV Trans.,      MV Trans.,      School       MV Trans.,
     Inc.            Firstgroup Plc    Inc.            Inc.            Inc.            Services     Inc.         Instacart    Instacart
 2                                                                     Durham
     Firstgroup                        Firstgroup                      School                                    MV Trans.,   MV Trans.,
     Plc             MV Trans., Inc.   Plc             Veolia Trans.   Services        Uber         Amtrak       Inc.         Inc.
 3                                     Westours
                                       Motor                                                        Veolia       First
     Veolia Trans.   Veolia Trans.     Coaches         First Student   Amtrak          Amtrak       Trans.       Transit      Uber
 4   Coach                                             Firstgroup                      MV Trans.,   First                     First
     America         First Transit     Veolia Trans.   Plc             Veolia Trans.   Inc.         Transit      Uber         Transit
 5                                                     Durham
                                                       School          Firstgroup      Veolia                    Stock        Stock
     First Transit   Coach America     First Transit   Services        Plc             Trans.       Uber         Trans.       Trans.
Notes: These data come from Burning Glass. We report the top 5 companies by number of job postings (NAICS 485). Burning Glass
does not report employer data for every single job posting.




                                                                                                                                           44
Table 4: Top Warehousing and Storage Companies by Job Postings
            2010        2011              2012       2013           2014            2015       2016           2017           2018
 1                                                                                         Diversified
     Americold      Americold      Americold      Americold     Americold    Americold     Transfer
     Logistics      Logistics      Logistics      Logistics     Logistics    Logistics     Storage        Dematic        Dematic
 2                                                                                                                       All My Sons
                                                                                           Americold      Americold      Moving
     Exel           Dematic        Dematic        Dematic       Exel         Exel          Logistics      Logistics      Storage
 3                                 After-market                 Versacold                                 Pure           Life Storage,
     Dematic        Exel           Tech. Corp,    Exel          Int. Corp.   Dematic       Dematic        Storage, Inc   Inc
 4   Document       After-                        After-                     Diversified                  All My Sons
     Storage        market                        market                     Transfer                     Moving         Pure
     Systems Inc.   Tech. Corp.    Exel           Tech. Corp.   Dematic      Storage       Exel           Storage        Storage, Inc
 5   Jk Moving      Jk Moving                     Versacold                  Versacold     Pure                          Americold
     Storage Inc.   Storage Inc.   Es3 Llc        Int. Corp.    Es3 Llc      Int. Corp,    Storage, Inc   Exel           Logistics
Notes: These data come from Burning Glass. We report the top 5 companies by number of job postings (NAICS 493). Burning Glass
does not report employer data for every single job posting.




                                                                                                                                        45
