                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    INCOME DISTRIBUTION, INTERNATIONAL INTEGRATION, AND SUSTAINED
                          POVERTY REDUCTION

                                      Pinelopi K. Goldberg
                                          Tristan Reed

                                       Working Paper 27286
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27286


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2020




We thank Andrei Shleifer, Christoph Lakner and Michele Ruta for comments in the earliest stage
of this project. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Pinelopi K. Goldberg and Tristan Reed. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Income Distribution, International Integration, and Sustained Poverty Reduction
Pinelopi K. Goldberg and Tristan Reed
NBER Working Paper No. 27286
May 2020
JEL No. F10,F13,F15,L10,L16,O10,O14

                                         ABSTRACT

What is the pathway to development in a world with less international integration? We answer
this question within a model that emphasizes the role of demand-side constraints on national
development, which we identify with sustained poverty reduction. In this framework,
development is linked to the adoption of an increasing returns to scale technology by imperfectly
competitive firms, who need to pay the fixed setup cost of switching to that technology. Sustained
poverty reduction is measured as a continuous decline in the share of the population living below
$1.90/day PPP in 2011 US dollars over a five year period. This outcome is affected in a
statistically significant and economically meaningful way by both domestic market size, which is
measured as function of the income distribution, and international market size, which is measured
as a function of legally-binding provisions to international trade agreements, including the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, the World Trade Organization and 279 preferential
trade agreements. Counterfactual estimates suggest that, in the absence of international
integration, the average resident of a low and lower-middle income country does not live in a
market large enough to experience sustained poverty reduction.


Pinelopi K. Goldberg
Yale University
Department of Economics
37 Hillhouse Ave.
P.O. Box 208264
New Haven, CT 06520-8264
and NBER
penny.goldberg@yale.edu

Tristan Reed
The World Bank
Development Research Group
1818 H Street NW
Washington, DC 20433
treed@worldbank.org
1    Introduction

Many of the success stories of economic development during the last century, for instance in East
Asia (Stiglitz, 1996), coincided with growth in exports and trade surplus. As advances in technology
threaten the comparative advantage offered by cheap labor, and as interest in protectionism rises in
advanced economies, it is not clear that this same export-led model will be relevant in the future.
Lund et al. (2019) find that the share of trade based on labor-cost arbitrage (defined as exports
from countries whose GDP per capita is one-fifth or less than that of the importing country) has
been declining in some value chains, especially in labor-intensive manufacturing where it dropped
from 55 percent in 2005 to 43 percent in 2017. Such observations have led policy makers to ask:
What is the pathway to development in a world with less international integration?
    We answer this question within a model that emphasizes the role of demand-side constraints
on national development, which we identify with sustained poverty reduction and measure as a
continuous decline in the share of the population living on less than $1.90 PPP per day in 2011
US dollars, over a 5 year period. In this framework, development is linked to the adoption of an
increasing returns to scale technology by imperfectly competitive firms, who need to pay the fixed
setup cost of switching to that technology. Poverty is reduced as adoption of the new technology sets
off a structural transformation process that increases wages. The necessary demand to overcome the
fixed cost of technology adoption may come from either the domestic or the international market.
Importantly, economies of scale can be achieved even in sectors serving primarily domestic demand
(e.g., services); in such a case, the role of exports from the tradable sector is that they provide
income that translates into additional demand for all sectors, including those that are non-tradable.
Increased demand stemming from broad household ownership of firm profits is the key channel
through which an equitable distribution of wealth and income improves labor productivity in the
general equilibrium model we use to motivate our empirical analysis (Murphy, Shleifer and Vishny,
1989a).
    The size of the international market is measured on the basis of a new database of the legally-
binding provisions of international trade agreements, which include the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade (GATT), the various agreements of the World Trade Organization (WTO), and
279 preferential trade agreements (PTAs) whose provisions are recorded by Hofmann, Osnago and
Ruta (2017). These provisions primarily establish rights related to goods and services trade, but
also relate to flows of capital, ideas, and labor, and together make up the legal architecture of the
international economy. The size of a given country's integrated international market is calculated
by summing the population and income of all other countries, where those countries are weighted


                                                 1
by the number of economic integration provisions a country has signed with them. By this measure,
Sub-Saharan Africa already has access to the relatively highest­income international market in the
world. Though the relative per capita income of the integrated market declines rapidly with a
country's national income in our sample, we find that its effect on sustained poverty reduction is
positive, quantitatively large and statistically significant, suggesting international integration has
provided a pathway for poor countries to eliminate poverty in the past. These results are highly
relevant in light of the existing evidence that poverty declines more slowly among countries that
are initially poor (Ravallion, 2012).
       Setting the size of the integrated international market to zero in a counterfactual scenario allows
us to isolate the effect of domestic market size alone on sustained poverty reduction, which quantifies
the hope for development in a less integrated economy. The size of the domestic market is measured
as a function of the income distribution, as summarized by the share of the population in the global
middle class (defined based on Kharas (2017) to include those living on $11-110 PPP per day in
2011 US dollars). The use of an absolute, rather than relative, definition for the middle class reflects
the assumption that the increasing returns technology is the same across countries. Like the size
of the international market, the middle class share has a positive and significant effect on sustained
poverty reduction.1
       Our empirical framework is inspired by the industrial organization literature, specifically Bres-
nahan and Reiss (1991), who develop a method to estimate entry thresholds based on the profit
functions of firms facing increasing returns and entering imperfectly competitive markets. Their
approach is especially useful in our setting because it does not require data on market prices to
estimate variable profit and fixed cost parameters, which are required to calculate the break-even
point. Using this approach, we estimate that the threshold market size for sustained poverty re-
duction is 328 million people, if the purchasing power of these people is below that of the global
middle class.
       In a scenario in which the size of the integrated international market is set to zero, as of 2011-
   1
    Allowing for a large gap between the lower bound of the middle class ($11 PPP per day) and the upper bound
of poverty ($1.90 PPP per day) ensures the relationship between the share of the population in these two states
is not mechanical. Alternative definitions of the middle class have been studied by others. For instance, Birdsall,
Graham and Pettinato (2000) and Easterly (2001) define the middle class in each country relative to the national
income distribution (i.e., respectively, 0.75-1.25 of median income; and the 20th and 80th percentile in consumption).
Banerjee and Duflo (2008) and Ravallion (2009) examine alternative definitions which are fixed across countries, but
may be considered suitable for different income levels (i.e., respectively, $2-4/day and $6-10/day; or a "developing
world's middle class" with income above the median poverty line of developing countries and a "Western middle
class," above the poverty line of the USA). The use of an absolute threshold anchored to advanced country living
standards, as in this paper, is more common in the private sector, for instance among retailers considering whether to
enter a market. For the argument that this is profit-maximizing, see the critical review of "bottom-of-the pyramid"
retail strategies by Simanis (2012).


                                                          2
15, the average resident of a low and lower-middle income country does not live in a market large
enough to experience sustained poverty reduction. The primary reason for this is that the middle
class in these countries is not yet large enough. For the average country in our sample, increasing
the share of the population in the middle class by 10 percent is equivalent to increasing population
by 54 million people. For countries with small population, equality therefore is disproportionately
important. This suggests that, if international integration is indeed declining in importance for
sustained poverty reduction, to eliminate poverty policy-makers in poor countries must focus on
equalizing the distribution of income, for instance through taxation or (as suggested by the model
underlying this paper's analysis) redistribution of equity shares to the poor.
      Methodologically, our work is related to a specific approach in the economic growth literature, in
which researchers identify a set of countries that perform exceptionally well over some time period,
and then compare them with the rest of the world. In the report of the Commission on Growth
and Development, Spence et al. (2008) identify 13 economies that have sustained cumulative GDP
growth of more than 7 percent annually for 25 years or more since 1950.2 Werker (2012) studies
all countries that achieved double-digit growth--above 10 percent annually--for 8 or more years,
finding that almost two thirds of such periods are either recoveries from war or resource booms,
typically those driven by oil. Hausmann, Pritchett and Rodrik (2005) identify periods of growth
accelerations, by identifying all periods in which the change in growth rate is greater than or equal
to 2 percentage points per annum, and then coding the successive 7 year period to equal one (and
zero otherwise) if growth over that time was more than 3.5 percent per annum, and if income at the
end was higher than the maximum of income during the period. They find that such accelerations
are highly unpredictable. In all of these studies, the years over which growth is observed are allowed
to vary, and the length of time studied is longer than five years. In contrast, our approach holds
periods fixed in time, each comprising a disjoint five-year window (e.g., 1981-85, 86-90, etc.). This
approach constraints us from selecting windows of time that paint a disproportionately positive or
negative picture of performance in a specific country. It also means our predictions are relevant for
the relatively shorter time horizon over which governments make decisions.
      Our work contributes to several distinct literatures. First, our focus on sustained poverty reduc-
tion is relevant to a literature on poverty dynamics, which have been studied in individual countries
(Ferreira, Leite and Ravallion, 2010) and among households (Carter and Barrett, 2006; Baulch and
Hoddinott, 2000). A key message of this literature is that households frequently move in and out
of poverty, and it is much rarer to escape permanently than to escape for a few years (Shepherd
  2
    These are Botswana, Brazil, China, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Japan, the Republic of Korea, Malaysia, Malta, Oman,
Singapore, Taiwan, and Thailand.


                                                       3
and Diwakar, 2019). Looking across countries, more than half of the time countries have sustained
poverty reduction at the aggregate level. The results also highlight the limited effect of the business
cycle in advanced economies on poverty reduction in developing economies, at least during the 2006-
10 and 2011-15 windows, which included the advanced economies' financial crisis and deceleration,
and yet were among the best years for sustained poverty reduction.
   Second, our paper contributes to a voluminous literature on inequality, poverty and growth.
We find that a certain degree of equality and poverty reduction go hand in hand at low income
levels, a result that is broadly consistent with Barro (2000, 2008) and Ostry, Berg and Tsangarides
(2014). Our work in this regard is most closely related to Desai and Kharas (2017) who emphasize
the importance of middle class in poverty reduction. While these authors use historical data since
1870 to explore the relationship between middle class and poverty reduction, we focus on a more
recent period that is characterized by growing global integration and use counterfactual simulations
to quantify the role of the middle class in sustained poverty reduction.
   Third, our study contributes to a literature on the effects of trade policy on poverty (Autor,
Dorn and Hanson, 2016; Topalova, 2010; Harrison, ed, 2007; Goldberg and Pavcnik, 2004; Win-
ters, McCulloch and McKay, 2004). We introduce to this literature a novel measure of integrated
international market size, which in our model predicts sustained poverty reduction. This mea-
sure complements and extends the data sets of Sachs and Warner (1995) and Wacziarg and Welch
(2008), which identify the specific years at which economies liberalize. By our treaty-based measure
of liberalization, in which a country has access to some international market once it signs a trade
agreement, many countries appear open in years when these other datasets consider them closed.
Even though many countries are closed according to our measure in 1981, almost none are closed
today, given almost complete membership in the WTO by UN member states. Despite this, there
is large variation in the relative size of the integrated international market in many regions, driven
for instance by China's entry into the WTO in 2001, which lowered the average income of WTO
member states by approximately 18 percent.
   Finally, while models of development with firm-level increasing returns assume supply-side con-
straints, such as capital market imperfections, to explain why countries remain poor (Banerjee and
Duflo, 2005), our framework does not rely on such assumptions. Our demand-side framework im-
plies that the small size of the market itself may explain why countries remain poor. Further, this
equilibrium is in our stylized framework unique. Support for the view that demand-side constraints
may be binding comes from the empirical literature on the growth of small and medium-sized en-
terprises (Woodruff, 2018). While a decade of research on supply-side interventions, for instance



                                                  4
microfinance (Banerjee, Karlan and Zinman, 2015) and business training (McKenzie and Woodruff,
2014), has found mostly disappointing effects, a nascent literature finds that boosts to demand may
be effective in promoting productivity growth (Alfaro-Urena, Manelici and Vasquez, 2020; Atkin,
Khandelwal and Osman, 2017; Ferraz, Finan and Szerman, 2015).
    The paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, we introduce our conceptual framework that guides
the empirical strategy laid out in Section 3. In Section 4, we describe the variables we construct
to bring the model to the data, namely sustained poverty reduction, the middle class share of the
population, and the relative size of the integrated international market. Section 5 presents the
results. Section 6 discusses our counterfactual estimates of market size in an economy without
international integration. Section 7 concludes and offers some thoughts on policy implications.


2    Conceptual Framework

We define "development" as sustained poverty reduction. While many indicators summarize a
country's progress, poverty reduction is arguably the best indicator that a country is on track
to becoming what could be called an advanced economy. Poverty elimination is the first of the
World Bank's Twin Goals and the first of the United Nation's Sustainable Development Goals.
All advanced economies have eliminated extreme poverty. For practical purposes, the World Bank
defines extreme poverty elimination as occurring when the headcount of people living on $1.90 per
day falls to less than 3 percent of the population, recognizing that some small pockets of poverty will
always remain, even in advanced economies. According to the most recent data from POVCALNET,
the extreme poverty headcount in the United States is 1.25 percent, in Japan, 0.22 percent, and in
Germany, 0 percent.
    Our focus on the transition between two dichotomous stages of development, one with extreme
poverty and one without, follows in the tradition of W. Arthur Lewis and others. In this framework,
the economy has two alternative production technologies, one with constant returns to scale and
another with increasing returns to scale.3 Development occurs when firms pay the fixed setup costs
of adopting the increasing returns technology, which causes labor productivity to rise. Even if the
poor do not work in the firms that adopt the new technology, poverty falls because the common wage
paid to all workers rises. The main implication of this framework is that a threshold market size is
required to achieve development--if there is not enough demand, a firm operating the increasing
   3
     Banerjee and Duflo (2005) propose a similar model of development in which firms choose to upgrade to a new
technology, and emphasize the role played by capital market imperfections in prohibiting the adoption of this tech-
nology.




                                                        5
returns technology will not break even. Development is given by the threshold crossing model

                                                D = 1 ( > 0)                                                  (1)

where  is profitability in the increasing returns sector.
    The idea that international markets allow firms to achieve minimum efficient scale is well estab-
lished in trade theory (Helpman and Krugman, 1985). In principle however, a large enough domestic
market could also allow firms using the increasing return technology to break even. Murphy, Shleifer
and Vishny (1989a) provide a model of exactly this phenomenon, with a specific mechanism in which
the effects of a positive income shock, from either agricultural productivity or exports, depend on
the initial shareholdings of individuals in society. Societies develop faster when shares in the firms
are distributed more equitably across the population, raising the marginal propensity to consume
out of the profits generated by the increasing returns sector. This model suggests that a large
internal market may provide a path to development, even in the absence of trade. The middle class,
which determines the size of this market, is created endogenously as a result of an initial wealth
shock and an initial relatively equitable distribution of firm ownership.4 These ideas imply the
threshold market size could be achieved though some combination of: (i) large population, (ii) an
equitable distribution of income, (iii) a large international market.
    Norway, where oil exploration began in 1963 and was discovered in 1969, is an example of a
country that perhaps grew more rapidly than other countries because of a more equitable initial
distribution of income. In 1960, the country had per capita income of $23,167 in 2010 US dollars.
In 2018, years after the discovery of oil, per capita income had quadrupled to $92,077. According to
the Luxembourg Income Study, Norway had relatively low Gini coefficient of 26.8 in 1979, the first
year for which data are available, indicating a relatively equal distribution of income. In comparison,
Mexico, which similarly had major oil discoveries in the 1970s, had a much higher Gini of 48.4 in
1984, indicating relatively higher inequality. Mexico had income of $3,907 in 1960, which in 2018
had grown only 2.7 times to $10,403.


3    Empirical Strategy

Our empirical strategy is based on the threshold crossing model of Equation 1 and utilizes cross-
country panel data. The challenge is to estimate a profit function for the increasing returns sector,
   4
     For clarity, we note that the equilibrium in this model is unique, and so this is not a setting with multiple
equilibria, one with high development and one poverty trap equilibrium with low development, as in the authors'
companion paper (Murphy, Shleifer and Vishny, 1989b). Kraay and McKenzie (2014) argue that there is limited
empirical evidence for such poverty traps, especially on the scale that would affect an entire economy.


                                                        6
so that we may calculate the relative contribution of domestic and international market size to
sustained poverty reduction. Bresnahan and Reiss (1991) propose a method to estimate the profit
function of a profit maximizing firm when data on prices and quantities are unavailable. We adopt
their approach to modeling the profit function of the increasing returns to scale sector, while letting
the dependent variable D = Dit be an indicator that sustained poverty reduction is achieved in
country i over the five-year period indexed by t.
      Suppose profit of the increasing returns sector in country i at time t is given by:

                               it = S (Mit , ) × V (Zit , Wit ,  ) - F (Wit ,  ) +   it                     (2)

where ,  and  are parameters of the profit function, Mit are observables capturing market size,
Zit and Wit are per-capita demand and cost shifters respectively, and the error term              it   captures
unobservable factors affecting profits. This specification corresponds to the functional form of
Murphy, Shleifer and Vishny (1989a), in which expenditure of the middle class is multiplied by
profits from either exports or agricultural productivity to determine the level of industrialization.
      The function S summarizes the domestic and international market as determined by population,
the income distribution, and international integration. We assume a linear function:



             S (Mit , ) = Mit  = populationit +1 middle class share of populationit                         (3)
                                                    +2 relative population of integrated marketit
                                                    +3 relative income of integrated marketit .


All variables are predetermined in each of our data windows, as t refers to the first year of the
five-year period. We set the coefficient of population in S (Mit , ) equal to one because V contains
a constant term. This normalization translates units of market demand into units of population,
allowing for an easy interpretation of S . So that our quantitative estimate of market size is more
easily interpretable in terms of people consuming less than the middle class, before estimation we
subtract from population the number of people in the middle class.5
  5
      This decision does not substantially affect our estimate of .




                                                           7
   V stands for per-capita variable profits, which are modeled as a function of economic variables
Xit = [Zit , Wit ]. We assume:



              V =Xit                                                                               (4)
                =1 + 2 export growthit-1 + 3 agricultural productivity growthit-1



where t-1 refers to growth over the last five year period. The variables included in Xit account
for differences in the variable per-capita profits of the increasing returns sector across countries.
Finally, we include under "fixed costs" variables that capture both fixed production costs and fixed
barriers to entry. We assume:



  F =WiL                                                                                           (5)
    =1 + 2 tropical climate i + 3 desert climate i + 4 distance to coast i + 5 ruggedness i +
      6 British legal origins i + 7 French legal originsi


The variables in WiL include predetermined factors that likely affect start-up or entry costs. Bresna-
han and Reiss (1991), who study non-tradable services, use the price of agricultural land to capture
intermarket variation in land costs. A natural proxy for land costs across countries is climate, which
may effect land prices through the regularity of rain, which may degrade real estate and slow con-
struction and repairs. Our first two controls therefore are the percentage of land area with a tropical
climate, and the percentage of land area with a desert climate. Of course, it is well known that
tropical countries have had poor long term economic performance either due either to geographic
disadvantage (Sachs, 2001), or interaction with historical shocks, such as colonialism (Acemoglu,
Johnson and Robinson, 2001). We therefore interpret our fixed cost variables as controls for long-
run determinants of institutions or technology, rather than structural parameters. In alternative
specifications, we also include distance to coast (Rappaport and Sachs, 2003) and ruggedness (Nunn
and Puga, 2012), as well as dummies for the origins of legal institutions (La Porta, Lopez-de Silanes,
Shleifer and Vishny, 1999). Socialist legal origins are the omitted category, so that the legal origins
dummies are not co-linear with the constant.
   The further assumption that      it   is normally distributed with mean zero, combined with the
threshold condition in Equation (1), yields a probit model in which the probability of development,


                                                   8
conditional on market size, demand and costs, is:

                                Pr(Dit = 1) = Pr(it > 0) = (¯ it )                                 (6)

where Dit is an indicator variable equal to 1, if there is sustained poverty reduction (our measure of
development) in country i over period t, and zero otherwise,     ¯ it = it - it , and (·) is the normal
cumulative distribution function. We estimate this model using maximum likelihood.
     Estimated threshold market size is given by
                                                  L^
                                              ^= W 
                                              S                                                    (7)
                                                 X ^

where the overbar indicates sample averages and the circumflex indicates estimates from the probit
model. By setting S (Mit , ^) = S
                                ^, it is possible to determine which counterfactual combinations of
Mit would be sufficient for a country to achieve development. These results are presented in Annex
B.


4     Data and Measurement

We call henceforth our sample of 347 country-five-year periods the sustained poverty reduction
sample. It includes 93 countries, observed in 5-year periods from 1981-2015, where five year pe-
riods range between 1981 to 2015: 81-85, 86-90, 91-95, 96-00, 01-05, 06-10, 11-15. This sample
excludes advanced economies, or those with a poverty headcount below 3 percent for all years in the
POVCALNET data. Advanced economies cannot provide any information about sustained poverty
reduction, because poverty has been eliminated (following the World Bank definition) for all years
they are observed.
     We construct three novel variables to estimate the empirical model. The first of these is our
outcome, a binary variable indicating whether a country experienced sustained extreme poverty
reduction over a five-year period. The second is a measure of relative international market size,
according to legally-binding provisions to international trade agreements. The third is a measure
of domestic market size, which we define as the share of national population in the global middle
class. In this section, we explain how each of these variables was constructed, and establish some
stylized facts about how they have varied over time.
     Existing data sets are used to measure the components of variable profit and fixed costs. To
calculate export growth, the first determinant of variable profit, we use the World Bank series
of goods and service exports as a share of GDP (NE.EXP.GNFS.ZS in the World Development



                                                   9
Indicators).6 For labor productivity growth in agriculture, the second determinant of variable
profit, we use the international agricultural productivity series of the United States Department of
Agriculture's Economic Research Service (Fuglie et al., 2012). For geographic components of fixed
costs we use data from Nunn and Puga (2012): the share of land in tropical climate, the share of
land in desert climate, average distance to ice-free coast and terrain ruggedness. For origins of legal
system (i.e. English, French or socialist) we use data from La Porta, Lopez-de Silanes, Shleifer and
Vishny (1999).

4.1      Sustained poverty reduction

The data used to construct our outcome variable, Dit , are from POVCALNET, which reports the
national extreme poverty headcount, or the percent of population living below $1.90 PPP in 2011 US
dollars, in years where household survey data are available. The headcount series for each country is
transformed into a series of periods of sustained poverty reduction in the following four steps. First,
for years where there is a missing headcount within a country, a linear trend is estimated between
years, and used to interpolate the missing data. Second, the data are segmented into seven mutually
exclusive 5-year periods. Third, for all years, we create an indicator for whether the headcount is
lower relative to the previous year, referencing either the observed or interpolated value. Fourth,
this indicator is used to create an indicator for sustained poverty reduction throughout the period.
If interpolated and observed poverty has fallen in all years within the five year period, we code the
indicator equal to 1 for that period. If the poverty headcount is not declining in every year, we code
the variable equal to 0. If an observed or interpolated headcount is not available in all five years,
the indicator is missing for that period.
       To see how this works, consider the examples of Angola and Nigeria, two large high poverty
countries. In Angola, the extreme poverty headcount is only observed twice, in 2000, at 32.3 percent
and in 2008, at 30.1 percent Using the linear interpolation, we therefore only observe sustained
poverty reduction in each year from 2001-2008. When data are segmented into periods, 01-05 is
the only five year period for which the change in headcount is observed. Therefore, this is the
only period we are able to code for Angola: we code sustained poverty reduction equal to 1 in
this period, because the linear trend is always negative, and set all other periods for Angola to
missing. In Nigeria, the poverty head count is observed five times, in 1985, 1992, 1996, 2003 and
2009. We are therefore able to code periods 1986-90, 91-95, 96-00 and 01-05. Over these periods,
   6
    For six countries, where this series is not available, we supplement with the IMF series of exports of goods, services
and primary income (BX.GSR.TOTL.CD), which matches closely the World Bank series in most cases. The countries
for which we supplement data are Djibouti, Ethiopia, Fiji, Iran, Lesotho and Sao Tome and Principe.



                                                           10
the country did experience reductions in the poverty rate, but we still code all periods as 0, because
these reductions were not continuous over any of the four time periods. Specifically, between 1996
and 2003 the poverty rate fell from 63.5 percent to 53.46 percent. However, because this decline is
followed by a slight increase in the poverty rate to 53.47 percent in 2009, the period 01-05 is coded
as 0, given the interpolated increase from 2003-05. Similarly, since the headcount in 1996 implied
an increase in the poverty rate from 57.1 percent in 1992, the period 95-00 was also coded as 0,
since the interpolated poverty trend is increasing in 1995. These examples highlight the challenges
involved with measuring changes in poverty at the national level; statistical agencies may release
numbers infrequently.
   To summarize the results, Figure 1 displays the share of five-year periods which achieved sus-
tained extreme poverty reduction, over time across six regions. Notably, the share is above 50%
for most years in most regions. This reflects the tremendous progress that has been made against
extreme poverty in the last four decades. For instance, sustained poverty reduction occurs in 100
percent of countries in four periods in specific regions: 85-90 and 06-10 in the Middle East and
North Africa, and 06-11 and 11-15 in South Asia. Interestingly, the period of 06-10, which spans
much of the recent crisis originating in the United States, does not seem to have been a particularly
bad year for poverty reduction globally. This highlights a separation of cycles between advanced
and developing economies. Two eras of poor performance stand out, 1981 to 1995 in Sub-Saharan
Africa, and 1985 to 2005 in Latin America.
   It is well known that Africa had poor performance during that period, but why was sustained
poverty reduction in Latin America and Caribbean so low? One answer may that in these regions,
poverty surveys typically measure income and not consumption, which may introduce measurement
error. Assuming households have either some savings or access to credit markets, one would expect
income to be more volatile than consumption, as income shocks are smoothed over time. In Europe
and Central Asia, for example, 54 percent of headcounts are derived from income rather than
consumption surveys, and in Latin America and the Caribbean this number is 98 percent. In Sub-
Saharan Africa however only 2 percent percent of headcounts are based on income surveys, and in
the Middle East and North Africa none of the headcounts are. Therefore, in the estimation of the
model, we consider an additional specification, which drops the observations derived from income
surveys. Though standard errors increase somewhat when we drop such a large portion of the data,
our basic conclusions remain robust.
   An additional challenge to measuring sustained poverty reduction is that the frequency of surveys
may also introduce error in our measure. For instance, in periods with zero or one observations of



                                                 11
the headcount, as is the case in all periods for Angola and Nigeria, it will be impossible to see short
(e.g., 1-2 year) increases in the headcount, because the increases will not carry over into following
years. As a result, countries with more frequent household surveys may appear to have less instances
of sustained poverty reduction, given greater observed volatility. In our results, we also present a
specification estimated while dropping the 131 observations that have more than two years of data
in the 5 year period, or 37 percent of the sample. These observations should be most affected by
short run volatility.
   There is a strong presumption in economics that labor productivity growth and poverty reduction
go hand in hand. To test whether this relationship bears out in our data, Table 1 compares instances
of sustained poverty reduction to instances of sustained growth in real GDP per capita, the latter
of which is considered to occur when real GDP per capita does not contract at all during a period.
To prevent higher frequency observations of GDP per capita from affecting our results, we look only
at GDP per capita in the years in which the poverty headcount is also measured, and interpolate
GDP per capita between years, as we have done for the headcount. What is apparent from Table
1 is that sustained GDP per capita growth does seem to be positively correlated with sustained
poverty reduction, with 76 percent of instances of poverty reduction also having sustained GDP per
capita growth, and only 24 percent not having it. More interestingly however, despite this positive
relationship, there are still 82 periods, or 23 percent of the sample, which experience sustained GDP
growth without sustained poverty reduction. Poverty reduction and GDP growth, while positively
related, do not necessarily go hand in hand.

4.2   International market size

The second data set we develop is a database of the relative income and population of each coun-
try's international market, as defined by signatures to trade agreements. We define each country's
global market by summing up the populations and incomes of all other countries, with weights
corresponding to the number of legally enforcible provisions of multilateral agreements between the
country and all others. This measure has three main advantages for our analysis. First, it allows us
to measure directly the effect of international integration treaties, participation in which is a policy
choice for the government. Other analyses of trade liberalization (Sachs and Warner, 1995; Wacziarg
and Welch, 2008; Easterly, 2019) have typically focused on a mixture of policy decisions (e.g., lib-
eralizing state monopolies in exporting sectors), and trade outcomes (e.g., abnormally low shares
of trade to GDP). By focusing specifically on the policy decision to integrate economically through
trade agreements, we ensure our counterfactuals are tied to policies actually within government's



                                                  12
control. Second, because we calculate market size in terms of GDP and population, these measures
allow us to estimate directly the relative value of integrating with a richer versus a more populous
market. Finally, our measures allow us to exploit variation in market size stemming from the entry
of other countries into a trade agreement. A good example of this variation is what may be called
the China shock to the WTO, shown in Figure 2. When China entered in 2001, GDP per-capita of
WTO member states fell from above $11,000 to below $9,000, while population increased by more
than 1 billion people. Below we describe in detail how we construct our relative size measures, and,
provide an example of the variation we exploit in our estimation by tracing out the China shock to
the WTO through the relative population and income of countries' international markets.

4.2.1    Legally enforceable core provisions of multilateral trade agreements

Our measure of market size is based on a measure of the depth of the trade agreements between
a pair of countries, which is simply the number of provisions in agreements related to different
domains of international trade (e.g., flows of goods, services, capital, labor and ideas). Our data on
provisions come primarily from Hofmann, Osnago and Ruta (2017), who code the legal content of all
provisions of all 279 regional trade agreements in force and notified to the World Trade Organization
as of 2015. These authors build on the approach developed by Horn, Mavroidis and Sapir (2010)
for preferential trade agreements involving the United States (US) and European Community (EC).
We add to their work by coding provisions linked to three major international (rather than regional)
trade agreements, General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), the various agreements of the
World Trade Organization (WTO), and the Government Procurement Agreement (GPA). Table 2
lists the 32 legal provisions in our data set, and shows that they fall into two broad groups, which
together make up the legal architecture of the international economy.7
    First, there are provisions establishing rights protecting the mobility of goods and services, labor,
capital and ideas. Rights over trade in goods, for instance the right to receive the most favored
nation tariff, have been enforceable for some time, first under the GATT Article I and then the
WTO. Establishment of rights related to services trade remains limited to those areas covered under
the General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS), from which major sectors are excluded, such
as maritime services. Provisions enforcing rights over labor and capital mobility are the most rare.
   7
     We focus on what are called as "core" provisions, those related directly to trade (Baldwin, 2008). Non-core
provisions cover a wide variety of topics, for instance related to the enforcement of human rights, labor or environmental
standards, as well anti-money laundering, consumer protection, and statistics cooperation. Our exclusion of non-core
provisions has practical implications for measurement. Since we weight countries by the number of provisions, we
do not want to overweight regional trade agreements, which include many more non-core provisions relative to the
international agreements.




                                                           13
Visa and asylum provisions for instance are only protected in regional trade agreements, such as
the EC or the Economic Cooperation Organization of West African States (ECOWAS). Rights to
free capital flows, such as prohibitions on local content requirements and protections of the right to
repatriate profits, have only recently emerged under certain preferential trade agreements. Finally,
some provisions enforce rights over the mobility of ideas, via intellectual property rights protection
which is controversial, for instance in the pharmaceutical industry where losses in consumer welfare
may be substantial (Chaudhuri, Goldberg and Jia, 2006).
   Second, the agreements have additional provisions to protect the specified rights, by limiting
government discretion to undo them. For instance, the Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing
Measures (ASCM) gives rights to the withdrawal of subsidies or the removal of their adverse effects.
Countries also have the right, after an investigation, to charge "countervailing" duties on subsidized
imports that are found to be hurting domestic producers. There is an argument that, particularly
as regards provisions regarding the mobility of ideas, capital and services, trade agreements have
become captured by rich-country business elites (Rodrik, 2018) and do not necessarily serve devel-
oping countries. Given this, we interpret any observed effect of joining an agreement to be the net
of potentially positive and potentially negative effects.
   One question is how our legally-determined measure of market integration compares with other
measures of liberalization in the literature. Annex A lists, for 1981, 2001 and 2015, all economies
which are considered closed by our measure, given that they have no signatures to any of the
treaties in our database. Out of current members of the United Nations that existed at the time, in
1981 we count 67 closed economies. Of these, only four, Botswana, Ecuador, Jordan and Thailand
were classified as open at the time by Sachs and Warner (1995) and Wacziarg and Welch (2008).
Their classifications however are much more likely to classify countries as closed, even when they
appear open in our sample. For example, Wacziarg and Welch (2008) consider China and India
closed as of 2001, even though India had been a WTO member since 1995 and a member of GATT
since 1948. China joined the WTO in that year. According to our treaty-based classification of
openness, very few economies remained closed as of 2015, the three largest being Afghanistan, Iran
and North Korea, and the others being very small states, often with special customs arrangements
(i.e., Monaco with France, or the Marshall Islands and Palau with the United States) that may
obviate the need for multilateral agreements to obtain market integration. Afghanistan joined the
WTO in July 2016.




                                                  14
4.2.2   Relative international market size

We use the pairwise provisions signed between countries to construct a country-specific measure of
the relative size of the international market. As our indicators of relative market size, we use both
per-capita income, or per-capita GDP in current US dollars (NY.GDP.MKTP.CD in the World
Development Indicators), and population (SP.POP.TOTL). Formally, for each integrated market
M and country i and year t, let

                                    incomeM
                                          it =          ijt incomejt
                                                   j
                                                                                                  (8)
                                populationM
                                          it   =        ijt populationjt
                                                   j

where ijt equals the number of in force provisions signed between country i and j in year t, as a
share of the maximum, 32. Using these statistics, we calculate the relative size of the integrated
market, in terms of population and income, for each country year:

              relative population of integrated marketit = populationM
                                                                     it /populationit
                                                               incomeM              M
                                                                     it /populationit
                                                                                                  (9)
                  relative income of integrated marketit =                             .
                                                                incomeit /populationit

   Figure 3 displays these variables, averaged in each year within regions where observations are
weighted by the population of the country. The figure allows us to see how the relative size of the
international integrated market in each region changes over time. Each line is a population weighted
average of the relative market size, in that year. A number of observations stand out. First, Sub-
Saharan Africa was an early integrator, with many of its largest economies joining GATT early
on, for instance South Africa (June 13, 1948), Nigeria (November 18, 1960) and Kenya (February
5, 1964). Until 1995, when it was overtaken by Latin America and the Caribbean, it had the
largest relative market size in terms of population. Second, South Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa
have both integrated with richer countries. For instance, throughout the 1980s and 1990s, Africa
experienced rapid growth in the market size to which it was linked, as more rich countries joined
trade agreements such as GATT. Then, in 2001, when China enters the WTO, relative income falls.
Countries in Sub-Saharan Africa no longer had simply open markets with rich buyers, but a rival
in their income bracket. Third, countries' own per-capita GDP and population growth affect the
relative size of the market. This can be seen clearly in East Asia, where the relative market size
in terms of GDP per capita declines over the 2000s, as China gets richer. It is also possible to see
how the relative population of Sub-Saharan Africa's international market declines in the 2000s, as
Africa's population grows faster than the rest of the world's.


                                                   15
4.3   Income distribution

Our measure of domestic market size depends on the income distribution. Consistent with the
underlying conceptual framework, we identify "domestic market size" with the share of the popu-
lation in the global middle class, a statistic which depends on both average income and equality.
Assuming potential increasing returns to scale are constant across countries, we define the global
middle class following Kharas (2010, 2017), who proposes bounds at $11-110/day PPP in 2011 US
dollars of consumption, on the basis that the lower bound is the average of the national poverty
lines in Portugal and Italy, and the upper bound is twice the median income in Luxembourg. That
is, to be in the global middle class, one cannot be poor in the poorest rich countries, but cannot be
rich in the richest country. In what follows, we apply these bounds and estimate the share of the
middle class as the headcount ratio for the upper bound minus the headcount ratio for the lower
bound.
   To measure equality, we use the Gini coefficient (Git ), a standard measure of (in)equality, also
from POVCALNET, for consistency with our measure of sustained poverty reduction. For average
income, we use data on real GDP per capita (Y it ) from the Penn World Tables 9.1. GDP is
preferred to income based on household surveys given the risk of top-coding, and the fact that we
are interested in the middle and top of the distribution, especially in low and lower-middle income
countries (Deaton, 2005; Ravallion, 2003). We make the parametric assumption that income within
countries is distributed log-normally in order to combine our measures of equality and income to
get a measure of the middle class. Pinkovskiy and Sala-i Martin (2009) show that the log-normal
distribution provides a good fit to the income distribution in most countries, delivering distributions
very similar to those obtained from kernel density estimates, and of superior fit to the gamma and
Weibull distributions, two alternatives that also have two parameters.
                                                                                  2 ), so that:
   Suppose individual daily income y is distributed according to ln(y )  N (µit , it
                                                            it2
                                      µit = ln(Y it /365) -     ,
                                                             2
                                                                                                  (10)
                                                       Git + 1
                                      it =      2-1
                                                          2
where -1 (·) is the inverse normal cumulative distribution function. Aitchison and Brown (1957)
first showed the link between the Gini and the parameters of the log-normal distribution, the
properties of which are reviewed by Crow and Shimizu (1987).
   Then
                                                       ln(110) - µit        ln(11) - µit
           middle class share of populationit =                        -                   .      (11)
                                                            it                  it


                                                  16
It is often remarked that there is a trade-off between higher income and equality. We will show that
if a government focuses on the middle class, it need not face such a trade-off.
    Figure 4 shows country averages of the middle class share within four periods: 1981-90, 91-
00, 00-10, 11-15. Two samples are shown, the sustained poverty reduction sample, which uses
only POVCALNET Gini coefficients, and the rest of the world, which uses Gini coefficients from
Milanovic (2013), selecting in each country the series with the most observations over time. The first
pattern emerging from the figure is that, though income and middle class share of the population
are highly correlated at low levels of income, there is a large dispersion of middle class shares within
a large band of income, between 8 and 10 log points, or approximately $3,000 to $22,000 dollars.
This demonstrates that there are many levels of equality for a given level of income.
    The second striking observation is the emergence over time, among rich countries, of a region
of the distribution where the middle class is declining in income -- a shrinking middle class. In
the most recent period, several countries with income of more than 22 thousand dollars, Ireland,
the Netherlands, Norway, Switzerland, and Luxembourg, had a middle class that was less than 50
percent of the population. In Luxembourg, the middle class is just 13 percent of the population.
Clearly the upper bound $110 is much less than twice the median income in Luxembourg, at
least according to our estimate of the country's income distribution in the most recent decade.
A difference between our approach and that of Kharas (2010) is that he uses average household
consumption in place of Y it , whereas we have used GDP per capita. The latter includes expenditure
in the investment sector (i.e. construction, machinery and equipment), thus increasing average
income and making our estimates of the middle class larger relative to his. As a result, we have not
made an assumption about whether increasing returns are differentially available in the investment
or consumption sector. The use of national accounts in place of average income is most controversial
when studying the lower tail of the income distribution (Pinkovskiy and Sala-i Martin, 2014).


5    Results

We begin by summarizing our data visually. Figure 5 shows the sample data for the market size
variables, plotted against income per capita observed in the first year of the five-year period. Popu-
lation, and relative population of the integrated market are widely distributed across income, with
no clear relationship between them. Outliers in population, China and India, are visible, as well as
outliers in terms of the relative population of the integrated market, such as Djbouti, which had
an integrated market in 2011-15 of 2,930 times more people, relative to its own population. The
Gambia is another outlier, with a relative market of 1,313 more people, and Botswana, with 1,218


                                                  17
more people.8 While population and relative population of the integrated market appear evenly
distributed across income levels, relative income of the international market is rapidly declining at
lower levels of income before flattening after 9 log points, or about $8,000 dollars in income. Turn-
ing to the middle class, there is substantial dispersion especially after 7 log points, or about $1,000
income. This emphasizes that though average income increases the share of the population in the
middle class, the Gini coefficient still creates substantial dispersion. Finally, turning to the income
boosts, it appears that agricultural productivity and export shocks are uniformly distributed across
income.
      Before estimating the parameters of the profit function implied by our conceptual framework, we
summarize how the variables in our dataset differ between periods of sustained poverty reduction
and periods without sustained poverty reduction. Table 3 presents descriptive statistics for all
variables, as well as T-tests for whether each of our sample variables is different between samples.
Beginning with population, it is clear that periods of sustained poverty reduction occur in larger
countries, with 50 million more people on average (p = 0.016). The middle class is also larger during
periods of sustained poverty reduction (p = 0.071). These results provide some initial support for
our hypothesis that domestic market size matters. Interestingly, however, we do not find significant
differences in international market size, either as measured by relative income per capita (p =
0.907), or as measured by relative population (p = 0.122). This is surprising in the context of our
framework, where international market size should affect poverty reduction.
      Turning to the income boosts, we find that earlier export growth is significantly higher in
instances of sustained poverty reduction, 8 percent on an annualized basis over the last 5 years,
compared to 4 percent in periods without (p = 0.0004). It appears that, in these simple T-tests, the
effects of international markets on poverty are loaded on exports, rather than international market
size. In our structural estimation of the profit function, we will study their effects when they are both
included in the same model. Turning to agriculture, there is no significant difference in agricultural
productivity growth, which is 2 percent annually in both samples (p = 0.266). Finally, looking
at the fixed costs, tropical climate has a significant negative effect on poverty reduction, with the
average land share of tropical climate being 20 percentage points less in periods of sustained poverty
reduction (p = 0.00001). Desert climate appears also to be a significant predictor (p = 0.002), as
well as distance to ice free coast (p = 0.036), but not ruggedness (p = 0.301). For legal institutions,
British legal institutions are significantly more frequent (p = 0.001) in periods of sustained poverty
reduction, while French institutions are significantly less frequent (p = 0.001)relative to periods
  8
    Botsawna, Djbouti, the Gambia are all members of the WTO. The Gambia joined GATT in 1965, and Botswana
joined in 1987. Djibouti joined GATT in December 1994, just before joining the WTO.


                                                   18
without sustained poverty reduction. These results are consistent with past research that has shown
geographic and institutional factors to be strong predictors of outcomes related to development.
    We now turn to our estimates of the threshold model, which are reported in Table 4. Each
                                                                                                ^,
column of the table reports coefficient estimates of each parameter, as well as our estimate of S
the threshold market size required for the increasing returns sector to break even. In columns
1 through 4, the market size and variable profit components of the model are the same, but we
allow for alternative specifications of fixed costs in order to explore how fixed geographical and
institutional factors affect the model.
       The constant parameter for fixed costs in column 1 is positive and statistically significant:
1 = 0.56 (s.e. = 0.04). This is consistent with our premise of increasing returns to scale. In
columns 2 through 4, we add additional geographic and institutional controls to the fixed cost term.
In column 2, the share of land in a tropical climate is positive and significant and the coefficient
on the share of land in a desert climate is negative and significant, implying that tropical climate
raises fixed costs and desert climate lowers them. This is expected, given what is known about the
growth experience of tropical countries. In column 3, we add distance to coast and ruggedness.
Ruggedness is significant and positive, raising fixed costs, and distance to coast is negative, though
not significant. In column 4, we add British legal origins, which have a large negative effect on
fixed costs, reducing them by the equivalent of 580 million people, relative to the omitted category,
socialist legal origins. Fixed costs in markets with French legal origins are not significantly different
from markets with socialist legal origins. Our estimate for threshold market size also increases 44
percent between columns 1 and column 4, suggesting that geographic and institutional factors pose
significant barriers to development.
       We evaluate the fit of these specifications using the area under the receiver operating charac-
teristic curve (AUC).9 In column 1, AUC = 0.667, indicating the model has some predictive power
relative to a random guess. Adding climate controls increases the statistic to 0.708. When adding
ruggedness and distance to coast, it actually falls to 0.706, suggesting that the model is actually
losing predictive power. Adding legal origins raises the AUC to 0.735. Not perfect, but better than
random guessing. It is notable, that though geographic and institutional controls improve the fit,
the improvement is small relative to the baseline model. For comparison, Kleinberg, Lakkaraju,
Leskovec, Ludwig and Mullainathan (2017) develop a machine learning tool that can improve on
   9
     The ROC curve reports the combination of false positives and true positives implied by the empirical model.
The area under the curve can be interpreted as the percent of time the empirical model would classify an instance
of sustained poverty reduction and an instance without sustained poverty reduction correctly, compared to a random
guess, which would get it right 50 percent of the time.




                                                       19
human judge's decisions to offer or deny bail in New York City; it has an AUC of 0.707. In our
case, variables in the model have been selected by economic theory, rather than a machine.
   We focus our discussion on column 4, our preferred specification which includes all of the geo-
graphic and institutional controls. In contrast with the univariate T-tests, this specification shows
statistically significant effects of both domestic and international market size on sustained poverty
reduction. The coefficient on the size of the middle class as a share of the population is 1 = 0.54
(s.e. = 0.07), implying that moving from zero to one hundred percent of the population in the
middle class is equivalent of adding 540 million people to the population. Recall that variables are
scaled, so that the results can be interpreted in terms of people with average income below that of
those belonging to the middle class.
   The effects of the international market size are also substantial, both when measured by relative
population (in 1,000s of people), where 2 = 0.16 (s.e. = 0.02), and when measured by relative
income per capita, 3 = 0.02 (s.e. = 0.0001) . To understand the magnitude of these effects,
consider the situation of Afghanistan, with a population of approximately 35 million. Suppose
Afghanistan contemplates whether to integrate with one of its neighbors, either Pakistan, with
population of 200 million, or Iran, with population of 80 million. In terms of population, Iran is
2.3 times larger, and Pakistan is 5.7 times larger than Afghanistan. According to the coefficient
estimate, opening up to an integrated market of the same population adds the equivalent of 160,000
people to average market size. The multiple of this would be greater if the country integrated with
Pakistan. Joining a market with the same relative income per capita, however, has much larger
effects, equivalent to 20 million people on average in our sample. Pakistan, which has a 3 times
greater income per capita than Afghanistan would be worth an additional 60 million additional
people. However, Iran has income per capita 10 times larger than Afghanistan, and so integration
would yield the equivalent of 200 million more people. In this example, Iran is a much more valuable
market when one one accounts for population and income. Though there gains to having a large
market in terms of population, the main incremental value comes from trading partners' purchasing
power. This suggests that so called "South-South" integration between countries of similar incomes
will be less valuable than "North-South" integration between countries of different incomes.
   Turning to the components of variable profit, the estimate of the constant, 1 = 1.18(s.e. = 0.35),
is positive and statistically significant at standard levels. However, the coefficients on exports and
agricultural labor productivity are not statistically significant. Conditional on market size, therefore,
we do not have statistical power to quantify the specific effect of either income shock on poverty
reduction. The fact that the coefficient on exports, 2 = 6.26 (s.e. = 11.45), is positive and



                                                   20
large is however reassuring. Somewhat surprisingly, the effect of agricultural productivity growth,
3 = -0.66 (s.e. = 22.46), is negative.
    Having estimated the coefficients of the profit function, and confirmed both the presence of
economies of scale and the statistical significance of the market size variables, we now examine what
these coefficients imply for our outcome, sustained poverty reduction. In column 4, our preferred
                                                                                   ^ = 328 million
specification, the threshold market size to achieve sustained poverty reduction is S
people, where those people have purchasing power less than the global middle class. One way to
view this number is in terms of expenditure. If those people had expenditure of $2 per day, their
expenditure would be $2 × 365 × 328 million = $239.4 billion, slightly less than the GDP (in 2011
PPP terms) of Morocco. If those people had expenditure of $5 per day, their expenditure would
be $5 × 365 × 328 million = $598.6 billion, less than the GDP of the Philippines. These estimates
imply that a large market indeed is required for sustained poverty reduction. This market size
can be achieved in a small country however through international trade agreements, or through a
more equitable income distribution. The coefficients in parameter vector  convert domestic and
international market size variables into units of population, which allows one to determine what it
will take for a given country to meet the threshold. It is clear therefore that income distribution and
international integration will be relatively more important for small countries. Very large countries,
for instance India and China, have been able to meet this threshold on the basis of population alone.
    Finally, in columns 5 and 6, we rerun the estimation on two select subsamples of the data, in order
to test whether our results are affected by two measurement issues discussed earlier: the additional
volatility introduced from the use of income surveys to measure poverty, and the implications of using
higher frequency household surveys. Specification 5 includes only consumption surveys, reducing
the sample to 216 observations. Specification 6 includes only surveys in which 0, 1 or 2 years of
poverty headcounts are observed, reducing the sample to 234 observations. Though the middle class
is no longer significant in column 6, it remains so in specification 5. Coefficients on international
market size variables remain significant in all specifications. We cannot reject, however, that any
of these coefficients are different from specification 4, with the exception of the coefficient on the
relative income of the international market in Specification 5, which however remains positive (albeit
smaller in magnitude than before) and highly significant.


6    Counterfactual Closed Economy

To evaluate the effect effect of international integration on sustained poverty reduction, we simulate
a counterfactual closed economy, without international integration in which 2 = 3 = 0. This could


                                                  21
be understood as the development policy doomsday scenario, in which comparative advantage from
trade becomes irrelevant for sustained poverty reduction. Annex B reports estimates of open and
closed market size for each country period in our dataset, as well as the percentage increase in
market size needed for countries to reach the threshold, if necessary.
    We summarize these results in two figures. Figure 6 shows average estimated market size,
calculated as Mit ^ , averaged over deciles of GDP per capita, using only data from 2011-15 and
weighting observations by population, to provide a recent and welfare-relevant view. The blue set
of columns correspond to the open economy (at current levels of integration), in which market size
is calculated using the  reported in column 4 of Table 5. The red columns show a market size
estimate in which 2 = 3 = 0, so market size is determined only by population and the size of the
middle class. Notably, in this closed economy scenario, it is not until the sixth decile of GDP per
capita, which corresponds to $2,417, that the market becomes large enough to meet the estimated
          ^ = 328. International integration appears to help however. In all except the first and
threshold S
fifth deciles, the open economy market size is on average greater than the threshold. This suggests
that, if the value of international markets remains as it has in the past, most countries should be
able to achieve sustained poverty reduction. The average market size of the open economy however
does not go far above the threshold.
    Figure 7 is a similar bar chart, where countries are grouped by region, rather than income. Here,
South Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa are both below the threshold in the closed economy scenario.
The result on South Asia excludes India, which has not reported a national poverty headcount
since 2011. Looking at past data in Annex B, India, given its large population, has long had a
large enough market, and also achieved sustained poverty reduction in each period it was observed.
Other populous countries in South Asia however either fail to reach, or barely reach, the threshold
because their middle classes are not large enough. For instance Bangladesh, which in 2011 had 129
million people not in the middle class, would still need to grow its market by 62% in the closed
economy scenario to reach the threshold, given its relatively small middle class (13 percent of the
population). Pakistan, which in 2011 had 102 million people not in the middle class, but a larger
middle class (44 percent of the population) just barely meets the threshold, but did not do so in
previous periods.


7    Conclusions

Our findings are relevant for governments considering the question of which development objectives
they should prioritize. The traditional approach (among economists) has been to recommend that,


                                                 22
even if one is concerned with poverty reduction, one should focus primarily on economic growth, be-
cause it is "the most direct route" to development (Hausmann, Rodrik and Velasco, 2008). Though
growth is indeed good for the poor (Dollar and Kraay, 2002; Dollar, Kleineberg and Kraay, 2013),
which we confirm here, we have shown that it is also not sufficient for sustained poverty reduction.
The seventeen Sustainable Development Goals adopted by United Nations member states in 2015
are an effort to incorporate broader development objectives than growth alone into decision making.
The goals include 169 specific targets for line ministries and donors working on specific thematic
issues, such as poverty, water, education, climate and gender.10 A drawback is that they do not
aggregate well into a few headline targets that could define a national development strategy--it is
difficult for citizens, politicians and business people to keep the multitude in mind all at once.
      The demand-side framework described here suggests a middle way, which is specifically for
governments to focus on three high-level objectives in their development strategy. The first goal is
to eliminate povertry. Progress towards this goal is measured by

      · Sustained poverty reduction: a continuous reduction in the poverty headcount.

Our empirical results suggest that two intermediate goals support progress towards the first:

      · Income distribution: the size of the middle class, defined using an global standard;

      · International integration: legal affirmation of rights to the mobility of goods, services, labor,
        capital and ideas between countries.

There is a straightforward mapping of the SDGs to these high-level objectives. Progress towards
Goal (1), i.e., no poverty, can be measured by sustained poverty reduction. Goals ensuring a
sufficiently equitable income distribution are those linked to human capital: (2) zero hunger, (3)
good health and well-being, (4) quality education and (6) clean water; as well as: (5) gender equality,
(10) reducing inequality, and (16) peace, justice and strong institutions; and also the goals most
directly linked to economic performance: (8) decent work and economic growth and (9) industry,
innovation and infrastructure. Notably however, international integration corresponds to only one
Goal:(17) partnership for the goals, a target for which is to conclude the WTO Doha round of trade
negotiations. Given the empirical importance of international integration we have demonstrated
for sustained poverty reduction, it is perhaps surprising that the SDG agenda does not give more
prominence to international integration as an objective.11
 10
      https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/content/documents/11803Official-List-of-Proposed-SDG-Indicators.
pdf
 11
      The remaining six SDGs concern primarily the climate. These goals are (7) affordable and clean energy, (11)


                                                        23
    In the demand-side framework, with a fixed population, there are two strategies for develop-
ment: integrate internationally or develop the middle class. Worryingly, for countries with small
populations, these strategies will require bigger results to reach the threshold market size. What
then is way forward? A few options are clear. First, deeper economic integration via more provisions
especially with richer countries, for instance regarding the mobility of labor (including the unskilled
and professional tradespeople). Second, redistribution of income which targets the poor and the
middle class. While direct aid to the poor is a valuable tool to help them escape poverty, resources
must also be made available to broaden the middle class, who sustain the value of the market. The
presence of imperfect competition underlying our model suggests that redistribution of firm profits
in particular is important. Efforts to assist households in accumulating equity shares may therefore
be especially useful policies for redistribution, as opposed to the redistribution of wage income.
    We evaluated the fit of our model using the AUC, a statistic for predictive performance used
by the machine learning community. Here, our empirical model was selected not by a machine,
but by an economic model of development as old as at least the 1950s, further motivated using
specific advancements in economic theory from the 1980s regarding increasing returns to scale and
imperfect competition. If presented with one five-year period of sustained poverty reduction and
one without sustained poverty reduction, our preferred specification is able to classify the period
correctly 73.5 percent of the time, compared to a random guess, which would get it right 50 percent
of the time. We venture that this is not too bad for the domain of economic development policy.




sustainable cities and communities, (12) responsible consumption and production, (13) climate action, (14) life below
water, (15) life on land. Our estimates of the effect of climate on fixed costs are statistically significant and comparable
in size to the effect of the middle class on market size. However, given the well known challenge of disentangling
whether these effects capture the impact of weak institutions or productivity disadvantage, we do not interpret these
coefficients as structural parameters. This paper does not address the question of whether climate action will interact
with the three development objectives proposed above.


                                                            24
References
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A Robinson, "The colonial origins of com-
 parative development: An empirical investigation," American Economic Review, 2001, 91 (5),
 1369­1401.

Aitchison, John and James AC Brown, "The lognormal distribution with special reference to
 its uses in economics," 1957.

Alfaro-Urena, Alonso, Isabela Manelici, and Jose P Vasquez, "The Effects of Joining
 Multinational Supply Chains: New Evidence from Firm-to-Firm Linkages," Technical Report
 2020.

Atkin, David, Amit K Khandelwal, and Adam Osman, "Exporting and firm performance:
 Evidence from a randomized experiment," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2017, 132 (2),
 551­615.

Autor, David H, David Dorn, and Gordon H Hanson, "The China shock: Learning from
 labor-market adjustment to large changes in trade," Annual Review of Economics, 2016, 8, 205­
 240.

Baldwin, Richard, "Big-think regionalism: a critical survey," National Bureau of Economic Re-
 search Working Paper No. 14056 2008.

Banerjee, Abhijit, Dean Karlan, and Jonathan Zinman, "Six randomized evaluations of
 microcredit: Introduction and further steps," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
 2015, 7 (1), 1­21.

Banerjee, Abhijit V and Esther Duflo, "Growth theory through the lens of development
 economics," Handbook of Economic Growth, 2005, 1, 473­552.

  and , "What is middle class about the middle classes around the world?," Journal of Economic
  Perspectives, 2008, 22 (2), 3­28.

Barro, Robert J, "Inequality and Growth in a Panel of Countries," Journal of Economic Growth,
 2000, 5 (1), 5­32.

  , "Inequality and growth revisited," Working Paper Series on Regional Economic Integration No.
  11, Asian Development Bank 2008.

Baulch, Bob and John Hoddinott, "Economic mobility and poverty dynamics in developing
 countries," The Journal of Development Studies, 2000, 36 (6), 1­24.

Birdsall, Nancy, Carol Graham, and Stefano Pettinato, "Stuck In The Tunnel: Is Global-
  ization Muddling The Middle Class?," 2000.

Bresnahan, Timothy F and Peter C Reiss, "Entry and competition in concentrated markets,"
 Journal of Political Economy, 1991, 99 (5), 977­1009.

Carter, Michael R and Christopher B Barrett, "The economics of poverty traps and persistent
 poverty: An asset-based approach," The Journal of Development Studies, 2006, 42 (2), 178­199.

                                              25
Chaudhuri, Shubham, Pinelopi K Goldberg, and Panle Jia, "Estimating the effects of global
 patent protection in pharmaceuticals: a case study of quinolones in India," American Economic
 Review, 2006, 96 (5), 1477­1514.

Crow, Edwin L and Kunio Shimizu, Lognormal distributions, Marcel Dekker, 1987.

Deaton, Angus, "Measuring poverty in a growing world (or measuring growth in a poor world),"
 Review of Economics and Statistics, 2005, 87 (1), 1­19.

Desai, Raj M and Homi Kharas, "Is a growing middle class good for the poor? Social policy in
 a time of globalization," Global Economy and Development Working Paper No. 105, Brookings
 Institution 2017.

Dollar, David and Aart Kraay, "Growth is Good for the Poor," Journal of Economic Growth,
 2002, 7 (3), 195­225.

  , Tatjana Kleineberg, and Aart Kraay, "Growth still is good for the poor," World Bank
  Policy Research Working Paper No. 6568 2013.

Easterly, William, "The middle class consensus and economic development," Journal of Economic
 Growth, 2001, 6 (4), 317­335.

  , "In Search of Reforms for Growth: New Stylized Facts on Policy and Growth Outcomes,"
  National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 26318 2019.

Ferraz, Claudio, Frederico Finan, and Dimitri Szerman, "Procuring firm growth: the effects
  of government purchases on firm dynamics," National Bureau of Economic Research Working
  Paper No. 21219 2015.

Ferreira, Francisco HG, Phillippe G Leite, and Martin Ravallion, "Poverty reduction
  without economic growth?: Explaining Brazil's poverty dynamics, 1985­2004," Journal of Devel-
  opment Economics, 2010, 93 (1), 20­36.

Fuglie, Keith Owen, Sun Ling Wang, V Eldon Ball et al., Productivity growth in agriculture:
  an international perspective, CABI, 2012.

Goldberg, Pinelopi K and Nina Pavcnik, "Trade, inequality, and poverty: What do we know?
 Evidence from recent trade liberalization episodes in developing countries," Brookings Trade
 Forum, 2004, pp. 223­269.

Harrison, Ann, ed., Globalization and poverty 2007.

Hausmann, Ricardo, Dani Rodrik, and Andr´       es Velasco, "Growth diagnostics," The Wash-
 ington consensus reconsidered: Towards a new global governance, 2008, pp. 324­355.

  , Lant Pritchett, and Dani Rodrik, "Growth accelerations," Journal of Economic Growth,
  2005, 10 (4), 303­329.

Helpman, Elhanan and Paul R Krugman, Market structure and foreign trade: Increasing
 returns, imperfect competition, and the international economy, MIT press, 1985.


                                              26
Hofmann, Claudia, Alberto Osnago, and Michele Ruta, Horizontal depth: a new database
 on the content of preferential trade agreements, The World Bank, 2017.

Horn, Henrik, Petros C Mavroidis, and Andr´     e Sapir, "Beyond the WTO? An anatomy of
 EU and US preferential trade agreements," The World Economy, 2010, 33 (11), 1565­1588.

Kharas, Homi, "The emerging middle class in developing countries," OECD, 2010.

  , "The unprecedented expansion of the global middle class: An update," 2017.

Kleinberg, Jon, Himabindu Lakkaraju, Jure Leskovec, Jens Ludwig, and Sendhil Mul-
 lainathan, "Human decisions and machine predictions," The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 2017, 133 (1), 237­293.

Kraay, Aart and David McKenzie, "Do poverty traps exist? Assessing the evidence," Journal
 of Economic Perspectives, 2014, 28 (3), 127­48.

Lund, Susan, James Manyika, Jonathan Woetzel, Jacques Bughin, Mekala Krishnan,
 Jeongmin Seong, and Mac Muir, "Globalization in Transition: The Future of Trade and
 Value Chains," Technical Report, McKinsey Global Institute 2019.

McKenzie, David and Christopher Woodruff, "What are we learning from business train-
 ing and entrepreneurship evaluations around the developing world?," The World Bank Research
 Observer, 2014, 29 (1), 48­82.

Milanovic, Branko, "All the Ginis dataset," The World Bank, 2013.

Murphy, Kevin M, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, "Income distribution, market size,
 and industrialization," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1989, 104 (3), 537­564.

  , , and Robert W Vishny, "Industrialization and the big push," Journal of Political Econ-
  omy, 1989, 97 (5), 1003­1026.

Nunn, Nathan and Diego Puga, "Ruggedness: The blessing of bad geography in Africa," Review
 of Economics and Statistics, 2012, 94 (1), 20­36.

Ostry, Mr Jonathan David, Mr Andrew Berg, and Mr Charalambos G Tsangarides,
 "Redistribution, inequality, and growth," Staff Discussion Note No. 2, International Monetary
 Fund 2014.

Pinkovskiy, Maxim and Xavier Sala i Martin, "Parametric estimations of the world distribu-
  tion of income," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 15433 2009.

   and    , "Africa is on time," Journal of Economic Growth, 2014, 19 (3), 311­338.

Porta, Rafael La, Florencio Lopez de Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny,
 "The quality of government," The Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 1999, 15 (1),
 222­279.

Rappaport, Jordan and Jeffrey D Sachs, "The United States as a coastal nation," Journal of
 Economic Growth, 2003, 8 (1), 5­46.


                                               27
Ravallion, Martin, "The debate on globalization, poverty and inequality: why measurement
 matters," International Affairs, 2003, 79 (4), 739­753.

  , "The developing world's bulging (but vulnerable)" middle class"," World Bank Policy Research
  Working Paper 4816 2009.

  , "Why Don't We See Poverty Convergence?," American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (1), 504­
  523.

Rodrik, Dani, "What do trade agreements really do?," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2018,
 32 (2), 73­90.

Sachs, Jeffrey D, "Tropical underdevelopment," National Bureau of Economic Research Working
  Paper No. 8119 2001.

   and Andrew Warner, "Economic reform and the process of global integration," Brookings
  Papers on Economic Activity, 1995, 1995 (1), 1, 1095, 108­118.

Shepherd, Andrew and Vidya Diwakar, "Pathways to sustained poverty reduction," Technical
  Report, Overseas Development Institution 7 2019.

Simanis, Erik, "Reality check at the bottom of the pyramid," Harvard Business Review, 2012.

Spence, Michael et al., "The growth report: Strategies for sustained growth and inclusive devel-
  opment," Commission on Growth and Development Final Report, Washington, DC, 2008.

Stiglitz, Joseph E, "Some lessons from the East Asian miracle," The World Bank Research
  Observer, 1996, 11 (2), 151­177.

Topalova, Petia, "Factor immobility and regional impacts of trade liberalization: Evidence on
  poverty from India," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2010, 2 (4), 1­41.

Wacziarg, Romain and Karen Horn Welch, "Trade liberalization and growth: New evidence,"
 The World Bank Economic Review, 2008, 22 (2), 187­231.

Werker, Eric, "Learning from Double-Digit Growth Experiences," International Growth Center
 Rapid Response Note 2012.

Winters, L Alan, Neil McCulloch, and Andrew McKay, "Trade liberalization and poverty:
 the evidence so far," Journal of Economic Literature, 2004, 42 (1), 72­115.

Woodruff, Christopher, "Addressing constraints to small and growing businesses," Technical
 Report, International Growth Centre 2018.




                                              28
Table 1: Periods of sustained poverty reduction
and growth
                        Sustained real per capita
                               GDP growth
                      No        Yes     Total
Sustained     No      76        82      158
extreme               48%       52%     100%
poverty       Yes     45        144     189
reduction             24%       76%     100%
              Total 121         226     347
                      35%       65%     100%
Notes: Percentages report shares of row totals.
An observation is a country five-year period,
ranging from 1981-2015.
Sources: POVCALNET. Penn World Tables 9.1.
Table 2: Core provisions of multilateral trade agreements
                                                                                    Agreement on
                  General Agreement on Tariffs World Trade Organization             Government
Policy Area       and Trade (GATT)                (WTO)                             Procurement (GPA)        Preferrential Trade Agreements (PTAs)
A) Establishing basic economic integration rights
   goods          · Industrial tariffs                                                                       · Industrial tariffs (WTO+)
                  · Agricultural tariffs                                                                     · Agricultural tariffs (WTO+)
                                                                                                             · Export taxes (WTO+)
   services                                      · General Agreement on Trade in                             · GATS (WTO+)
                                                 Services (GATS)
   capital                                       · Agreement on Trade-Related                                · TRIMS (WTO+)
                                                 Investment Measures (TRIMS)                                 · Local content (WTO-X)
                                                                                                             · Repatriation of capital (WTO-X)
   labor                                                                                                     · Visa and asylum (WTO-X)
   ideas                                         · Agreement on Trade-Related                                · TRIPS (WTO+)
                                                 Aspects of Intellectual Property                            · Intellectual property rights (WTO-X)
                                                 Rights (TRIPS)


B) Protecting these rights (by limiting government discretion to undo them)
                  · Customs administration        · Agreement on the Application · Public procurement        · Customs administration (WTO+)
                  · Anti-dumping (GATT Article of Sanitary and Phytosanitary                                 · Anti-dumping (WTO+)
                  VI)                             (SPS) Measures                                             · Countervailing measures (WTO+)
                  · Countervailing measures       · Technical Barriers to Trade                              · SPS (WTO+)
                  (GATT Article VI)               (TBT) Agreement                                            · TBT (WTO+)
                                                  · Agreement on Subsidies and                               · Subsidies (WTO+)
                                                  Counterveiling Measures (ASCM)                             · State trading enterprises (WTO+)
                                                  · State trading enterprises (GATT                          · Public procurement (WTO+)
                                                  Article XVII)                                              · Competition policy (WTO-X)


Provisions       5                               7                                1                          19
                                                                                  TOTAL                      32
Notes: For preferrential trade agreements, WTO+ indicates provisions that are within the scope of the WTO's jurisdiction, whereas provisions indicated
by WTO-X are not.
Sources: WTO and Hofmann, Osnago, and Ruta (2017). In Hofmann et. al. provisions related to local content are labeled "investment," and provisions
related to repatriation of capital are called "movement of capital".
Table 3: Sample market descriptive statistics
                                                                                                            T-Tests for differences in means,
                                                                                                         by sustained poverty reduction status
                                                                                                    Mean,            Mean,
                                                                                                   Sustained       Sustained
                                                                Standard                            Poverty          Poverty
Variables                                              Mean     Deviation      Min      Max      Reduction = 0 Reduction = 1 Difference P-value
Domestic market
    Population (billions of people)                     0.07       0.20        0.00     1.34          0.04             0.09            0.05       [0.016]
    Middle class (% of total population)                0.37       0.29        0.00     0.97          0.34             0.40            0.06       [0.071]
Relative size of integrated international market
    Population (1,000s of people)                       0.23       0.42        0.00     2.93          0.19             0.26            0.07       [0.122]
    Income per capita                                   8.11       8.90        0.00    50.58          8.05             8.16            0.11       [0.907]
Past income boosts
    Exports (% annual growth, last 5 years)             0.06       0.09       -0.36     0.50          0.04             0.08            0.04      [0.0004]
    Agricultural labor productivity                     0.02       0.03       -0.11     0.15          0.02             0.02           0.00        [0.266]
    (% annual growth, last 5 years)
Geographic variables
    Tropical climate (% of land area)                   0.48       0.43        0.00     1.00          0.59             0.39           -0.20     [0.00001]
    Desert climate (% of land area)                     0.03       0.10        0.00     0.75          0.01             0.05            0.03       [0.002]
    Distance to ice-free coast (1,000s of km)           0.43       0.44        0.00     2.21          0.37             0.47            0.10       [0.036]
    Ruggedness                                          1.41       1.25        0.11     6.74          1.48             1.34           -0.14       [0.301]
Legal origins
    British legal origins                               0.25       0.44        0.00     1.00          0.17             0.32            0.15       [0.001]
    French legal origins                                0.57       0.50        0.00     1.00          0.66             0.49           -0.18       [0.001]
    Socialist legal origins                             0.18       0.38        0.00     1.00          0.16             0.19            0.03       [0.532]
Notes: Sustained poverty reduction is a continuous reduction in the share of the population in extreme poverty (i.e., earning less than $1.90/day PPP in
2011 US dollars) over a 5 year period, assuming a linear trend between years of survey data. The sample includes 347 observations of 93 countries
between 1981-2015, and excludes advanced economies (i.e., those with less than 3% of the population in extreme poverty for all periods in the sample).
Middle class is the share of the population earning $11-110/day PPP 2011, calculated as a funtion of the Gini coefficient and real GDP per capita,
assuming a log-normal income distribution. Population and income of integrated international market is calculated summing all the countries in the
world, weighted by the depth of trade agreements signed between them.
Sources: POVCALNET, Penn World Tables, WTO, Hofmann, Osnago, and Ruta (2017), WDI, USDA ERS, Nunn and Puga (2012), La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes,
Shleifer and Vishny (1999).
Table 4: Threshold profit function with alternative specifications
                                                                                                                  (1)             (2)            (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)
DEPENDENT VARIABLE                                                                                             Sustained       Sustained      Sustained        Sustained        Sustained        Sustained
                                                                                                                Poverty         Poverty        Poverty          Poverty          Poverty          Poverty
                                                                                                               Reduction       Reduction      Reduction        Reduction        Reduction        Reduction


Market size (S)       Middle class (% of total population)                                                         0.60            0.59            0.56            0.54             0.67            1.49
                                                                                                                  (0.08)          (0.11)          (0.12)          (0.07)           (0.41)          (2.41)
                      Relative population of integrated international market (1,000s of people)                    0.17            0.18            0.20            0.16             0.12            0.44
                                                                                                                  (0.01)          (0.02)          (0.03)          (0.02)           (0.01)          (0.22)
                      Relative income per capita of integrated international market                                0.02            0.02            0.02            0.02             0.01            0.02
                                                                                                                (0.0001)        (0.0002)        (0.0002)        (0.0001)         (0.0001)        (0.0007)
Variable profit (V)   Constant                                                                                     1.15            0.88            0.81            1.18             1.90            0.49
                                                                                                                  (0.34)          (0.28)          (0.28)          (0.35)           (4.09)           (0.3)
                      Exports (% annual growth, last 5 years)                                                      6.13            5.61            5.72            6.26             9.76            4.95
                                                                                                                 (10.96)         (10.64)         (12.43)         (11.45)          (84.34)         (25.25)
                      Agricultural labor productivity (% annual growth, last 5 years)                              -1.69          -0.14            -0.38          -0.66             9.88            -1.11
                                                                                                                 (19.19)         (14.52)          (15.7)         (22.46)         (126.17)         (18.15)
Fixed cost (F)        Constant                                                                                     0.56            0.28            0.05            0.25             0.24            0.34
                                                                                                                  (0.04)          (0.06)          (0.11)          (0.15)           (0.24)          (0.28)
                      Tropical climate (% of land area)                                                                            0.54            0.65            0.68             0.73            0.79
                                                                                                                                  (0.03)          (0.05)          (0.06)           (0.11)          (0.09)
                      Desert climate (% of land area)                                                                             -1.67            -1.30          -1.35            -0.36            0.36
                                                                                                                                  (0.56)          (0.65)          (0.73)           (0.97)          (0.99)
                      Distance to ice-free coast (1,000s of km)                                                                                    -0.02           0.01            -0.10            -0.35
                                                                                                                                                  (0.04)          (0.04)           (0.08)           (0.1)
                      Ruggedness                                                                                                                   0.09            0.10             0.20            0.09
                                                                                                                                                   (.01)        (0.0074)         (0.0067)        (0.0067)
                      British legal origins                                                                                                                       -0.58            -0.35            -0.68
                                                                                                                                                                   (.07)           (0.14)          (0.14)
                      French legal origins                                                                                                                        -0.02            -0.15            -0.39
                                                                                                                                                                   (.05)           (0.14)          (0.15)
Sample                                                                                                             Full            Full           Full              Full      Consumption      Maximum 2
                                                                                                                                                                             survey countries years observed
                                                                                                                                                                                    only        per period


Log likelihood                                                                                                       -224.3          -214.7          -213.7       -207.6           -118.1           -134.6
Area under the reciever operating characteristic curve (AUC)                                                          0.667           0.708          0.706         0.735            0.770            0.742
Threshold market size (billions of people outside middle class)                                                       0.227           0.391          0.371         0.328            0.222            0.371
Number of observations                                                                                                 347             347            347           347              216              234
Notes: Asymptotic standard errors in parenthesis. Market size also includes population of people not in the middle class, with a coefficient set equal to one. This allows the threshold market size to be
interpreted in units of people who are not in the middle class. Socialist legal origins are the omitted legal orgins category in specifications 4-6.
Annex A: Closed economies, as determined by lack of signature to any legally-binding multilateral trade agreement
A) Closed Economies in 1981
               a                                    a                          a
Afghanistan                             Djibouti                         Libya                             Sao Tome and Principe
         a                                          b                                 a                                    a
Albania                                 Ecuador                          Maldives                          Saudi Arabia
                                                           a                               a                            a
Algeria                                 Equatorial Guinea                Marshall Islands                  Seychelles
           a                                                                                                                 a
Andorra                                 Eswatini (Swaziland)             Mexico                            Solomon Islands
                                                                                                a                    a
Angola                                  Ethiopia                         Micronesia, Fed. Sts.             Somalia
                 a                                                                  a                             a
Bahamas, The                            Fiji                             Monaco                            Sudan
          a                                                                                                           b
Bahrain                                 Guinea                           Mongolia                          Thailand
                                                                                                                  a
Bhutan                                  Guinea-Bissau                    Morocco                           Tonga
Bolivia                                 Iran, Islamic Rep.               Mozambique                        Tunisia
             b                               a                                                                     a
Botswana                                Iraq                             Namibia                           Tuvalu
                    a                            a,b                             a                                               a
Brunei Darussalam                       Jordan                           Nauru                             United Arab Emirates
                                                  a                                                                   a
Bulgaria                                Kiribati                         Nepal                             Vanuatu
               a                                                  a              a
Cabo Verde                              Korea, Dem. People's Rep.        Oman                              Venezuela, RB
             a
Cambodia                                Lao PDR                          Panama                            Vietnam
                                                                                                                               a
China                                   Lebanon                          Paraguay                          Yemen, (Arab) Rep.
                                                                                a
Comoros                                 Lesotho                          Qatar                             Zambia
                                  a                                                     a
Czech Republic (Czechoslovakia)         Liberia                          San Marino
B) Closed Economies in 2001
               a                                                  a                                                  a
Afghanistan                             Korea, Dem. People's Rep.        Nepal                             Somalia
                                                         a                     a                                          a
Algeria                                 Marshall Islands                 Palau                             Timor-Leste
                                                              a                   a                               a
Bhutan                                  Micronesia, Fed. Sts.            Samoa                             Tonga
                          a                         a                                   a                          a
Bosnia and Herzegovina                  Monaco                           San Marino                        Tuvalu
                                                      a                                                               a
Iran, Islamic Rep.                      Montenegro                       Sao Tome and Principe             Vanuatu
         a                                      a
Kiribati                                Nauru                            Serbia
C) Closed Economies in 2015
               a                                         a
Afghanistan                             Marshall Islands                 Sao Tome and Principe
                                                    a                               a
Iran, Islamic Rep.                      Monaco                           Somalia
                            a                  a                                         a
Korea, Dem. People's Rep.               Palau                            Timor-Leste
Notes: List includes all sovereign states that are members of the United Nations in 2019, if they existed at the time. For instance,
in 1981, the USSR had not signed the GATT, but does not exist today so it is not on the list. Superscript (a) indicates that country is
not included in analysis of sustained poverty reduction, either because it had kept the extreme poverty headcount at less than 3%
of the population for the entire sample, or sufficient poverty data were not available. Superscript (b) indicates that economy was
classified as open in 1981 by Sachs and Warner (1995) and Waczirag and Welch (2008). Signatures are included only if in-force
and have been notified to GATT or WTO.
    5-year periods of sustained extreme poverty reduction (%)
                East Asia and the Pacific                                     Europe and Central Asia                                  Latin America and the Caribbean



                                                          83.3
                          75.0                    75.0
                                                                                                                                     66.7
                                                                                                                 61.5    61.5
                                           57.1                                                                                                                                          57.1
                 50.0                                                                                     50.0
                                    42.9                                                           42.9                                                                           41.2
                                                                                                                                              37.5
                                                                                        33.3                                                            31.3


                                                                                                                                                                    16.7
                                                                                                                                                                           11.8



    1981-8586-90 91-95 96-00 01-05 06-10 11-15                    1981-8586-90 91-95 96-00 01-05 06-10 11-15                     1981-8586-90 91-95 96-00 01-05 06-10 11-15
   N = 36, Distinct countries = 8                                N = 50, Distinct countries = 15                                 N = 93, Distinct countries = 19



             Middle East and North Africa                                                  South Asia                                             Sub-Saharan Africa

                100.0                             100.0                                                          100.0   100.0



                                    80.0   80.0                                                    80.0   80.0
                                                          75.0                 75.0                                                                                                      73.3
                                                                                                                                                                                  71.9

                          60.0                                                          60.0                                                                               60.7


                                                                                                                                                                    45.5




                                                                                                                                              20.0

                                                                                                                                                        11.1

                                                                                                                                     0.0
    1981-8586-90 91-95 96-00 01-05 06-10 11-15                    1981-8586-90 91-95 96-00 01-05 06-10 11-15                     1981-8586-90 91-95 96-00 01-05 06-10 11-15
   N = 27, Distinct countries = 6                                N = 29, Distinct countries = 6                                  N = 112, Distinct countries = 39




                                                             Figure 1: Sustained poverty reduction

Notes: The sample includes 347 5-year periods, from 93 distinct countries, excluding advanced economies (i.e., those
with less than 3% of the population in extreme poverty for all periods in the sample). Extreme poverty reduction is a
continuous reduction in the share of the population living on  $1.90/day PPP in 2011 US dollars, assuming a linear
trend in the poverty headcount ratio between years of survey data.




                                                                                                   34
                                      WTO member states
                                   Income per capita                      Population
        11000




                                                                                              7
        10500




                                                                                                                 6
                                                                                              Billions of people
   US$ (2010)
      10000




                                                                                                       5
                                       China joins
                                        in 2001
        9500




                                                                                              4
        9000




                                                                                              3
                1995           2000                 2005                 2010          2015


                       Figure 2: The China shock to the World Trade Organization

Notes: Income and population are summed over all member countries for each year.




                                                      35
                  Relative size of integrated international market
                 EAP            ECA                LAC           MENA             NA            SA           SSA


                       ...in terms of population                             ...in terms of GDP per capita
    150




                                                                 20
                                                                 15
    100




                                                                 10
    50




                                                                 5
    0




                                                                 0




          1960           1980           2000             2020         1960        1980          2000         2020




             Figure 3: The rise (and fall) in the value of the integrated international market

Notes: Regional average values are weighted by population. If an economy has not signed any trade agreements,
relative population and income are set equal to zero. EAP is East Asia and Pacific, LAC is Latin America and the
Carribean, ECA is Europe and Central Asia, MENA is Middle East and North Africa, SA is South Asia and SSA is
Sub-Saharan Africa.




                                                            36
                Global middle class (% of national population)
                               Sustained poverty reduction sample              Other countries

                             1981-90                                                       1991-00
   100




                                                                    100
   80




                                                                    80
   60




                                                                    60
   40




                                                                    40
   20




                                                                    20
   0




                                                                    0
         6              8                   10            12              6           8                   10            12


                             2001-10                                                       2011-17
   100




                                                                    100
   80




                                                                    80
   60




                                                                    60
   40




                                                                    40
   20




                                                                    20
   0




                                                                    0




         6               8                    10          12              6            8                    10          12
                National ln(GDP per capita), US$ (2010)                       National ln(GDP per capita), US$ (2010)




         Figure 4: The global middle class, or those consuming US$11-110 per day, PPP 2011

Notes: Each dot is a country average for the time period. Calculation of the middle class share combines real GDP
per capita and the Gini coefficient, assuming a log normal income distribution within each country.




                                                               37
                                                               Sustained poverty reduction sample

                                         Population (billions)                                                         Global middle class (% of total pop.)
   1.5




                                                                                          1
                                                                                          .2 .4 .6 .8
   1
   .5
   0




                                                                                          0
                         5         6          7            8            9     10                                5         6           7           8            9   10


                        Rel. pop. of integrated int'l market (1,000s of people)                                        Rel. income of integrated int'l market




                                                                                          0 10 20 30 40 50
   3
   2
   1
   0




                        5          6          7            8            9     10                                5         6           7           8            9   10


                              Exports (% annual growth, last 5 years)                                          Ag. labor productivity (% annual growth, last 5 years)
                                                                                           -.05 0 .05 .1 .15
   -.4 -.2 0 .2 .4 .6




                                                                                        -.1




                         5         6          7             8           9     10                                5         6          7             8           9   10
                                       Ln(GDP per capita), US$ (2010)                                                         Ln(GDP per capita), US$ (2010)




                                                     Figure 5: Market size and variable profit data

Notes: Includes all countries that are not advanced (i.e., those with more than 3% of the population in extreme
poverty for all periods in the sample), a total of 347 country-five-year periods, from 1981-2015. All variables are
measured at the first year of the period. For closed economies, integrated market income and population are zero.




                                                                                   38
                       Estimated market size (millions of people)
                        Internationally integrated economy                               Closed economy
   800
   600
   400




           Threshold
             = 328
   200
   0




               1         2         3         4         5         6         7         8         9        10
                                 Deciles of GDP per capita (US$ 2010)


                        Figure 6: Counterfactual market size by GDP per capita

Notes: Period of 2011-15 only. Bars show averages from sustained poverty reduction sample, when market size is
calculated using coefficients estimated in column 4 of Table 5. Averages are weighted by population in the base year.
Market size is in units of people outside the middle class, i.e., those consuming less than $11 per day, PPP in 2011
US dollars. In the closed economy scenario, the coefficients on the relative population and income of the integrated
market are set equal to zero.




                                                           39
                         Estimated market size (millions of people)
                         Internationally integrated economy                            Closed economy
   800
   600
   400




           Threshold
             = 328
   200
   0




                EAP             ECA              LAC            MENA               SA              SSA
                                                       Region


                              Figure 7: Counterfactual market size by region

Notes: EAP is East Asia and Pacific, LAC is Latin America and the Caribbean, ECA is Europe and Central Asia,
MENA is Middle East and North Africa, SA is South Asia (excluding India) and SSA is Sub-Saharan Africa. Period
of 2011-15 only. Bars show averages from sustained poverty reduction sample, when market size is calculated using
coefficients estimated in column 4 of Table 5. Averages are weighted by total population in the base year. Market
size is in units of people outside the middle class, in this sample, those consuming less than $11 per day, PPP 2011
USD. In the closed economy scenario, the coefficients on the relative population and income of the integrated market
are set equal to zero.




                                                        40
Annex A: Closed economies, as determined by lack of signature to any legally-binding multilateral trade agreement
A) Closed Economies in 1981
                      a                                          a                            a
Afghanistan                                   Djibouti                                   Libya                               Sao Tome and Principe
          a                                                      b                                           a                                    a
Albania                                       Ecuador                                    Maldives                            Saudi Arabia
                                                                             a                                       a                        a
Algeria                                       Equatorial Guinea                          Marshall Islands                    Seychelles
              a                                                                                                                                       a
Andorra                                       Eswatini (Swaziland)                       Mexico                              Solomon Islands
                                                                                                                         a                a
Angola                                        Ethiopia                                   Micronesia, Fed. Sts.               Somalia
                          a                                                                              a                           a
Bahamas, The                                  Fiji                                       Monaco                              Sudan
          a                                                                                                                               b
Bahrain                                       Guinea                                     Mongolia                            Thailand
                                                                                                                                   a
Bhutan                                        Guinea-Bissau                              Morocco                             Tonga
Bolivia                                       Iran, Islamic Rep.                         Mozambique                          Tunisia
                  b                                  a                                                                                a
Botswana                                      Iraq                                       Namibia                             Tuvalu
                              a                              a,b                                  a                                                           a
Brunei Darussalam                             Jordan                                     Nauru                               United Arab Emirates
                                                             a                                                                            a
Bulgaria                                      Kiribati                                   Nepal                               Vanuatu
                      a                                                              a            a
Cabo Verde                                    Korea, Dem. People's Rep.                  Oman                                Venezuela, RB
                  a
Cambodia                                      Lao PDR                                    Panama                              Vietnam
                                                                                                                                                          a
China                                         Lebanon                                    Paraguay                            Yemen, (Arab) Rep.
                                                                                                 a
Comoros                                       Lesotho                                    Qatar                               Zambia
                                          a                                                                      a
Czech Republic (Czechoslovakia)               Liberia                                    San Marino
B) Closed Economies in 2001
                      a                                                              a                                                    a
Afghanistan                                   Korea, Dem. People's Rep.                  Nepal                               Somalia
                                                                         a                       a                                                a
Algeria                                       Marshall Islands                           Palau                               Timor-Leste
                                                                                 a                   a                             a
Bhutan                                        Micronesia, Fed. Sts.                      Samoa                               Tonga
                                  a                              a                                               a                    a
Bosnia and Herzegovina                        Monaco                                     San Marino                          Tuvalu
                                                                     a                                                                    a
Iran, Islamic Rep.                            Montenegro                                 Sao Tome and Principe               Vanuatu
          a                                              a
Kiribati                                      Nauru                                      Serbia
C) Closed Economies in 2015
                      a                                                  a
Afghanistan                                   Marshall Islands                           Sao Tome and Principe
                                                                 a                                       a
Iran, Islamic Rep.                            Monaco                                     Somalia
                                      a                  a                                                       a
Korea, Dem. People's Rep.               Palau                            Timor-Leste
Notes: List includes all sovereign states that are members of the United Nations in 2019, if they existed at the time. For instance,
in 1981, the USSR had not signed the GATT, but does not exist today so it is not on the list. Superscript (a) indicates that country is
not included in analysis of sustained poverty reduction, either because it had kept the extreme poverty headcount at less than 3%
of the population for the entire sample, or sufficient poverty data were not available. Superscript (b) indicates that economy was
classified as open in 1981 by Sachs and Warner (1995) and Waczirag and Welch (2008). Signatures are included only if in-force
and have been notified to GATT or WTO.
Annex B: Market Size Data and Estimates. The estimate for breakeven market size is 0.328 billion people earning less than $11 per day, US$ PPP.
                                                                                                                                                           Increase in market
                                                                                                                                                             size required to
                                                                                                                                                            meet threshold, if
                                                            Market Size Data                                      Market Size Estimates                          required
                                                                   Rel. pop. of
                                                                  integrated         Rel. income.    Open economy       Closed economy         Ratio of
                    Sustained        Pop. outside   Middle class international      of integrated    market size (bn    market size (bn       open to
                    Poverty         of middle       (% of total   market (1000s     international    people outside     people outside        closed       Open     Closed
Country   Period    Reduction       class (bn)      pop.)         of people)        market           middle class)      middle class)         market size economy economy
AGO       2001-05               1           0.014           18.1%          127.97            10.57              0.306                 0.112           2.72       7%      191%
ARG       1981-85               1           0.018           38.1%           14.51             1.35              0.250                 0.225           1.11      31%       45%
ARG       1986-90               1           0.018           43.0%           15.40             1.22              0.274                 0.252           1.09      20%       30%
ARG       1991-95               0           0.016           52.9%           18.56             1.07              0.324                 0.304           1.07       1%        8%
ARG       1996-00               0           0.009           74.6%           42.62             0.98              0.439                 0.416           1.06
ARG       2001-05               0           0.013           66.0%           57.02             0.80              0.395                 0.372           1.06
ARG       2006-10               1           0.009           78.2%           58.25             1.40              0.467                 0.434           1.07
ARG       2011-15               1           0.006           85.1%           60.09             0.85              0.494                 0.470           1.05
ARM       2001-05               0           0.002           26.5%           33.42             2.14              0.187                 0.147           1.28      75%      123%
ARM       2006-10               1           0.001           69.4%          772.44             3.81              0.566                 0.379           1.50
ARM       2011-15               1           0.000           87.5%          870.63             3.19              0.671                 0.477           1.41
AZE       1996-00               1           0.007           13.0%           12.71             4.57              0.154                 0.077           1.99    112%       323%
AZE       2001-05               1           0.006           20.5%           12.25             2.14              0.155                 0.118           1.31    111%       177%
BDI       1996-00               0           0.006            0.3%          250.05            50.58              0.877                 0.008        111.53               4066%
BDI       2001-05               1           0.007            0.3%          326.27            42.08              0.750                 0.008          93.98              4004%
BDI       2006-10               1           0.008            0.0%          302.51            47.78              0.840                 0.008        107.69               4102%
BEN       2006-10               0           0.008            6.7%          272.40            13.11              0.303                 0.044           6.90       8%      646%
BEN       2011-15               0           0.009            7.9%          257.04            12.90              0.304                 0.052           5.91       8%      536%
BFA       1996-00               1           0.010            2.2%          139.57            30.36              0.542                 0.022          24.23              1363%
BFA       2001-05               1           0.012            2.8%          173.57            24.59              0.458                 0.027          17.08              1122%
BFA       2006-10               1           0.013            2.6%          161.75            19.52              0.374                 0.028          13.46              1080%
BGD       1986-90               0           0.093            0.4%            5.07            18.85              0.405                 0.095           4.26               245%
BGD       1991-95               0           0.105            0.8%            5.01            22.12              0.472                 0.109           4.33               200%
BGD       1996-00               1           0.115            2.2%           11.99            19.66              0.451                 0.127           3.55               158%
BGD       2001-05               1           0.128            2.0%           15.58            14.25              0.374                 0.138           2.71               137%
BGD       2006-10               1           0.135            4.1%           16.11            15.88              0.420                 0.158           2.67               108%
BGD       2011-15               1           0.129           13.2%           16.49            12.22              0.405                 0.202           2.01                62%
BGR       1991-95               1           0.001           90.4%             -                -                0.494                 0.494           1.00
BGR       1996-00               1           0.002           78.9%          167.81             5.35              0.547                 0.432           1.27
BGR       2001-05               0           0.001           83.4%          253.07             3.36              0.552                 0.456           1.21
BGR       2006-10               0           0.001           89.0%          287.32             1.87              0.563                 0.486           1.16
BLR       1996-00               0           0.002           82.7%            9.46             1.28              0.475                 0.452           1.05
BLR       2001-05               1           0.001           86.0%           11.40             1.26              0.492                 0.470           1.05
BLR       2006-10               1           0.000           96.6%           12.88             1.28              0.550                 0.527           1.04
BLR       2011-15               1           0.000           96.3%           13.11             1.56              0.553                 0.525           1.05
BOL       1991-95               0           0.006           13.4%           77.04             8.38              0.229                 0.079           2.89      43%      313%
BOL       1996-00               0           0.006           19.5%          182.86             8.11              0.275                 0.112           2.45      19%      192%
BOL       2001-05               0           0.007           21.5%          237.75             6.21              0.264                 0.124           2.13      24%      165%
BOL       2006-10               1           0.007           29.2%          233.94             6.85              0.316                 0.166           1.91       4%       98%
BOL       2011-15               0           0.005           47.4%          233.10             4.63              0.378                 0.264           1.43                24%
BRA       1986-90               0           0.082           40.5%            3.42             2.27              0.341                 0.303           1.12                 8%
BRA       1991-95               1           0.088           41.9%            3.63             1.62              0.343                 0.316           1.09                 4%
BRA       1996-00               0           0.077           53.2%            8.71             1.50              0.393                 0.367           1.07
BRA       2001-05               0           0.088           50.2%           11.58             1.88              0.394                 0.362           1.09
BRA       2006-10               1           0.081           57.0%           11.74             1.42              0.417                 0.391           1.06
BRA       2011-15               0           0.057           71.3%           12.13             0.82              0.461                 0.445           1.03
BTN       2006-10               1           0.000           56.3%          144.18             0.57              0.340                 0.307           1.11                 7%
BTN       2011-15               1           0.000           61.2%          147.01             0.53              0.366                 0.334           1.10
BWA       1986-90               1           0.001           25.4%             -                -                0.139                 0.139           1.00    136%       136%
BWA       1991-95               1           0.001           35.5%          399.09             2.18              0.295                 0.194           1.52      11%       68%
BWA       1996-00               1           0.001           42.3%          937.39             2.41              0.423                 0.231           1.83                42%
BWA       2001-05               1           0.001           46.9%        1,248.31             1.76              0.487                 0.256           1.90                28%
BWA       2006-10               1           0.001           52.4%        1,228.60             1.48              0.510                 0.287           1.78                14%
BWA       2011-15               1           0.001           61.0%        1,217.79             1.41              0.554                 0.333           1.66
CAF       1996-00               1           0.003            2.7%          426.36            25.47              0.504                 0.018          28.45              1749%
CAF       2001-05               0           0.004            1.5%          544.80            23.61              0.487                 0.012          41.69              2706%
CHL       1991-95               0           0.007           51.7%           39.22             2.31              0.332                 0.288           1.15                14%
CHL       1996-00               0           0.005           63.0%           96.69             1.45              0.388                 0.349           1.11
CHL       2001-05               1           0.005           65.6%          134.41             1.32              0.406                 0.363           1.12
CHL       2006-10               1           0.004           78.0%          180.98             1.22              0.478                 0.429           1.12
CHL       2011-15               1           0.004           79.7%          191.93             1.02              0.485                 0.438           1.11
                                                                                                                                                           Increase in market
                                                                                                                                                             size required to
                                                                                                                                                            meet threshold, if
                                                            Market Size Data                                      Market Size Estimates                          required
                                                                   Rel. pop. of
                                                                  integrated         Rel. income.    Open economy       Closed economy         Ratio of
                    Sustained        Pop. outside   Middle class international      of integrated    market size (bn    market size (bn       open to
                    Poverty         of middle       (% of total   market (1000s     international    people outside     people outside        closed       Open     Closed
Country   Period    Reduction       class (bn)      pop.)         of people)        market           middle class)      middle class)         market size economy economy
CHN       1986-90               0           0.941           11.8%             -                -                1.005                 1.005           1.00
CHN       1991-95               1           0.953           17.2%             -                -                1.047                 1.047           1.00
CHN       1996-00               1           0.830           31.8%             -                -                1.003                 1.003           1.00
CHN       2001-05               1           0.746           41.4%            1.59             5.61              1.063                 0.971           1.09
CHN       2006-10               1           0.524           60.0%            1.72             3.90              0.915                 0.851           1.08
CHN       2011-15               1           0.312           76.8%            1.87             1.88              0.761                 0.730           1.04
CIV       1986-90               0           0.008           17.8%           45.87             4.96              0.194                 0.105           1.84      69%      211%
CIV       1991-95               0           0.011           13.0%           42.82             7.64              0.214                 0.082           2.62      53%      301%
CIV       1996-00               0           0.013           14.4%           98.66             9.15              0.257                 0.091           2.82      27%      259%
CIV       2001-05               0           0.015           12.7%          122.95             8.72              0.247                 0.084           2.94      33%      290%
CIV       2006-10               0           0.016           13.2%          119.20             8.65              0.249                 0.088           2.83      32%      272%
CIV       2011-15               1           0.017           19.0%          118.47             9.37              0.293                 0.121           2.43      12%      172%
CMR       2001-05               0           0.013           16.0%          127.28             9.08              0.270                 0.101           2.68      21%      225%
CMR       2006-10               0           0.015           17.7%          119.87             7.89              0.260                 0.111           2.33      26%      194%
COD       2006-10               1           0.056            0.3%           41.17            31.11              0.574                 0.058           9.91               466%
COG       2006-10               1           0.003           28.3%          583.42             4.06              0.318                 0.157           2.03       3%      109%
COL       1981-85               1           0.015           44.3%           14.95             2.82              0.305                 0.257           1.19       7%       28%
COL       1986-90               1           0.016           47.1%           15.47             3.85              0.339                 0.273           1.24                20%
COL       1991-95               0           0.017           50.7%           15.90             4.41              0.368                 0.293           1.26                12%
COL       1996-00               0           0.019           48.3%           39.45             2.91              0.337                 0.282           1.19                16%
COL       2001-05               0           0.022           45.1%           51.74             2.43              0.316                 0.268           1.18       4%       22%
COL       2006-10               0           0.020           53.9%           51.95             2.25              0.359                 0.314           1.14                 4%
COL       2011-15               1           0.016           65.2%           54.02             1.53              0.405                 0.371           1.09
COM       2006-10               0           0.001           18.1%          191.11             0.76              0.143                 0.099           1.44    130%       230%
CRI       1986-90               1           0.001           74.9%            0.96             0.57              0.418                 0.409           1.02
CRI       1991-95               0           0.001           58.8%          166.25             2.88              0.396                 0.322           1.23                 2%
CRI       1996-00               0           0.001           65.5%          389.25             2.42              0.461                 0.358           1.29
CRI       2001-05               1           0.001           63.4%          504.28             1.50              0.453                 0.347           1.31
CRI       2006-10               0           0.001           69.3%          542.27             2.05              0.500                 0.379           1.32
CRI       2011-15               1           0.001           74.9%          659.64             1.31              0.537                 0.409           1.31
DJI       2006-10               1           0.001           14.6%        2,899.18             8.26              0.685                 0.080           8.56               309%
DJI       2011-15               0           0.001           15.7%        2,930.49             7.15              0.678                 0.086           7.85               279%
DOM       1991-95               1           0.004           38.7%           72.81             4.84              0.306                 0.215           1.42       7%       52%
DOM       1996-00               0           0.004           49.2%          177.36             3.38              0.356                 0.272           1.31                20%
DOM       2001-05               0           0.004           57.6%          237.44             1.98              0.388                 0.318           1.22                 3%
DOM       2006-10               0           0.004           60.9%          238.66             2.02              0.407                 0.335           1.21
DOM       2011-15               1           0.003           72.3%          267.11             2.23              0.477                 0.397           1.20
DZA       1991-95               1           0.008           70.6%             -                -                0.392                 0.392           1.00
DZA       1996-00               1           0.008           72.2%             -                -                0.401                 0.401           1.00
DZA       2001-05               1           0.006           80.7%             -                -                0.446                 0.446           1.00
DZA       2006-10               1           0.004           89.2%            4.75             9.40              0.645                 0.490           1.32
ECU       1991-95               1           0.006           42.2%            1.00             1.05              0.253                 0.236           1.07      29%       39%
ECU       1996-00               0           0.007           41.0%          120.90             3.60              0.309                 0.230           1.34       6%       42%
ECU       2001-05               0           0.008           39.3%          157.91             3.11              0.298                 0.222           1.35      10%       48%
ECU       2006-10               0           0.006           54.2%          156.29             2.51              0.368                 0.302           1.22                 8%
ECU       2011-15               0           0.004           70.8%          156.13             2.09              0.450                 0.390           1.15
EGY       1991-95               1           0.050           12.2%            9.22             9.96              0.281                 0.117           2.41      16%      180%
EGY       1996-00               1           0.041           36.3%           23.54             6.89              0.355                 0.238           1.49                38%
EGY       2001-05               0           0.035           50.0%           30.22             4.08              0.379                 0.307           1.23                 7%
EGY       2006-10               1           0.026           65.6%           32.08             7.00              0.504                 0.384           1.31
EGY       2011-15               1           0.009           89.5%           31.97             4.46              0.575                 0.497           1.16
ETH       2001-05               1           0.068            0.0%            1.22             5.13              0.152                 0.068           2.24    115%       381%
ETH       2006-10               1           0.078            0.1%            1.22             5.24              0.165                 0.079           2.09      98%      314%
ETH       2011-15               1           0.089            0.9%            1.16             3.91              0.158                 0.094           1.68    107%       248%
FJI       2006-10               1           0.000           59.2%        2,639.77             2.23              0.787                 0.323           2.44                 2%
GAB       2006-10               1           0.000           85.7%        1,527.87             1.16              0.734                 0.467           1.57
GAB       2011-15               1           0.000           86.1%        1,407.26             1.01              0.714                 0.469           1.52
GEO       2001-05               0           0.003           23.3%          530.20             7.11              0.332                 0.130           2.56               152%
GEO       2006-10               0           0.002           50.3%          588.80             4.12              0.439                 0.276           1.59                19%
GEO       2011-15               1           0.001           71.5%          644.92             2.84              0.541                 0.390           1.39
GHA       1991-95               0           0.012           20.9%           34.81            14.95              0.377                 0.126           2.99               160%
GHA       1996-00               1           0.014           18.6%           82.83            19.08              0.442                 0.116           3.82               183%
                                                                                                                                                           Increase in market
                                                                                                                                                             size required to
                                                                                                                                                            meet threshold, if
                                                            Market Size Data                                      Market Size Estimates                          required
                                                                   Rel. pop. of
                                                                  integrated         Rel. income.    Open economy       Closed economy         Ratio of
                    Sustained        Pop. outside   Middle class international      of integrated    market size (bn    market size (bn       open to
                    Poverty         of middle       (% of total   market (1000s     international    people outside     people outside        closed       Open     Closed
Country   Period    Reduction       class (bn)      pop.)         of people)        market           middle class)      middle class)         market size economy economy
GHA       2001-05               1           0.016           19.7%          104.66            21.58              0.494                 0.123           4.01               166%
GHA       2006-10               1           0.017           25.1%           99.68             9.02              0.318                 0.154           2.07       3%      113%
GHA       2011-15               0           0.015           39.3%           95.44             6.86              0.358                 0.230           1.56                43%
GIN       1996-00               0           0.006           17.2%          194.04            14.60              0.371                 0.100           3.71               227%
GIN       2001-05               0           0.008           10.6%          245.92            17.23              0.388                 0.066           5.92               400%
GIN       2006-10               1           0.009            5.7%          239.94            18.14              0.376                 0.040           9.43               722%
GMB       2001-05               1           0.001           16.2%        1,522.90            11.47              0.524                 0.089           5.86               266%
GMB       2006-10               1           0.001           16.3%        1,404.16            19.96              0.645                 0.090           7.16               264%
GMB       2011-15               1           0.002           15.9%        1,313.49            21.95              0.661                 0.088           7.50               272%
GNB       1996-00               1           0.001            3.7%        1,304.83            31.06              0.742                 0.021          34.95              1444%
GNB       2001-05               0           0.001            3.2%        1,691.71            18.09              0.589                 0.018          31.95              1677%
GNB       2006-10               0           0.001            4.1%        1,626.05            19.08              0.600                 0.024          25.17              1274%
GTM       1991-95               1           0.007           25.9%           56.05             6.51              0.264                 0.148           1.78      24%      121%
GTM       1996-00               1           0.007           31.3%          132.72             5.26              0.286                 0.178           1.61      15%       84%
GTM       2001-05               0           0.008           36.4%          170.51             3.76              0.295                 0.206           1.43      11%       59%
GTM       2006-10               0           0.008           39.9%          174.64             4.70              0.331                 0.226           1.47                45%
HND       1991-95               0           0.004           20.0%            0.55             1.15              0.132                 0.113           1.17    148%       189%
HND       1996-00               0           0.005           21.2%          240.62             8.73              0.302                 0.120           2.52       8%      173%
HND       2001-05               0           0.005           21.4%          301.24             5.27              0.257                 0.122           2.11      28%      169%
HND       2006-10               0           0.006           24.5%          306.84             7.47              0.311                 0.139           2.24       5%      136%
HND       2011-15               0           0.006           28.1%          302.38             6.29              0.311                 0.159           1.95       5%      106%
HTI       2006-10               1           0.009            7.2%          233.92            16.47              0.356                 0.048           7.41               583%
IDN       1986-90               1           0.143           15.1%            2.81             9.28              0.378                 0.225           1.68                45%
IDN       1991-95               1           0.132           28.2%            2.87            10.26              0.455                 0.286           1.59                14%
IDN       1996-00               0           0.108           46.2%            7.09             6.80              0.472                 0.359           1.31
IDN       2001-05               0           0.136           36.6%            9.50             7.87              0.466                 0.335           1.39
IDN       2006-10               0           0.122           46.9%           10.28             4.98              0.461                 0.377           1.22
IDN       2011-15               1           0.060           75.4%           12.04             2.91              0.521                 0.471           1.11
IND       1986-90               1           0.797            0.6%            0.59            14.19              1.033                 0.800           1.29
IND       1991-95               1           0.879            1.4%            0.59            21.40              1.237                 0.886           1.40
IND       1996-00               1           0.934            4.9%            1.44            19.40              1.279                 0.961           1.33
IND       2001-05               1           0.966           10.1%            1.89            13.08              1.236                 1.021           1.21
IND       2006-10               1           0.921           20.9%            1.90            10.32              1.205                 1.036           1.16
IRN       1991-95               1           0.042           28.0%             -                -                0.194                 0.194           1.00      69%       69%
IRN       1996-00               1           0.032           48.9%             -                -                0.298                 0.298           1.00      10%       10%
IRN       2001-05               1           0.022           66.4%             -                -                0.384                 0.384           1.00
IRN       2006-10               1           0.013           81.7%             -                -                0.458                 0.458           1.00
IRN       2011-15               1           0.009           88.1%             -                -                0.489                 0.489           1.00
JAM       1991-95               0           0.001           47.2%          217.37             3.88              0.357                 0.258           1.38                27%
JAM       1996-00               1           0.001           51.0%          551.70             2.69              0.412                 0.279           1.48                17%
KAZ       2001-05               0           0.005           66.2%            7.60             1.03              0.384                 0.366           1.05
KAZ       2006-10               1           0.001           95.3%            7.92             0.92              0.536                 0.520           1.03
KAZ       2011-15               1           0.001           92.4%            7.33             0.85              0.520                 0.505           1.03
KEN       1996-00               0           0.025           12.2%           52.76            17.29              0.383                 0.091           4.19               259%
KEN       2001-05               0           0.029           10.5%           64.97            14.27              0.331                 0.087           3.82               278%
KEN       2006-10               1           0.034           10.4%           61.29            11.63              0.291                 0.090           3.22      13%      262%
KEN       2011-15               1           0.036           15.7%           58.07            10.65              0.306                 0.122           2.51       7%      169%
KGZ       2001-05               0           0.005            6.6%          433.80            18.39              0.412                 0.040          10.21               711%
KGZ       2006-10               0           0.005           11.3%          440.98            15.11              0.385                 0.066           5.80               393%
KGZ       2011-15               0           0.004           29.3%          451.01             9.66              0.395                 0.164           2.41               100%
LAO       1996-00               0           0.005            2.8%             -                -                0.020                 0.020           1.00   1539%      1539%
LAO       2001-05               1           0.005            7.5%            3.04             3.42              0.103                 0.046           2.23    219%       612%
LAO       2006-10               1           0.005           21.6%           31.03             3.54              0.185                 0.122           1.52      77%      168%
LBR       2011-15               0           0.004            0.2%           14.37             2.98              0.056                 0.005          11.13    482%      6381%
LKA       1986-90               1           0.014           15.4%           28.82            11.28              0.287                 0.098           2.94      14%      235%
LKA       1991-95               0           0.013           23.1%           30.19            12.63              0.351                 0.139           2.52               135%
LKA       1996-00               1           0.012           35.1%           76.79            10.25              0.384                 0.203           1.89                61%
LKA       2001-05               1           0.011           40.9%          114.28             6.69              0.362                 0.234           1.55                40%
LKA       2006-10               1           0.009           53.3%          119.85             5.44              0.408                 0.300           1.36                 9%
LKA       2011-15               1           0.005           77.0%          125.48             3.18              0.497                 0.424           1.17
LSO       1991-95               0           0.002            7.4%          303.77            16.04              0.354                 0.042           8.40               677%
LSO       1996-00               0           0.002            9.7%          784.08            14.81              0.424                 0.055           7.78               501%
                                                                                                                                                           Increase in market
                                                                                                                                                             size required to
                                                                                                                                                            meet threshold, if
                                                            Market Size Data                                      Market Size Estimates                          required
                                                                   Rel. pop. of
                                                                  integrated         Rel. income.    Open economy       Closed economy         Ratio of
                    Sustained        Pop. outside   Middle class international      of integrated    market size (bn    market size (bn       open to
                    Poverty         of middle       (% of total   market (1000s     international    people outside     people outside        closed       Open     Closed
Country   Period    Reduction       class (bn)      pop.)         of people)        market           middle class)      middle class)         market size economy economy
LSO       2001-05               0           0.002           11.6%        1,026.85            14.20              0.464                 0.065           7.14               404%
LSO       2006-10               1           0.002           13.3%        1,133.48             9.03              0.406                 0.074           5.47               342%
MAR       1986-90               1           0.017           27.2%             -                -                0.165                 0.165           1.00      99%       99%
MAR       1991-95               0           0.016           36.9%           20.95             5.07              0.303                 0.217           1.40       8%       51%
MAR       1996-00               0           0.015           44.1%           51.51             4.92              0.344                 0.255           1.35                28%
MAR       2001-05               1           0.017           40.3%           75.08             5.19              0.334                 0.237           1.41                38%
MAR       2006-10               1           0.018           42.9%           82.63             5.48              0.354                 0.251           1.41                30%
MDA       2001-05               0           0.003            8.1%          585.53            14.00              0.372                 0.047           7.85               592%
MDA       2006-10               1           0.003           18.9%          637.50             8.64              0.351                 0.106           3.32               210%
MDA       2011-15               1           0.002           43.8%          697.11             4.58              0.429                 0.241           1.78                36%
MDG       1981-85               0           0.009            5.1%           45.83             9.32              0.197                 0.036           5.40      67%      800%
MDG       1986-90               0           0.010            4.0%           45.68            13.99              0.269                 0.032           8.40      22%      924%
MDG       1991-95               0           0.012            3.0%           44.32            29.19              0.513                 0.028          18.43              1077%
MDG       1996-00               0           0.014            1.8%          108.82            25.28              0.455                 0.023          19.37              1294%
MDG       2001-05               0           0.016            3.8%          130.75            20.32              0.391                 0.037          10.69               796%
MDG       2006-10               0           0.018            2.6%          121.71            27.41              0.501                 0.032          15.44               909%
MEX       1986-90               0           0.025           68.3%            6.09             2.54              0.439                 0.397           1.11
MEX       1991-95               0           0.027           68.0%            6.19             1.77              0.428                 0.398           1.08
MEX       1996-00               0           0.026           71.6%           17.03             2.23              0.456                 0.417           1.09
MEX       2001-05               0           0.028           72.5%           23.24             1.17              0.446                 0.423           1.05
MEX       2006-10               0           0.024           77.5%           23.90             1.40              0.473                 0.447           1.06
MEX       2011-15               0           0.021           81.5%           24.00             1.52              0.494                 0.465           1.06
MKD       2001-05               1           0.001           69.4%           96.92            10.57              0.568                 0.379           1.50
MKD       2006-10               0           0.001           71.5%        1,174.93             3.15              0.632                 0.390           1.62
MKD       2011-15               0           0.000           83.7%        1,272.48             2.59              0.705                 0.456           1.54
MLI       1996-00               1           0.010            1.4%          147.17            26.79              0.480                 0.017          27.60              1784%
MLI       2001-05               1           0.011            2.5%          183.95            18.84              0.363                 0.025          14.60              1217%
MNG       1996-00               0           0.002           12.9%             -                -                0.072                 0.072           1.00    352%       352%
MNG       2001-05               1           0.002           21.9%          837.68            11.28              0.442                 0.121           3.65               170%
MNG       2006-10               1           0.001           58.2%          853.47             6.28              0.559                 0.318           1.76                 3%
MNG       2011-15               1           0.000           82.2%          855.26             2.90              0.634                 0.448           1.42
MOZ       2001-05               1           0.018            1.0%          114.44            22.07              0.404                 0.024          17.11              1288%
MOZ       2006-10               1           0.021            1.7%          106.72            20.78              0.388                 0.030          12.94               994%
MRT       1991-95               0           0.002           11.8%          253.52             9.38              0.261                 0.066           3.95      26%      396%
MRT       1996-00               1           0.002            9.2%          594.42            12.76              0.358                 0.052           6.83               526%
MRT       2001-05               1           0.002           10.0%          750.01            12.33              0.380                 0.057           6.70               477%
MRT       2006-10               1           0.003           14.4%          701.79             8.58              0.335                 0.081           4.13               304%
MWI       2001-05               0           0.011            2.8%          189.90            37.08              0.665                 0.027          24.99              1131%
MWI       2006-10               1           0.013            1.4%          181.03            25.58              0.469                 0.020          23.16              1519%
MWI       2011-15               1           0.015            1.9%          170.89            19.12              0.366                 0.025          14.76              1223%
NAM       2006-10               1           0.001           39.9%        1,144.19             2.06              0.438                 0.218           2.00                50%
NAM       2011-15               1           0.001           49.7%        1,137.99             1.86              0.487                 0.272           1.79                21%
NER       1996-00               1           0.010            0.5%          147.34            37.42              0.650                 0.012          52.06              2526%
NER       2001-05               1           0.012            0.5%          176.43            34.98              0.616                 0.015          42.10              2138%
NER       2006-10               1           0.014            0.4%          158.15            31.85              0.564                 0.016          34.75              1920%
NGA       1986-90               0           0.053           38.7%            5.51             6.89              0.377                 0.264           1.43                24%
NGA       1991-95               0           0.091            6.7%            5.42            12.89              0.340                 0.128           2.66               156%
NGA       1996-00               0           0.110            0.3%           12.91            16.61              0.386                 0.112           3.45               193%
NGA       2001-05               0           0.121            3.6%           16.33             9.92              0.306                 0.140           2.18       7%      133%
NIC       1996-00               0           0.004           23.4%          298.16             8.52              0.319                 0.131           2.43       3%      150%
NIC       2001-05               0           0.004           27.7%          395.34             5.70              0.312                 0.155           2.02       5%      112%
NIC       2006-10               1           0.004           30.1%          425.03             8.64              0.378                 0.168           2.25                95%
NPL       1986-90               1           0.017            0.3%             -                -                0.019                 0.019           1.00   1619%      1619%
NPL       1991-95               1           0.019            1.0%             -                -                0.025                 0.025           1.00   1224%      1224%
NPL       1996-00               1           0.022            1.8%             -                -                0.031                 0.031           1.00    945%       945%
NPL       2001-05               1           0.024            2.9%             -                -                0.039                 0.039           1.00    733%       733%
NPL       2006-10               1           0.025            4.1%           87.36            23.26              0.443                 0.047           9.35               592%
PAK       1991-95               1           0.095           13.9%            4.78            15.80              0.431                 0.171           2.52                91%
PAK       1996-00               0           0.108           15.1%           11.08            15.60              0.448                 0.191           2.35                72%
PAK       2001-05               0           0.123           15.9%           13.88            11.94              0.407                 0.209           1.95                57%
PAK       2006-10               1           0.119           27.5%           13.84             9.67              0.429                 0.269           1.60                22%
PAK       2011-15               1           0.102           44.5%           15.33             8.54              0.487                 0.344           1.41
                                                                                                                                                           Increase in market
                                                                                                                                                             size required to
                                                                                                                                                            meet threshold, if
                                                            Market Size Data                                      Market Size Estimates                          required
                                                                   Rel. pop. of
                                                                  integrated         Rel. income.    Open economy       Closed economy         Ratio of
                    Sustained        Pop. outside   Middle class international      of integrated    market size (bn    market size (bn       open to
                    Poverty         of middle       (% of total   market (1000s     international    people outside     people outside        closed       Open     Closed
Country   Period    Reduction       class (bn)      pop.)         of people)        market           middle class)      middle class)         market size economy economy
PAN       1981-85               0           0.001           44.4%             -                -                0.243                 0.243           1.00      35%       35%
PAN       1986-90               0           0.001           41.1%             -                -                0.226                 0.226           1.00      45%       45%
PAN       1991-95               1           0.001           43.3%             -                -                0.237                 0.237           1.00      38%       38%
PAN       1996-00               0           0.001           47.9%             -                -                0.262                 0.262           1.00      25%       25%
PAN       2001-05               0           0.001           54.4%          656.01             1.46              0.428                 0.298           1.44                10%
PAN       2006-10               0           0.001           65.8%          645.12             1.57              0.490                 0.360           1.36
PAN       2011-15               0           0.001           74.6%          645.42             1.16              0.531                 0.407           1.30
PER       1986-90               0           0.014           32.4%           23.37             5.85              0.290                 0.190           1.52      13%       72%
PER       1991-95               0           0.015           35.0%           23.90             4.16              0.277                 0.205           1.35      18%       60%
PER       1996-00               0           0.015           37.7%           57.38             3.46              0.287                 0.221           1.30      14%       48%
PER       2001-05               0           0.016           38.5%           76.03             3.04              0.288                 0.226           1.27      14%       45%
PER       2006-10               1           0.013           54.5%           78.13             2.65              0.366                 0.310           1.18                 6%
PER       2011-15               1           0.008           74.1%          108.31             2.08              0.463                 0.411           1.13
PHL       1986-90               0           0.044           20.4%            8.48             8.22              0.292                 0.156           1.87      12%      111%
PHL       1991-95               0           0.045           28.6%            8.34             9.06              0.351                 0.201           1.74                63%
PHL       1996-00               1           0.045           37.4%           19.91             6.65              0.360                 0.248           1.45                32%
PHL       2001-05               0           0.050           36.9%           25.62             6.14              0.356                 0.251           1.42                30%
PHL       2006-10               0           0.055           37.4%           26.88             5.69              0.356                 0.259           1.38                27%
PHL       2011-15               0           0.047           51.1%           30.94             4.52              0.404                 0.325           1.24                 1%
PRY       1991-95               0           0.003           30.1%           23.03             2.66              0.214                 0.167           1.28      53%       96%
PRY       1996-00               1           0.003           28.7%          310.66             3.80              0.272                 0.160           1.70      20%      105%
PRY       2001-05               0           0.004           26.5%          394.69             3.71              0.273                 0.148           1.84      20%      121%
PRY       2006-10               0           0.004           37.9%          390.06             3.63              0.333                 0.210           1.58                56%
PRY       2011-15               1           0.003           52.9%          394.38             2.07              0.389                 0.291           1.34                12%
ROU       1991-95               0           0.004           80.4%           23.01             5.14              0.531                 0.443           1.20
ROU       1996-00               0           0.005           79.4%           62.36             4.75              0.525                 0.437           1.20
ROU       2001-05               1           0.003           85.3%           91.58             3.24              0.536                 0.468           1.15
ROU       2006-10               1           0.001           95.1%          103.05             1.46              0.560                 0.519           1.08
ROU       2011-15               0           0.001           96.8%          143.53             1.54              0.577                 0.528           1.09
RUS       1996-00               0           0.046           68.7%            0.32             0.31              0.426                 0.421           1.01
RUS       2001-05               1           0.024           83.7%            0.35             0.37              0.486                 0.480           1.01
RUS       2006-10               1           0.019           86.9%            0.42             0.34              0.498                 0.492           1.01
RUS       2011-15               1           0.024           83.1%            0.43             0.32              0.482                 0.477           1.01
RWA       1986-90               0           0.006            0.5%           73.38            14.59              0.260                 0.009          27.92      26%     3413%
RWA       1991-95               0           0.007            0.8%           74.72            24.03              0.417                 0.011          36.95              2802%
RWA       1996-00               0           0.006            1.0%          252.01            31.55              0.569                 0.012          49.26              2735%
RWA       2001-05               1           0.008            1.6%          258.60            26.61              0.495                 0.017          29.57              1858%
RWA       2006-10               1           0.009            3.3%          254.44            23.21              0.448                 0.027          16.81              1128%
RWA       2011-15               1           0.010            5.0%          244.74            16.17              0.341                 0.037           9.26               789%
SEN       1996-00               1           0.008           13.4%          162.46            10.52              0.279                 0.081           3.46      17%      306%
SEN       2001-05               1           0.009           14.8%          206.63             9.41              0.277                 0.089           3.10      18%      266%
SEN       2006-10               0           0.010           15.8%          196.58             7.88              0.257                 0.096           2.68      28%      242%
SLE       2006-10               1           0.006            1.3%          383.21            25.42              0.491                 0.013          38.96              2499%
SLV       1996-00               0           0.004           27.6%          248.44             4.60              0.270                 0.155           1.75      21%      112%
SLV       2001-05               0           0.004           34.9%          343.19             2.85              0.296                 0.194           1.53      11%       69%
SLV       2006-10               0           0.003           47.0%          386.68             4.02              0.388                 0.259           1.50                26%
SLV       2011-15               1           0.003           57.1%          413.11             3.99              0.446                 0.314           1.42                 4%
SRB       2011-15               0           0.001           91.1%           33.73             4.56              0.577                 0.497           1.16
STP       2006-10               0           0.000           10.4%             -                -                0.057                 0.057           1.00    476%       476%
SWZ       1996-00               1           0.001           44.6%        1,604.38             4.27              0.573                 0.243           2.36                35%
SWZ       2001-05               1           0.000           51.4%        2,146.27             3.65              0.688                 0.280           2.45                17%
TCD       2006-10               1           0.010            4.0%          208.93            11.80              0.259                 0.032           8.09      26%      922%
TGO       2011-15               1           0.006            3.8%          368.79            18.16              0.385                 0.027          14.12              1103%
THA       1986-90               1           0.035           33.9%            8.92             5.41              0.310                 0.220           1.41       6%       49%
THA       1991-95               1           0.031           45.8%            9.25             3.78              0.344                 0.280           1.23                17%
THA       1996-00               1           0.018           70.1%           23.65             2.53              0.445                 0.400           1.11
THA       2001-05               1           0.022           65.5%           32.13             3.10              0.435                 0.379           1.15
THA       2006-10               1           0.015           77.4%           36.06             2.38              0.481                 0.437           1.10
THA       2011-15               1           0.007           89.4%           43.83             1.93              0.533                 0.494           1.08
TJK       2001-05               1           0.006            1.7%           18.17             9.27              0.170                 0.016          10.86      92%     1987%
TJK       2006-10               0           0.007            5.3%           16.62            12.33              0.240                 0.036           6.74      36%      818%
TJK       2011-15               0           0.007           11.6%           14.96            12.21              0.273                 0.070           3.89      20%      367%
