                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         DISGUISING PREJUDICE:
        POPULAR RATIONALES AS EXCUSES FOR INTOLERANT EXPRESSION

                                     Leonardo Bursztyn
                                      Ingar K. Haaland
                                        Aakaash Rao
                                     Christopher P. Roth

                                     Working Paper 27288
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27288


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                           May 2020, Revised October 2020




We thank Robert Akerlof, Ben Enke, Ed Glaeser, Daniel Gottlieb, Emir Kamenica, Ross
Mattheis, Paulo Natenzon, Nathan Nunn, Peter Schwardmann, Jesse Shapiro, Joel Van der
Weele, Noam Yuchtman, Florian Zimmermann, and numerous seminar participants for very
helpful suggestions. We thank Hrishikesh Iyengar, Ruoxuan Wu, and particularly Takuma Habu
and Alison Zhao for outstanding research assistance. We gratefully acknowledge financial
support from the Pearson Institute for the Study and Resolution of Global Conflicts and the
UChicago Social Sciences Research Center. The main experiments were pre-registered in the
AEA RCT Registry with IDs AEARCTR-0005308 and AEARCTR-0005462. The research
described in this article was approved by the University of Chicago Social and Behavioral
Sciences Institutional Review Board and the Humanities and Social Sciences Research Ethics
Committee at the University of Warwick. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Leonardo Bursztyn, Ingar K. Haaland, Aakaash Rao, and Christopher P. Roth. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Disguising Prejudice: Popular Rationales as Excuses for Intolerant Expression
Leonardo Bursztyn, Ingar K. Haaland, Aakaash Rao, and Christopher P. Roth
NBER Working Paper No. 27288
May 2020, Revised October 2020
JEL No. C90,D03,D72,D83,P16,Z10

                                               ABSTRACT

We study the use of popular rationales to justify public anti-minority actions. Rationales to oppose
minorities change some people's private opinions, leading them to take anti-minority actions even
if they are not prejudiced against minorities. When these rationales become widespread, prejudiced
people can pool with unprejudiced people who are persuaded, decreasing the stigma associated with
anti-minority expression and enabling greater public opposition to minority groups. We examine this
mechanism through several large-scale experiments in the context of anti-immigrant behavior in the
United States. In a first experiment, subjects learn that a previous respondent authorized a donation
to an anti-immigrant organization and then make an inference about the respondent's underlying motivations.
Subjects informed that their matched respondent learned about a study claiming that immigrants increase
crime rates before authorizing the donation see the respondent as less intolerant and more easily persuadable.
In a second experiment, subjects learn about that same study and then choose whether to authorize a
publicly observable donation to the anti-immigrant organization. Subjects who are informed that their
exposure to the rationale will be publicly observable are substantially more likely to make the donation
than subjects who are informed that their exposure will remain private. Our findings suggest that
prominent public figures can lower the social cost of intolerant expression by popularizing
rationales, contributing to waves of anti-minority behavior.




Leonardo Bursztyn                                     Aakaash Rao
Department of Economics                               Harvard University
University of Chicago                                 Department of Economics
1126 E. 59th Street                                   Littauer Center of Public Administration
Chicago, IL 60637                                     1805 Cambridge St
and NBER                                              Cambridge, MA 02138
bursztyn@uchicago.edu                                 arao@g.harvard.edu

Ingar K. Haaland                                      Christopher P. Roth
Department of Economics                               Department of Economics
University of Bergen                                  University of Warwick
Fosswinckels gate 14                                  Coventry CV4 7AL
Bergen, Norway                                        United Kingdom
ingar.haaland@uib.no                                  Christopher.Roth@warwick.ac.uk

                              A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at
                                https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/5308 and
                                   https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/5462
1       Introduction

As leaders of many democracies and popular segments of the media embrace a nativist, anti-
immigrant rhetoric, anti-minority expression has been on the rise (United Nations, 2020). A grow-
ing body of historical evidence suggests that such rhetoric can have substantial effects on people's
willingness to engage in xenophobic actions against immigrants and other minorities (Enikolopov
and Petrova, 2015; Zhuravskaya et al., forthcoming). For example, radio propaganda contributed
to increased killings during the Rwandan genocide (Yanagizawa-Drott, 2014) and anti-Semitic ex-
pression in Nazi Germany (Adena et al., 2015).1
    While these studies identify a causal effect of mass messaging on behavior, the underlying
mechanisms remain unclear. The most-studied channel is persuasion: one might attribute the
growing wave of anti-immigrant rhetoric and violence in the United States to private attitudes
toward immigrants growing more negative.2 Yet survey evidence suggests quite the opposite: both
Democrats and Republicans reported feeling, if anything, more warmly toward both legal and
illegal immigrants in 2018 than in 2014 (Gonzalez-Barrera and Connor, 2019). Consistent with
this observation, recent experimental work finds relatively small or null effects of information on
immigration policy preferences (Hopkins et al., 2019; Alesina et al., 2019; Grigorieff et al., 2020).
Together, the survey and experimental evidence suggest that mechanisms beyond persuasion may
be driving trends in public anti-minority expression.
    In this paper, we propose an additional mechanism through which the spread of anti-minority
narratives might affect public behavior. By popularizing rationales to oppose minorities, whether
true or false, public figures can enable intolerant expression by lowering the social cost of publicly
expressing otherwise-stigmatized positions. For example, consider people who oppose immigration
from Mexico simply because they dislike Mexicans, yet cannot express this opposition in a public
setting without incurring social costs. Once an anti-Mexican rationale becomes common knowledge
(e.g., a politician claims that Mexican immigrants bring crime into the country), these people are
given an excuse: they can attribute their position to a belief that Mexican immigrants commit
more crime, even if they privately do not believe the rationale is true.3 The key point is that the
    1
      For a review of social and economic impacts of media, see DellaVigna and La Ferrara (2015).
    2
      For example, the number of white nationalist hate groups in the United States has grown by 55 percent since Jan-
uary 2017. ("White Nationalist Hate Groups Have Grown 55% in Trump Era, Report Finds." The Guardian, March
18, 2020.) Islamophobic rhetoric among elected officials at all levels of government has also increased substantially.
("Islamophobia in the US: It Goes Way beyond Trump." Vox News, April 6, 2018.)
    3
      In many situations, this mechanism amounts to disguising taste-based discrimination (Becker, 1957) as statistical
discrimination (Phelps, 1972; Arrow, 1973).



                                                          1
availability of the excuse opens up explanations -- other than intolerance -- for their anti-Mexican
positions, reducing the extent to which they expect observers to update about their intolerance and
thus increasing their willingness to express their private views. Thus, even if the rationale has no
direct persuasive impact, it can serve as an excuse as long as it is plausible that others might be
persuaded.
    In the United States, the Trump administration has used a variety of rationales to justify the
construction of the US­Mexico border wall: among them, the claim that Mexican immigrants are
violent criminals and rapists, that terror suspects are pouring into the US over the Mexico border,
and that undocumented immigrants take jobs from American workers.4 These rationales allowed
the administration to maintain plausible deniability about the motives underlying controversial
policies: when asked about Trump's immigration policies, 49 percent of voters answered that they
were motivated by a "sincere interest in controlling our borders", while 41 percent answered that
they are motivated by "racist beliefs" (Snow, 2019). More recently, the Trump administration used
the COVID-19 pandemic to provide widespread justifications for xenophobic expression against
immigrants and asylum seekers.5 The results of a survey from May 2020 suggest a potentially im-
portant role of this rationale in enabling anti-immigrant expression: Republicans were 19 percentage
points more likely to publicly support a permanent ban on Mexican immigration when they were
able to publicly attribute their opposition to Mexican immigration to the threat of immigrants
bringing COVID-19 into the country (compared to a base rate of 32 percent).6 Other populist
leaders have also used similar rationales to target minority groups: Marine Le Pen, Boris John-
son, and Narendra Modi have all popularized (unsubstantiated) claims that migrants and refugees
disproportionately commit crimes and take jobs from native workers in order to justify stricter
immigration laws and crackdowns on immigrants already in the country, while Matteo Salvini has
widely spread the unsupported claim that Italy faces an "invasion" of African mafia bosses in order
to justify anti-refugee policies.7
    Uncorroborated rationales have also been widely used to justify discrimination against other
   4
      See "A Quick History of Trump's Evolving Justifications for the Border Wall." Morin, Rebecca, Politico, January
8, 2019.
    5
      See, for example, "The Trump administration is using the pandemic as an excuse to target immigrants and
asylum seekers." Vox News, May 15, 2020.
    6
      For further details, see Appendix C.
    7
      See, for example: "In Their Own Words: Marine Le Pen and Emmanuel Macron." Joseph, Yonette, The New
York Times, May 5, 2017. "Boris Johnson Follows Donald Trump's Lead On Immigration, Unveiling Plans For
Major Crackdown." Da Silva, Chantal, Newsweek, November 18, 2019. "Modi Defends Indian Citizenship Law Amid
Violent Protests." Schultz, Kai, The New York Times, December 22, 2019. " `Migrant menace': Salvini accused of
targeting refugees and ignoring mafia." Tondo, Lorenzo, The Guardian, February 12, 2019.



                                                         2
minority groups. Since Reconstruction and continuing to this day, political parties in the United
States have exaggerated the severity of voter fraud at the ballot box -- a "vanishingly rare"
phenomenon (Wines and Blinder, 2016) -- to justify measures that disproportionately depress
minority turnout (Cohen, 2012). US politicians and military leaders have for decades cited concerns
about "unit cohesion" as an excuse to justify discriminatory policies targeting minorities in the
military: African-Americans, women, gays and lesbians, and most recently transgender individuals
(Frank, 2009).8 The Reagan campaign popularized the image of the "welfare queen" to appeal to
racist stereotypes about African-American single mothers (Mendelberg, 2001).
    To illustrate the intuition behind the excuse effect and motivate our experiments, consider
a setting with two agents: a sender and a receiver.9 Both agents are first exposed to an anti-
immigrant rationale. The sender then chooses whether to engage in an anti-immigration action
(for example, donating to an anti-immigrant organization). The receiver observes the sender's
decision and makes an inference about the sender's motives. Agents differ on two privately-known
dimensions. First, some of them are tolerant toward immigrants, while others are not. Second,
some agents are persuaded to donate when they learn the rationale -- regardless of their tolerance
type.10 Senders receive expressive utility from making a donation decision consistent with their
own tolerance type as well as social utility from leading the receiver to believe that they are of the
same tolerance type.
    Consider a situation in which the rationale for donating to the anti-immigrant organization is
privately known to both the sender and the receiver, but the receiver is unaware that the sender
knows the rationale. The receiver will infer with certainty that the sender is intolerant if he decides
to donate, and the sender, knowing this, may therefore strategically choose not to donate, even if
he is privately intolerant. This inference changes if the receiver believes that the sender has been
exposed to the rationale (e.g. if the rationale is widely known in the population) since the receiver
understands there are two potential reasons the sender might have donated. In particular, the
sender might be intolerant, or the sender might be persuadable (e.g., the receiver might think the
sender is gullible or that the sender is particularly worried about the consequences associated with
   8
      See, for example, "Unit cohesion and how it's been used to justify discrimination in the military." ABC News,
July 27, 2017. Frank (2009) documents how military leaders popularized the "unit cohesion" rationale to disguise
the true motivation for the controversial "don't ask, don't tell policy" used to prevent gays and lesbians from openly
serving in the army: namely, moral opposition to "deviant sexual behavior".
    9
      We formalize this intuition with a simple model in Section 2.
   10
      Differences in persuasion may arise from differences in the extent to which information shapes beliefs (for
example some agents may be more gullible than others) or because some agents care more about the consequences
associated with the rationale (for example, low-skilled natives who worry more than high-skilled natives that increased
low-skilled immigration will threaten their employment prospects).


                                                          3
the rationale). To the extent that being persuadable is less stigmatized then being intolerant, the
popular knowledge of the justification reduces the social cost of donating and increases donation
rates by allowing intolerant senders to pool with agents with a "good reason to donate" ­ in essence,
pretending that their motivation for donating stems from the anti-immigrant rationale rather than
their intolerance.11 Motivated by this framework, we present two main experiments examining the
use of rationales to justify anti-immigrant positions.
    In Experiment 1, conducted with a broadly representative sample of 3,047 Democrats, we study
whether the availability of an excuse influences how respondents interpret xenophobic actions,
focusing on one of the most widely-used excuses for anti-immigrant expression: the claim that
immigrants disproportionately commit violent crime.12 In particular, we match participants with
a respondent from previous study who authorized a donation to "Fund the Wall," an organization
working to fund the proposed wall along the US­Mexico border. We begin by informing participants
about a recent study (Lott, 2018), which claims that undocumented immigrants in Arizona commit
crimes at substantially higher rates than comparable US citizens.13 Our key experimental variation
is to vary whether our subjects believe that their matched respondent knew about the study before
making their decision: subjects in the Excuse condition are matched with a respondent who knew
about the study before making their decision, while subjects in the No Excuse condition are matched
with a respondent who did not know about the study. We investigate whether subjects infer that
participants who had this "excuse" for donating are less intolerant than participants who donated
without an excuse. We also examine whether subjects infer that participants who had an excuse for
   11
       Justifications which are widely known thus work best as excuses. It is certainly true that people who express
intolerant views can, when challenged, claim to believe a fringe theory that justifies these views, the existence of which
the majority of the population is unaware. But this is true only if they have the opportunity to explain themselves
to their audience: in the absence of a justification, their audience will believe that their xenophobic expression is due
to innate xenophobia, not to persuadability. Thus, fringe narratives are limited in the extent to which they can be
effectively used as excuses.
    12
       We are particularly interested in how excuses affect judgment vis-a-vis an audience that disapproves of the
action, as this is precisely the audience before which an agent may require an excuse. We thus focus on Democrats,
who are most likely to disapprove of the decision to donate to Fund the Wall.
    13
       The Trump administration has cited this study repeatedly as evidence for the impact of illegal immigration on
crime. For example, in a January 2018 speech on "national security and immigration priorities of the administration,"
then-Attorney General Jeff Sessions claimed that the study proved that "tens of thousands of crimes have been
committed in this country that would never have happened if our immigration laws were enforced and respected
like they ought to be". (Sessions, Jeff. "Attorney General Sessions Delivers Remarks on National Security and
Immigration Priorities of the Administration." Justice News, January 26, 2018.) We also inform respondents that
many researchers have challenged the study's validity (Nowrasteh, 2018), and to further ensure that they are not
left with a distorted view of the relationship between immigration and crime, we provide respondents with a short
summary of the empirical evidence on the effects of immigration on crime and a link to a relevant meta-analysis at
the end of the experiment (Ousey and Kubrin, 2018), which highlights, if anything, a negative association between
increases in immigration and crime.



                                                            4
donating did so for another reason -- because they are gullible and were persuaded by the study
despite its methodological flaws.
    To most closely capture the natural process of inference and to avoid priming respondents,
we first measure participants' beliefs about their matched respondents' motives for donating to
Fund the Wall using an open-ended question, directly measuring what "comes to mind" through a
pre-registered text analysis procedure. We then turn to more structured measures of beliefs: half
of the participants make an incentivized guess about their matched respondent's score on a test
measuring cultural tolerance, while the other half make an incentivized guess about their matched
respondent's score on a test measuring gullibility.14
    We find strong treatment effects on both measures of type inference. In describing why they
believed their matched respondent chose to donate to Fund the Wall, participants matched with a
respondent who had no excuse for donating are 7 percentage points (70%) more likely to use a word
related to intolerance (p < 0.001) and 3 percentage points (43%) less likely to use a word related
to gullibility (p < 0.001) relative to participants matched with a respondent who had an excuse.
We find similar treatment effects on the structured belief measures: participants believe that a
matched respondent with an excuse scored 0.14 standard deviations lower on the intolerance scale
(p < 0.001) and 0.32 standard deviations higher score on the gullibility scale (p < 0.001). Taken
together, our evidence suggests that publicly known rationales for xenophobic behavior strongly
influence how an audience updates about the underlying motives. In an auxiliary experiment, we
show that respondents are less likely to punish gullible partners than intolerant partners, consistent
with our assumption that xenophobia is indeed more socially sanctioned than persuadability.
    In Experiment 2, we investigate whether people exploit widespread rationales to avoid the
social stigma associated with publicly expressing intolerant views. Specifically, we recruit a broadly
representative sample of 3,728 Republicans and Independents and examine whether they are more
willing to publicly undertake an anti-immigrant action -- authorizing a donation to Fund the Wall
-- when they have an excuse available. We inform all participants about the Lott (2018) study,
which claims that undocumented immigrants commit crimes at much higher rates than US citizens,
and then give participants the opportunity to authorize a $1 donation to Fund the Wall. We tell
   14
     Of course, gullibility is only one of a set of possible "second types." Holding fixed the extent to which two agents
believe the rationale and those agents' tolerance, one agent may choose to donate while the other does not because
she is more risk-averse, because she will be more affected in the event that the rationale is true, or because her costs
of donating are lower, among other potential reasons. We focus on this single "second type" to discipline our exercise
for a number of reasons: it is (arguably) the most natural "second type," it was the most frequent reason cited in
our pilot results, and it is more objectively coded than other possible types.



                                                           5
participants that we will post their individual donation decisions on our website when the study
is published in an academic journal, and that in order to communicate our research findings to
the public, we will publicize the website among residents in their city. This generates a real social
cost of authorizing a donation, particularly in areas where respondents expect the majority of the
population to disapprove of the donation.
   Identifying the "excuse effect" requires disentangling it both from the direct effect of persuasion
("first-order" persuasion) and from a change in anticipated social approval associated with changes
in the audience's beliefs ("second-order" persuasion). We hold first- and second-order persuasion
fixed across the Excuse and No Excuse condition; thus, the key treatment varies only the avail-
ability of an excuse for donating. In particular, participants in the Excuse condition see that their
audience will learn that they knew about the Lott study when making the donation decision, while
participants in the No Excuse condition believe that their audience will not know that they knew
about the Lott study.
   We find a large and statistically significant excuse effect on participants' willingness to publicly
donate to Fund the Wall. Participants in the Excuse condition are 6.3 percentage points (13%)
more likely to authorize the donation than respondents in the No Excuse condition (p < 0.001).
To benchmark the effect size, we compare the donation rate in a control condition -- in which
participants are not informed about the study -- with the donation rate in the No Excuse condition,
which allows us to identify the joint effect of first- and second-order persuasion. We find that this
joint effect is small relative to the "excuse effect." This again suggests a quantitatively important
role of commonly known excuses relative to the direct and indirect effects of persuasion. Moreover,
the effect is driven by participants who live in more liberal areas, suggesting that participants
more strongly require excuses when their audience is likely to disapprove of their actions. Evidence
from a number of different exercises, and a successful replication of our findings with a more
subtle treatment manipulation using a sample of 1,373 respondents in October 2020, suggests that
experimenter demand effects are not driving our results.


Related Literature Our paper builds on theoretical literature on the effects of social image
concerns on economic and moral decision-making (e.g. B´
                                                      enabou and Tirole 2006). Related to our
work is B´
         enabou et al. (2018), which presents a theoretical model of the production and circulation
of arguments justifying actions on the basis of morality. We also build on a growing empirical
literature studying the effect of social image concerns on political and economic outcomes (including



                                                  6
moral behavior, as in Ariely et al. 2009; Lacetera and Macis 2010; Ewers and Zimmermann 2015;
voting, as in DellaVigna et al. 2017; tax evasion, as in Perez-Truglia and Troiano 2018; Besley et
al. 2019; identity choice, as in Jia and Persson 2019; campaign donations, as in Perez-Truglia and
Cruces 2017; educational investments, as in Bursztyn and Jensen 2015; and labor market choices,
as in Bursztyn et al. 2017). Relative to existing work, which generally highlights a single type
dimension on which respondents signal and update (B´
                                                   enabou and Tirole, 2006), a key contribution
of this paper is to show that people can strategically use information to influence how others
will assess their motives on two dimensions, with important consequences for publicly-observable
behavior. Thus, in contrast to previous work showing that one's beliefs about others' opinions
matter for public behavior, we show that one's beliefs about how others will update about one's
own motives also have significant effects on one's willingness to express an otherwise-stigmatized
view. We therefore highlight the importance of commonly known rationales, which can be created
by prominent public figures and the media. Our paper is thus related to laboratory evidence on
strategic communication used to justify public actions (Foerster and van der Weele, 2018).
   Our work also relates to a growing literature on social norms governing public behavior -- in
particular, to work examining how these norms unravel (Kuran, 1997; Bursztyn et al., 2020b,a).
Our work is similar in that it examines how previously-stigmatized public behavior becomes socially
acceptable, but it differs both conceptually and in its implications for equilibrium expression.
Conceptually, we disentangle second-order beliefs (beliefs about others' views) from third-order
beliefs (beliefs about others' beliefs about one's own motives) and show that the latter mechanism
enables excuses to increase the public expression of intolerant positions by reducing the extent to
which public expression is informative of private attitudes. Practically, the excuse mechanism allows
even views that are privately unpopular -- such as conspiracy theories about certain minorities -- to
be publicly expressed in equilibrium. In contrast, the social norms mechanism examined in Bursztyn
et al. (2020a) and Bursztyn et al. (2020b) rests upon these stigmatized views already being widely
held. Of course, the two mechanisms are mutually reinforcing. For example, intolerant views may
initially emerge among only a small segment of the population, which may use excuses to lower
the cost of publicly expressing these views to the rest of society. As a consequence of this public
expression, others may then be privately persuaded. An event that serves to aggregate this private
information -- for example, an election, as studied in Bursztyn et al. (2020b) -- can then bring
previously-fringe views into the mainstream. Thus, excuses may thus be essential in facilitating the
initial growth of stigmatized views by enabling them to be publicly expressed.


                                                 7
     Several laboratory studies show that "moral wiggle room" can have substantial effects on behav-
ior (Dana et al., 2007; Golman et al., 2017, 2016; Andreoni and Bernheim, 2009; Lazear et al., 2012;
Hamman et al., 2010; Saccardo and Serra-Garcia, 2020; Exley, 2016; Cunningham and de Quidt,
2016). Because decisions in these settings are anonymous, these findings can be understood through
a behavioral model of self-signaling, as in B´
                                             enabou and Tirole (2011a): people exploit moral wiggle
room to take self-serving actions while convincing themselves that they are not acting selfishly. Our
work differs from this literature in that we are interested in the role of excuses in justifying actions
vis-a-vis others -- we hold the self-excuse channel constant by exposing respondents to the same
private information set -- and we examine the implications of commonly-known rationales both
for the interpretation of intolerant actions and for the decision to take these actions.15
     The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 motivates our experiments with a
simple theoretical framework. In Section 3, we present an online experiment examining how the
availability of an excuse affects the interpretation of xenophobic actions. In Section 4, we present
an online experiment showing that commonly known rationales increase xenophobic expression.
We discuss policy implications and conclude in Section 5. The Appendix includes proofs of our
theoretical results, additional tables and figures, a discussion of a motivating survey, and the full
set of experimental instructions.


2        Conceptual Framework

To organize thoughts and motivate the design of our experiments, we present a simple model of
communication that formalizes the strategic implications of a publicly known rationale for xeno-
phobic expression. Our framework is closely related to the canonical model by B´
                                                                               enabou and Tirole
(2006) on image concerns and other related models (Ali and B´
                                                            enabou, 2020; Golman, 2020; Jia
and Persson, 2019; Besley et al., 2019; Benabou and Tirole, 2011b). We abstract away from many
of the considerations in these related models to highlight our key conceptual contribution: the
implications of heterogeneity across two action-relevant type dimensions for equilibrium inference
and behavior.
    15
     A seminal contribution in psychology is Langer et al. (1978), which finds that subjects waiting to make Xerox
copies were more likely to comply with a request when it was justified by a reason, irrespective of whether the
reason was "bad" ("Excuse me...May I use the Xerox machine, because I have to make copies?") or "good" ("Excuse
me...May I use the Xerox machine, because I'm in a rush). Langer et al. (1978) interprets this as evidence for the
"mindlessness of ostensibly thoughtful action", arguing that people have simply been conditioned to comply with
requests accompanied by justifications. Related work in psychology includes Bandura et al. (1996), Bandura et al.
(2001), and Shalvi et al. (2015).



                                                        8
    A society consists of a continuum of agents who differ on two dimensions. First, some are
tolerant toward foreign cultures (i = 0), while others are intolerant (i = 1). Second, some are easily
persuaded by the given rationale ("persuadables") whereas others are not. The two dimensions are
independent; the probability that a given agent is tolerant is given by p  (0, 1), and the probability
that a given agent is persuadable is q  (0, 1). Agents' individual types are private information,
though the distribution of types is common knowledge. At the beginning of the game, two agents
are randomly drawn from the society: one agent is the "sender" while the other is the "receiver."
The sender and receiver are exposed to an anti-immigrant rationale. The sender can choose either
to take an anti-immigrant action (a = 1) or not to take this action (a = 0).16 The receiver observes
the sender's action and makes an inference about whether the sender is tolerant or intolerant.
    The persuadable sender is non-strategic, with actions characterized as follows: in the absence
of viewing anti-immigrant information, the tolerant-persuadable sender does not take the anti-
immigrant action, while the intolerant-persuadable sender takes the action. However, once exposed
to anti-immigrant information, the tolerant-persuadable sender is persuaded and induced to take
the action17 ; the intolerant-persuadable sender takes the action, as before.
    The non-persuadable sender is strategic and receives social utility proportional to the receiver's
belief that the receiver and sender share the same tolerance type. In particular, when the receiver
believes with certainty that the sender is of the same tolerance type, the sender receives social
utility b, while when the receiver believes with certainty that the sender is of the opposite tolerance
type, the sender receives social utility b, with b > b. Given that the probability of being matched
with a tolerant receiver is p and the probability of being matched with an intolerant receiver
is 1 - p, the sender's social utility from being perceived as tolerant with certainty is given by
b0 := pb + (1 - p)b, while the sender's social utility from being perceived as intolerant with certainty
is given by b1 := pb + (1 - p)b. For simplicity, we assume that the sender's utility is not directly
affected by the receiver's inference about the sender's persuadability. This assumption can be
relaxed without affecting any of the main results below, so long as the image cost of being perceived
   16
       Equivalently, we can interpret this as choosing between an anti-immigrant action (a = 1) and a pro-immigrant
action (a = 0), or choosing between no action (a = 1) and a pro-immigrant action (a = 0). In our experimental
setting, the anti-immigrant action corresponds to authorizing a $1 donation to Fund the Wall, an organization that
seeks to fund the proposed US-Mexico border wall.
    17
       Differences in persuasion may arise because some people are more gullible than others, and thus the posterior
probability that these gullible types assign to the event that the story is true shifts further from their prior than that
of non-gullible types. Alternatively, these differences may arise because some people will be more affected if the state
of the world implied by the rationale is true, and thus they are more willing to take the anti-immigrant action than
other agents even if they assign the same probability to the event that the rationale is true as other agents. Said
differently, differences in persuasion may arise from differences in belief updating or from differences in payoffs.



                                                            9
as persuadable is lower than the image cost of being perceived as intolerant.
    Thus, the sender's expected social utility of inducing the receiver to believe with probability 
that the sender is tolerant is given by b( ) = b0 + (1 -  )b1 . We assume that p > 0.5 such that
b0 > b1 , i.e. the expected social utility from being perceived as tolerant is strictly greater than the
expected social utility from being perceived as intolerant.18
    Both types of non-persuadable senders also receive expressive utility v > 0 from taking an
action consistent with their tolerance type: in particular, the intolerant sender receives v when
choosing to take the anti-immigrant action and 0 otherwise, while the tolerant sender receives v
when they choose not to take the anti-immigrant action and 0 otherwise. The utility function of
the non-persuadable sender with tolerance type a = i is thus given as follows:


                                    ui (a,  ) = v 1{a=i} + b0 + (1 -  )b1 .


    Let  (a) denote the receiver's posterior belief that the sender is tolerant after observing the
sender's action a. Then, the following proposition holds:

Proposition 1. Non-persuadable senders' optimal actions are as follows19 :


                                       a0 ( (·)) = 1                  v
                                                         (1)- (0)> b -b
                                                                             ,                                    (1)
                                                                    0   1

                                       a1 ( (·)) = 1                   v
                                                         (1)- (0)>- b -b
                                                                                 .                                (2)
                                                                     0   1



    In other words, assuming  (1) <  (0) (that is, the receiver believes senders who take the anti-
immigrant action are more likely to be intolerant than senders who do not take the action), the
tolerant non-persuadable agent never takes the action, while the intolerant non-persuadable agent
takes the action if and only if the social image cost of doing so is small relative to the expressive
utility. In what follows, we take the expressive utility v as given and endogenize  .
    We consider the equilibria of two separate games, which map to our experimental conditions. In
the No Excuse (N E ) game, the receiver holds incorrect beliefs about the sender's information set
(and this is known to the sender): the receiver believes with certainty that the sender did not see
  18
      This assumption implies that the sender wants to be perceived as intolerant if they think their matched receiver
is more likely to be intolerant than tolerant. Alternatively, we could assume that the sender always prefers to be
perceived as tolerant irrespective of whether the receiver is more likely to be tolerant or intolerant. With p > 0.5,
the model yields virtually identical results under this alternative assumption. That is, we can redefine b0 := b and
b1 := b and the remainder of this section would be identical under this alternative assumption.
   19
      We assume that the sender does not take the action when she is indifferent between taking and not taking the
action; however, the results in the section do not depend on this assumption.


                                                         10
the anti-immigrant rationale prior to choosing her action. Thus, the receiver believes that there is
no persuasion effect operating on the sender, and the receiver therefore believes with certainty that
a sender who takes the action is intolerant, i.e.  (a = 1) = 0. In contrast, in the Excuse (E ) game,
the receiver (correctly) believes with certainty that the sender has seen the anti-immigrant rationale
prior to choosing her action. Thus, the receiver no longer knows with certainty that a sender who
takes the action is intolerant, since he knows he may be matched with a tolerant-persuadable sender
who was persuaded by the anti-immigrant information to take the action.20 Our solution concept
for both games is Perfect Bayesian equilibrium in pure strategies, in which  (·) is consistent with
each type of sender's actions and follows Bayes' rule when possible. We adopt the intuitive criterion
to refine the set of off-path equilibria in the Excuse game (Cho and Kreps, 1987).21
    The fact that the tolerant-nonpersuadable sender does not take the action in either game is im-
mediate, since both social and expressive utility are strictly greater when the tolerant-nonpersuadable
sender does not take the action than when she does.22 When expressive utility v is small relative
to social utility, the intolerant-nonpersuadable sender does not take the action either in the Ex-
cuse game or the No Excuse game because the social image costs of taking the action outweigh
the expressive benefits. In contrast, when expressive utility v is large relative to social utility, the
intolerant-nonpersuadable sender takes the action in both the Excuse game and the No Excuse
game. For expressive utility v within a certain parameter range, there exists an equilibrium in
which the intolerant-nonpersuadable sender does not take the action under the No Excuse game
but takes the action under the Excuse game, assuming that the share of persuadable agents is suf-
   20
       We view intolerance and gullibility as independent dimensions. An alternative interpretation might be that many
agents are biased precisely because they are gullible: that is, they believe what they are exposed to, and they are
simply exposed to more anti-minority information than pro-minority information. One implication is that providing
the receiver with information relevant to the sender's type is likely to move the receiver's inference about the sender's
bias and the sender's gullibility in the same direction. In Experiment 1, we find evidence that receivers' posteriors
about senders' bias and gullibility, as measured by both an open-ended text analysis procedure and structured
measures of beliefs, generally move in opposite directions, suggesting that this alternative channel may be limited in
its quantitative importance. While the open-ended text may only capture the first motivation that comes to mind,
the (incentivized) structured beliefs measures are not subject to this concern.
    21
       In our model, persuadable and non-persuadable receivers are identical. In particular, tolerant-persuadable
receivers who are persuaded by the anti-immigrant organization still judge intolerant senders in the same manner
as tolerant-persuadable receivers, capturing the intuition that people care about the motivations behind others'
actions. Moreover, persuadable receivers still use Bayes' rule to make inferences about the sender's motivations. We
could alternatively model persuadable and non-persuadable receivers differently, such that persuadable receivers take
senders' actions at face value: in other words, such that they believe with probability one that donors are intolerant
and non-donors are tolerant. This alternative model would narrow the set of parameter values under which we
observe our equilibria of interest, as described in Proposition 2, but would leave our model's predictions qualitatively
unchanged.
    22
       The fact that expressive utility from not donating is greater than from donating is by definition, while the fact
that social utility from not donating is greater than social utility from donating follows from the assumption that
p > 0.5.


                                                           11
ficiently large to allow intolerant-nonpersuadable agents to pool with tolerant-persuadable agents.
We formalize this claim in Proposition 2, which we prove in Appendix A.

Proposition 2. Suppose that

                     (1 - p) (b0 - b1 )     p (b0 - b1 )                       p2
                                        <v                    and   q<     2p2 -2p+1
                                                                                     .
                          1 - qp           p + q (1 - p)

Then, there exists a unique equilibrium in the No Excuse game, and there exists a unique equilibrium
in the Excuse game satisfying the intuitive criterion. The tolerant-nonpersuadable sender does not
take the action in either game, while the intolerant-nonpersuadable sender takes the action only in
the Excuse game.

    Given the existence of the equilibrium as in Proposition 2, the following is an immediate corollary
from the sender's equilibrium actions under the two conditions.

Corollary 1. In the equilibria as in Proposition 2, the receiver's posterior belief that a sender who
takes the action is intolerant is lower in the Excuse game than in the No Excuse game:

                                                   1-p
                              1 -  N E (1) = 1 >          = 1 -  E (1) .
                                                   1 - pq

Moreover, the receiver's posterior belief that a sender who takes the action is non-persuadable is
higher in the No Excuse game than in the Excuse condition:

                                                  q (1 - p)
                                 N E (1) = 0 <              = E (1) ,
                                                   1 - qp

where (a) is the receiver's posterior belief after observing action a that the sender is non-persuadable.

    The reasoning is straightforward: because the receiver believes that only the intolerant-persuadable
sender takes the action in the No Excuse game, we have N E (1) = 0. In contrast, in the Ex-
cuse game, the receiver believes that intolerant-persuadable, tolerant-persuadable, and intolerant-
                                                                        q (1-p)           q (1-p)
sophisticated senders all take the action. Thus, we have E (1) =     (1-q )+q (1-p)   =    1-qp .



3    Excuses and Interpreting Xenophobic Expression

We begin by examining how the availability of a rationale changes how an audience interprets the
decision to donate to Fund the Wall, an organization that seeks to fund the proposed US­Mexico


                                                   12
border wall.23 We are particularly interested in how excuses affect judgment vis-a-vis an audience
that disapproves of the action, as this is precisely the audience before which an agent may require
an excuse, and we thus focus on Democrats.24
    In our framework, a "sender" may donate to Fund the Wall for two reasons. First, they may
be intolerant. Alternatively, they may have been persuaded to donate after being exposed to the
anti-immigrant rationale. The receiver observes the sender's donation decision and then uses this
information to make an inference about the sender's motivations; the receiver may or may not be
persuaded by the rationale.25 Motivated by Corollary 1 of our framework, in Experiment 1, we
study how the audience's inference about the sender's motivations is affected by the availability of
an excuse.


3.1    Sample

We conducted Experiment 1 in partnership with the survey company Luc.id, a widely used online
survey panel provider (Wood and Porter, 2019). We recruited a sample of 3,047 Democrats in
February 2020.26 Participants were directed to our survey on the online platform Qualtrics. Only
participants who were over the age of 18, resided in the United States, indicated their consent
to participate, and passed a simple test of attention were allowed to proceed. Our sample of
respondents is broadly representative of Democrats in the United States (Appendix Table B1) and
well-balanced on observables across treatment arms (Appendix Table B2). Experimental procedures
and analyses were pre-registered in the AEA RCT Registry.
  23
       All survey instruments are available in Appendix D.
  24
       As of January 2019, 6 percent of Democrats or Democratic leaners favored "substantially expanding the wall",
compared to 82 percent of Republicans or Republican leaners (Pew, 2019).
    25
       Differences in persuasion may arise because some people are more gullible than others, and thus the posterior
probability that these gullible types assign to the event that the story is true shifts further from their prior than
that of non-gullible types. Alternatively, these differences may arise because some people will be more affected if
the state of the world implied by the rationale is true, and thus they are more willing to donate than other agents
even if they assign the same probability to the event that the rationale is true as other agents. Said differently,
differences in persuasion may arise from differences in belief updating or from differences in payoffs. The definition
of persuasion that we adopt--"influencing behavior via provision of information" (Kamenica, 2019)--applies to both
possibilities, and thus we refer to "persuadable agents" without further distinguishing between the two potential
underlying mechanisms.
    26
       In our pre-registration, we specified that in some specifications, we would pool data from a pilot (N = 2, 019)
with the data from the main experiment. The pilot instrument was virtually identical to the instrument used in the
main experiment. We report both unpooled and pooled specifications.




                                                         13
3.2     Experimental design

Figure 1 outlines the structure of Experiment 1. We tell all respondents about a recent study (Lott,
2018) which finds that "undocumented immigrants are at least 142% more likely to be convicted
of a crime than other Arizonans ... they also tend to commit more serious crimes and serve 10.5%
longer sentences, are more likely to be classified as dangerous, and are 45% more likely to be gang
members than U.S. citizens."27 We also truthfully tell our respondents that a number of sources
(including a researcher affiliated with the Cato Institute, a libertarian think tank) have recently
challenged some of the study's methods, claiming that errors in analysis invalidate its results.28 .
We then tell participants that we conducted a project on political and social attitudes in the United
States earlier in the year, and that respondents to this previous study were given an opportunity to
authorize a $1 donation to Fund the Wall: a potentially stigmatized expression of anti-immigrant
beliefs. We inform participants that we have matched them with one of these respondents, and
that this respondent chose to authorize the donation. Respondents in the Excuse condition are
(truthfully) told that their matched respondent was informed about the study before deciding
whether or not to authorize the donation to Fund the Wall, while respondents in the No Excuse
condition are (truthfully) told that their matched respondent was not informed about the study
before making their donation decision.


Measuring type inference               After learning whether or not their matched respondent knew about
the study, all participants respond to the following open-ended question: "Why do you think your
matched respondent chose to donate to Fund the Wall?" As we discuss in Section 3.3, these open-
ended responses form the raw data for our first measure of type inference; we employ text analysis
to systematically analyze the open-ended responses. Participants are then cross-randomized into
one of two conditions: "tolerance" and "gullibility".29,30 Participants in the "tolerance" condition
   27
      This study has been widely covered by the media, including The Washington Times, National Review, and Fox
News, and has been repeatedly cited by Trump administration officials. For example, in a January 2018 speech on
"national security and immigration priorities of the administration," then-Attorney General Jeff Sessions claimed
that the study proved that "tens of thousands of crimes have been committed in this country that would never have
happened if our immigration laws were enforced and respected like they ought to be" (see footnote 5).
   28
      In order to ensure that our respondents are not misinformed, we debrief them at the end of the study and provide
them with a meta-analysis summarizing the work on the effects of immigration on crime (Ousey and Kubrin, 2018).
   29
      Of course, as described above, gullibility is only one of a set of potential reasons for donating after being exposed
to information suggesting immigrants commit more crimes; alternative reasons include lower tolerance for crime,
higher levels of risk aversion, etc. We focus on gullibility in our experiment because it is (arguably) the most natural
"second type," because it was the most frequent reason cited in our pilot results, and because it is more easily coded.
   30
      We measure type inference using a "between" design (in which each respondent is asked only about a single
dimension) rather than a "within" design (in which respondents are asked about both dimensions). We employ a



                                                            14
are told that their matched respondent completed the "Foreign Culture Tolerance Scale," a "short
questionnaire measuring tolerance toward foreign values and traditions," before making their do-
nation decisions. Participants in the "gullibility" condition are told that their matched respondent
completed the "Gullibility Scale," a "short questionnaire which measures how easily people are
manipulated by evidence from untrustworthy sources," before making their donation decisions. All
participants are asked to guess their respondent's score; we incentivize this guess by informing
them that if they correctly guess the score, they will be entered into a lottery for a $50 Amazon
gift card.31


3.3    Main results

Empirical strategy          To identify the effect of the excuse on respondents' inference about the
matched respondent's type, we estimate the following empirical specification:


                                           yi = 0 + 1 Excusei + i ,                                               (3)


where Excusei is an indicator taking value 1 for participants in the Excuse condition and value 0 in
the No Excuse condition. yi is our participant's belief about the matched respondent's type. We
employ robust standard errors throughout.


Main findings        We begin by using text analysis to measure how participants respond to the open-
ended question "Why do you think your matched respondent chose to donate to Fund the Wall?"
The advantage of this approach is that we can directly measure what comes to respondents' minds
rather than drawing their attention to the particular dimensions we are interested in. Measuring
type inference through analyzing open-ended text responses may thus better capture the natural
process of inference than directly asking about perceptions of tolerance or gullibility.32
between design in order to minimize experimenter demand effects and to avoid order effects (Haaland et al., 2020).
   31
      The previous study respondents with whom Experiment 2 subjects were matched completed a survey very
similar in structure to our Experiment 1 survey, but the two surveys were not precisely the same. In particular, it
was important that Experiment 2 subjects believe that their matched respondents completed the scale before learning
about the Lott study and before making their donation decision, such that subjects' inferences about their matched
respondents' scores were not biased by subjects believing that learning about the Lott study changed their matched
respondents scores. However, administering these scales in this manner to participants in Experiment 1 might have
created significant demand effects, compromising the validity of our findings. To avoid deception, we thus ran a small
auxiliary survey before we ran Experiment 2, and we matched Experiment 2 subjects with participants from this
auxiliary survey.
   32
      Because respondents in both the No Excuse and Excuse conditions see the same question, our approach also
mitigates concerns about experimenter demand. We discuss experimenter demand in greater depth in Section 3.4.



                                                         15
    We began with five "seed words" for each type. For (in)tolerance, we chose racist, biased,
xenophobic, intolerant, and prejudiced. For gullibility, we chose convinced, persuaded, gullible, naive,
and sucker. We added all "most relevant" synonyms for these words, as classified by the website
www.thesaurus.com. In order to capture different parts of speech, we then stemmed all words in
our list (e.g., xenophobic  xenophob, gullible  gullib), for a total of 23 intolerance-related stems
and 30 gullibility-related stems (Gentzkow et al., 2019).
    We then define two indicator variables -- one variable that takes value 1 if the respondent
uses an intolerance-related stem and 0 otherwise, and another variable that takes value 1 if the
respondent uses a gullibility-related stem and 0 otherwise -- and estimate treatment effects on the
probability that the respondent uses at least one word in each list.33 In order to eliminate potential
degrees of freedom for analysis, we pre-specified this entire procedure, including the list of stems
and the code file used for analysis.
    Figure 2 displays results from our text-based type inference. Participants in the Excuse condi-
tion are 7 percentage points less likely to use a stem related to intolerance when describing their
matched respondent's motive, compared to a mean of 17 percent among participants in the No Ex-
cuse condition (p < 0.001). These same participants are also 3 percentage points more likely to use
words related to gullibility (p < 0.001), relative to a mean of 7 percent among participants in the
No Excuse condition.34 These are substantial effect sizes, which highlight that the availability of a
rationale strongly changes people's inference about their matched respondent's motives. Columns
1­3 of Table 1 display results in regression form and demonstrate robustness to the inclusion of
demographic and partisan controls.
    Figure 2 also displays results from our structured belief measures. Participants who believe their
matched respondent had an excuse rated their respondent 0.13 standard deviations lower on the
intolerance scale (p < 0.001), and 0.32 standard deviations higher on the gullibility scale (p < 0.001).
As with the text analysis measure, effects are similar in the pilot and in the pre-registered main
experiment, are robust to the inclusion of control variables, and are precisely estimated. Table 2
displays results in regression form and demonstrates robustness to the inclusion of demographic
and partisan controls. To further validate our two measures of type inference, we show in Table B3
that they are highly correlated: on average, a respondent who uses a word related to intolerance
   33
      These two outcomes are neither mutually exclusive nor jointly exhaustive; responses that contain both an
intolerance-related stem and a gullibility-related stem will have both intolerance and gullibility indicators equal to
one, whereas responses that contain neither type of stem will have both indicators equal to zero. Thus, our results
are unbiased even if participants perceive a nonzero correlation between intolerance and gullibility.
   34
      We were intentionally conservative when choosing stem words in order to minimize the rate of false positives.



                                                         16
(gullibility) when describing the matched respondent's motive rates the matched respondent as half
a standard deviation more intolerant (gullible) than a respondent who does not use such a word.
    As a final measure of beliefs, we use a Support Vector Machine regression to predict participants'
ratings of their partners on the intolerance and gullibility scales based upon their open-ended text
responses. This measure aims to exploit all information given in the open-responses for predicting
the subsequent belief measures; importantly, because all participants completed the open-ended
responses before seeing the scale, we can include participants assigned to the gullibility condition
when evaluating effects on intolerance, and we can include participants assigned to the intolerance
condition when evaluating effects on gullibility.35 We then estimate treatment effects on these
predicted scores. Unlike our word-counting exercise, this approach is insensitive to the set of
keywords chosen and is thus a more disciplined procedure to measure perceptions of bias and
gullibility expressed in participants' open-ended responses. Columns 4­6 of Table 1 display these
results in regression form and confirm that our treatment has a statistically and economically
significant effect on perceptions.
    Taken together, our evidence suggests that when judging others' motives, people believe that
those who donated with an excuse are more persuadable and less intolerant than those who donated
without an excuse.


3.4    Ruling out alternative explanations

Demand effects One potential concern regarding the validity of our estimated treatment effects
is that respondents across different treatment conditions hold different beliefs about the exper-
imenter's expectations, and that these beliefs drive our findings. Despite recent evidence that
respondents are not elastic to explicit signals of the experimenter's expectations in online surveys
(de Quidt et al., 2018), suggesting a limited quantitative importance of demand effects in the
context of our experiment, we provide direct evidence on beliefs about the purpose of the study.
    We measured respondents' beliefs about the purpose of the experiment at the end of Experiment
1 using an open-ended question: "If you had to guess, what was the purpose of this study?" To
examine whether respondents in the different treatment conditions hold different beliefs about
the purpose of the study, we employ machine learning techniques to classify these text responses.
In particular, a Support Vector Machine classifier trained to predict treatment status given the
  35
     We employed a radial basis function kernel in the SVR, though in practice the results are insensitive to other
choices of parameters. This final exercise was not pre-registered.




                                                        17
participant's response cannot predict whether respondents were assigned to the Excuse or No
Excuse condition better than chance (Table B4).36 This suggests that the treatment does not
significantly affect respondents' perceptions about the purpose of the study.37


Differential attrition Could differential attrition across treatment arms explain our findings?
Attrition rates in Experiment 1 are virtually identical among respondents in the Excuse and No
Excuse conditions (p = 0.23) and neither political affiliation nor any other demographic variable
systematically predicts differential attrition across treatment arms (Table ?? in the Appendix).


3.5      Do people dislike the intolerant more than the gullible?

A key assumption in our model is that the social image cost of being perceived as intolerant is
higher than the social image cost of being perceived as gullible.38 In an additional auxiliary exper-
iment, we confirm that this assumption is reasonable.39 In particular, we recruit a representative
sample of Democrats (the same population as in Experiment 1), and we inform them that they have
been matched either with another respondent who scored above average on The Gullibility Scale
(gullibility condition) or below average on The Foreign Culture Tolerance Scale (intolerance condi-
tion). We then give them the opportunity to authorize a $1 donation to their matched respondent.
Consistent with our assumption, we observe significantly higher donations to matched partners
with high gullibility than to matched partners with high intolerance (see Appendix Figure B1 and
Appendix Table B6).


4        Excuses and Xenophobic Expression

Experiment 1 demonstrated that subjects were more likely to ascribe xenophobic behavior to gulli-
bility and less likely to ascribe xenophobic behavior to intolerance when an excuse was available.
Furthermore, the auxiliary experiment demonstrated that subjects were less spiteful toward gullible
types than intolerant types. These results raise the question of whether people who hold intolerant
    36
      We employed a radial basis function kernel in the SVR, though in practice the results are insensitive to other
choices of parameters.
   37
      In Section 4.2, we present evidence that our classifier is sufficiently sensitive to detect differences in stated beliefs
when they are present.
   38
      For simplicity, we assume in our model that there is no direct social image cost of being perceived as gullible.
We can relax this assumption without changing any of the key results, so long as the direct social image cost of being
perceived as intolerant remains higher than the direct social image cost of being perceived as gullible.
   39
      A copy of the experimental instructions is available in Appendix Section H.




                                                              18
views strategically use excuses to lower the social cost of publicly expressing these views (Propo-
sition 2 of our theoretical framework). We examine this question in Experiment 2 in the same
context as in Experiment 1: anti-immigrant expression justified by claims that immigrants dispro-
portionately commit violent crimes.


4.1    Experiment 2: sample and experimental design

We again worked with Luc.id to recruit 3,728 self-reported Republicans and Independents. In some
specifications, we supplement this data with approximately 716 Republicans and Independents from
a pilot experiment with Luc.id, also conducted in January 2020, that had nearly identical wording.40
In other specifications, we additionally pool with data from a replication and robustness check (1373
Republicans and Independents) conducted in October 2020.41 Participants were directed to our
survey on the online platform Qualtrics ; only participants who were over the age of 18, resided in
the United States, indicated their consent to participate, and passed a simple test of attention were
allowed to proceed.42 Our sample of respondents is broadly representative of Independents and
Republicans in the United States (Appendix Table B7) and is well-balanced on observables across
treatment arms (Appendix Table B8). We pre-registered all experimental procedures and analyses
for the main experiment. Figure 3 outlines the structure of Experiment 2.


Information: Lott study            After completing a series of demographic questions, respondents are
assigned to one of three different treatment conditions: an Excuse condition, a No Excuse condition,
and a Control condition. Respondents in the Excuse and No Excuse conditions receive information
about the Lott study; respondents in the Control condition do not learn about the study.


Donation decisions          To minimize experimenter demand concerns, we truthfully tell our respon-
dents that we will randomly select one of two organizations -- an anti-immigrant organization
(Fund the Wall ) and a pro-immigration organization (Texas Civil Rights Project ) -- and the re-
spondents will have the opportunity to authorize a $1 donation to this organization.43 In practice,
we randomized almost all respondents to Fund the Wall to maximize statistical power for our
comparison of interest.
   40
      We pre-registered reporting both results pooling pilot data with our main data and results with our main data
alone.
   41
      We describe this replication in greater detail in Section 4.2.
   42
      All survey instruments are available in Appendix E.
   43
      Respondents are explicitly informed that their own survey reward will be unaffected by their choice of whether
or not to donate: they are simply authorizing the researchers to make a donation on their behalf.


                                                        19
Visibility manipulation            Our treatment hinges upon respondents' decisions being publicly ob-
servable. We ask respondents to consent to us accessing their name, city, and operating system from
the survey provider (which confirmed that they would provide us with this data subject to partic-
ipant consent) and give respondents the option to terminate the survey if they do not consent.44
We inform respondents that once the Lott study is published in a reputable academic journal, we
will post the results from the survey, including their individual donation decision, on our study
website.45
    We also inform our respondents that "As researchers, we believe it is important to communicate
our findings about political and social attitudes in [City of respondent] to the public".46 We then
inform our respondents that "we will work with major news organizations in [City of respondent]
with both a liberal and conservative viewership to publicize our website through newspaper and
website articles", and "we will also promote our website via Facebook ads to [City of respondent]
residents". This non-deceptively generates a plausible social cost for acting in a way that will be
stigmatized in the respondent's area.47


Varying the availability of the excuse                 Our main object of interest is to identify the excuse
effect. This is complicated by the fact that providing information to respondents may affect their
behavior through two alternative channels other than the availability of the excuse. First, the
information might be directly persuasive, leading more respondents to donate because their private
views have changed. Second, even if the information does not persuade respondents, respondents
might believe that their audience will be persuaded by the study's description on the website, leading
respondents to expect lower social stigma from donating and thus increasing donation rates. We
thus design our experiment to rule out these competing effects. To hold fixed the first mechanism,
all respondents in the Excuse and No Excuse condition receive the same information about the
study. To hold fixed the second mechanism, we show respondents in the Excuse and No Excuse
conditions screenshots of our website, clearly indicating that all website visitors will be informed
about the study.
   44
      Because participants consent before exposure to the treatment, any resulting attrition should not bias our
estimates within the population who completes the survey.
   45
      At the time of writing (October 2020), the Lott study has not yet been published, and thus the donation decisions
are not yet online.
   46
      We used participants' IP address to capture and display their current location (i.e. their city). The IP addresses
were subsequently deleted to protect respondents' privacy.
   47
      Once the study has been published and the website has been created, we plan to publicize the website through
Facebook Advertisements and by disseminating the results of our study to news organizations. In line with instructions
to respondents, the website will only be created once the Lott study has been published.


                                                          20
   The key experimental treatment thus cleanly varies the availability of an excuse for donating.
In the Excuse condition, we inform respondents that "Website visitors will know that you knew
about the results of Dr. Lott's study," giving respondents an excuse to donate (i.e. believing, based
on the findings of the Lott study, that illegal immigrants commit substantially more crime than
US citizens). Respondents also see a screenshot of the website, which clearly states that "All
participants were told about Dr. Lott's study." Thus, respondents in the Excuse condition expect
that their audience will know they learned about the study before donating.
   Conceptually, in the No Excuse condition, we would like to show respondents a website screen-
shot stating that "No participants were told about Dr. Lott's study". However, because these
participants did in fact learn about the study, such a screenshot would be deceptive. Instead, we
exploit the fact that Lott's study had not yet been published in an academic journal (a fact about
which we explicitly informed all respondents when describing the website). In particular, we show
respondents a website screenshot stating that "We surveyed respondents earlier this year before
Dr. Lott's study was published." In the survey, we write that "the website states that you were
surveyed before the study was published and does not mention that you were shown an early sum-
mary of the study's findings."48 Respondents in this condition thus believe that their audience will
believe that they (the respondents) had no information excusing their decision to donate to Fund
the Wall.


Control condition           We also include a Control condition in which neither the respondent nor the
audience learns about the Lott study. This condition allows us to estimate the combined effects of
direct persuasion and anticipated persuasion of the audience, as we describe below.


4.2      Experiment 2: main results

Empirical strategy To identify the joint effects of direct persuasion and anticipated persuasion
of the audience (i.e. the direct persuasive effect of learning about the Lott study in addition to the
indirect effect of learning that one's audience has learned about the Lott study and may thus be
more likely to approve of the donation), we compare the Control condition with the No Excuse
condition. To identify the excuse effect, we compare the No Excuse condition to the Excuse
condition. This design thus allows us to benchmark the excuse effect against the combined effect
of first- and second-order persuasion. Our main specification of interest is given as follows:
  48
       As discussed in Section 4.2, we replicate our findings using a different and more subtle treatment manipulation.



                                                           21
                               yi = 0 + 1 Excusei + 2 Controli + i                                (4)


where yi is an indicator taking value 1 if the respondent authorized the donation to Fund the
Wall and 0 otherwise; Excusei is an indicator taking value 1 if the respondent was assigned to the
Excuse condition and 0 otherwise; and Controli is an indicator taking value 1 if the respondent was
assigned to the Control condition and 0 otherwise. The omitted category is thus the No Excuse
condition. We employ robust standard errors throughout our analysis.


Main findings Table 3 and Figure 4 display the main findings of Experiment 2. We find a
large and statistically significant effect on respondents' willingness to authorize a donation to Fund
the Wall: respondents in the Excuse condition are 6.3 percentage points more likely to authorize
the donation than respondents in the No Excuse condition. This effect is highly statistically
significant (p < 0.001) and large relative to a control condition mean of 48.8 percentage points.
Effect sizes are almost identical in our pre-specified main study, our pilot study, and a replication
several months later. The estimated effects are also stable to the inclusion of demographic controls;
Figure B2 presents a "coefficient stability plot" (Rao, 2020) displaying coefficient estimates under
every possible combination of controls.
   In contrast to the Excuse vs. No Excuse comparison, respondents in the No Excuse condition
are only 0.007 percentage points more likely to authorize a donation than respondents in the
control condition, suggesting that the combined effects of first- and second-order persuasion are
small. Relatively small persuasion effects are in line with other information provision experiments
in the immigration domain, which typically find relatively small or null effects on behavior and
stated preferences (Hopkins et al., 2019; Alesina et al., 2019; Grigorieff et al., 2020). Thus, small
effects of anticipated persuasion are consistent with agents holding accurate expectations about
whether their audience will be persuaded.
   Given the small joint effect of persuasion and the anticipated persuasion of the audience, what
might explain the large excuse effect we observe? First, agents may simply hold incorrect higher-
order beliefs: in particular, they may believe that their audience is more likely to believe that they
have been persuaded by the information. Alternatively, they may predict that social rewards or
sanctions associated with being perceived as intolerant are not linear in the probability that one
is intolerant: for example, they may believe that as long as it appears that there is some small


                                                 22
probability that they are not intolerant (i.e. because they were exposed to the study and may have
been persuaded), their audience will refrain from socially sanctioning them ("innocent until proven
guilty"). To preserve analytic tractability and convey our intuition as simply as possible, we do
not formally model either of these channels.


Heterogeneity by local vote shares              An implication of our model is that the audience's compo-
sition -- the share of tolerant vs. intolerant agents -- should affect donation decisions by changing
the perceived judgment associated with donating. Because we informed respondents that we would
promote the website (on which their individual donation decision would be posted) within their
geographical area, we might expect that controlling for the respondents' own private views, respon-
dents in areas with a greater fraction of Republicans should be less sensitive to the availability of
a rationale than respondents in areas with a lower fraction of Republicans, since Republicans are
likely to approve of the decision to donate to Fund the Wall even in the absence of a rationale.49 We
thus pre-registered investigating heterogeneity by the 2016 Republican vote share of respondents'
county, which we do by estimating the following specification:

       yi = 0 + 1 Excusei + 2 Controli + 3 Excusei × Rep sharei + 4 Controli × Rep sharei
                                                                                                                (5)
                + 5 Rep sharei + i

Table 4 displays the results, revealing striking heterogeneity by the Republican vote share of re-
spondents' counties. Although the heterogeneity is only statistically significant when we control for
individuals' demographic characteristics, the effect is large in magnitude: a one standard deviation
increase in the Republican vote share of a respondent's county is associated with halving the mag-
nitude of the excuse effect. These results should not be interpreted as a causal effect of respondents'
audiences -- it may be, for example, that Republicans in Democratic areas feel greater need to
signal their support for the study by publicly donating -- but the pattern is consistent with our
intuition that the excuse effect should be larger when the share of agents who privately approve of
the action is smaller.


Robustness experiment             The excuse effect, though potentially large in magnitude, is difficult to
cleanly identify given the need to hold both first-order and second-order persuasion constant. The
instructions of Experiment 2 were thus relatively explicit: participants were directly informed about
  49
     Of course, it is possible that Republicans care less about the opinions of Democrats than that of fellow Repub-
licans, which would weaken the heterogeneity results we examine.


                                                        23
their audience's information sets and were reminded about this information when making their
decision, thus ensuring that they fully understood the instructions. Yet one concern is that these
instructions, by making the higher-order belief mechanism salient, induced experimenter demand
effects that biased our estimated treatment effects. In October 2020, we conducted an additional
robustness experiment with 1,373 Republicans, which used a much leaner set of instructions and
which made the issue of higher-order beliefs much less salient.50 In this experiment, we did not show
participants any screenshots or illustrations; we did not explicitly tell them what their audience
was likely to believe about whether they had seen the study prior to making the donation; and we
considerably shortened the survey. We omitted the Control condition, given our primary interest
in the comparison between Excuse and No Excuse.
    Columns 4­6 of Table 3 report our estimates. We find similar and statistically significant
treatment effects (though of slightly smaller magnitudes) using this much leaner set of experimental
instructions. Thus, the results of this robustness experiment not only mitigate concerns that
experimenter demand effects drove our original findings but they also bolster their external validity:
despite being conducted almost a year later in a substantially different economic and political
situation (in the midst of the COVID-19 pandemic and an economic recession, just a few weeks
before Election Day), we once again find significant evidence for the excuse mechanism. We also
replicate the heterogeneity by Republican vote share (Columns 4­6 of Table 4), which, if anything,
is stronger than in the original experiment.


Demand effects: further discussion A priori, it seems plausible that showing participants
information about the Lott study may induce demand effects and thus affect donation rates. Even
if such demand effects are present, however, they will not bias our main comparison of interest
(Excuse vs. No Excuse ), given that participants in both treatment arms are shown identical
information about the study. Another concern is that the treatment manipulation of beliefs about
the audience's information set induced differential experimenter demand effects. In addition to
conducting the robustness experiment described above, we address this concern through a number
of additional exercises.
    As in Experiment 1, we measured respondents' beliefs about the purpose of the experiment
at the end of Experiment 2 using an open-ended question. As before, we use a Support Vector
    50
       We targeted 1,426 complete responses, the sample size needed for 80% power to detect an effect size of the same
magnitude as the effect size estimated in the main experiment and pilot (Column 3 of Table 3). Attrition rates were
slightly greater than in previous rounds, resulting in a slightly smaller sample. See Appendix F for the experimental
instructions.


                                                         24
Machine classifier to predict treatment status given the participant's response. Employing 75
percent of our sample as a training set and the remaining 25 percent as a test set, we show that we
cannot predict treatment status better than chance when distinguishing between the Excuse and
No Excuse conditions (Table B11). However, we can predict assignment to the control condition
substantially better than chance (Table B11), which highlights that respondents in the control
condition hold different beliefs from respondents in the Excuse and No Excuse condition. Given
that the control condition differs significantly from the Excuse and No Excuse conditions in that
control respondents do not learn about the Lott study, this difference is to be expected; we view this
result as validation for our method, as it demonstrates that we would in principle detect differences
in perceived purpose between the Excuse and No Excuse conditions if such differences were present.
   In addition to the machine-learning exercise, we also hired two independent research assistants
to hand-code the responses to the open-ended purpose question. Table B10 in the Appendix shows
that the majority of our respondents believed that we wanted to study the effects of information on
anti-immigrant sentiment or participant's willingness to have their decisions posted on the website.
Fewer than 1 percent of our sample correctly guessed the true purpose of our experiment (Column 1).
Table B10 also shows that on almost all of the dimensions we code, beliefs about the purpose of the
study do not significantly differ between the Excuse and No Excuse conditions. The exception is
Social Image (Column 3): respondents in the Excuse condition are 2 percentage points more likely
than respondents in the No Excuse condition to believe that the study was about whether people
were willing to publicly express political views (p = 0.038). Although statistically significant, this
difference is small in magnitude and cannot explain our effect sizes. Reassuringly, respondents were
no more likely to believe that the experimenters were biased in the Excuse condition than in the
No Excuse condition (Column 6, p = 0.994). As suggested by the results of the machine learning
exercise described previously, we do find significant differences in perceived purpose between the
control condition and the No Excuse condition and also between the control condition and the
Excuse condition. This is likely due to the fact that we provided respondents in the No Excuse
and Excuse conditions information suggesting that undocumented immigrants commit more crimes
than US citizens (i.e. the Lott study), while we did not provide any such information to respondents
in the control condition. However, these differences do not affect our main comparison of interest
(No Excuse vs. Excuse ).
   Finally, heterogeneous treatment effects by the county-level Republican vote share provide addi-
tional suggestive evidence against experimenter demand effects driving our findings. In particular,


                                                 25
for demand effects to explain our treatment effects, we would require that -- controlling for re-
spondents' own characteristics, including their political affiliation -- respondents in counties with
a lower Republican vote share are substantially more affected by latent experimenter demand ef-
fects (that both our hand-coding and our machine learning exercise fail to detect, and which are
induced even by the leaner set of experimental instructions used for the robustness experiment)
than respondents in counties with a higher Republican vote share. While not impossible, we view
this contingency as unlikely.


Differential attrition Could patterns of differential attrition explain the estimated treatment
effects in our data? We find no differential attrition among respondents in the Excuse versus No
Excuse condition (p = 0.47), and there is no evidence of differential attrition between different
subgroups (Table B12 in the Appendix). We do find a precisely estimated four percentage point
lower attrition rate among respondents in the control condition compared to respondents in the
Excuse condition and the No Excuse condition (p < 0.001), which may be explained by the greater
survey length of the Excuse and No Excuse versions of the survey. This does not affect our estimates
of the main effect of interest (No Excuse vs. Excuse ), but may slightly bias the benchmark (Control
vs. No Excuse ).


5    Policy Implications and Conclusion

Motivated by a global wave of anti-immigrant rhetoric and policy, we study how commonly known
rationales to oppose immigration serve as excuses to justify anti-immigrant behavior. In a moti-
vating survey, we find that public support among Republicans for a permanent ban on Mexican
immigration into the US jumps from 32% to 51% if respondents are allowed to attach a justifica-
tion for their public support: protecting the US from contagious diseases. We then use large-scale
experiments to examine the mechanisms through which excuses facilitate the expression of anti-
immigration behavior, focusing on one of the most widely-cited justifications for reducing immi-
gration: the claim that immigrants commit crimes at vastly higher rates than citizens. In a first
experiment, we show that subjects perceive donors who had been exposed to an anti-immigrant
rationale as less biased against immigrants and more persuadable than donors who had not been
exposed. In a second experiment, we show that subjects who believe that their exposure to the
rationale will be publicly observable are substantially more likely to make the donation to an anti-
immigrant organization than subjects who believe that their exposure to the rationale will remain

                                                 26
private.
    Our approach can be applied to understand a variety of political economy phenomena. For
example, populist rhetoric often seeks to generate common knowledge -- or the perception of
common knowledge -- of excuses. M¨
                                 uller (2016) argues that populist rhetoric is often characterized
by appeals to the beliefs or desires of the "people" or a "silent majority" -- a group which often
has little to no basis in fact. For example, several commentators have highlighted Donald Trump's
tendency to use phrases such as "People say ..." when discussing politically sensitive issues, and
as Rosenblum and Muirhead (2019) argue, this practice is common to a number of prominent
populist politicians around the world spanning the ideological spectrum. Such rhetoric generates
the perception of common knowledge of the excuse: by implying that fringe conspiracy theories are
known to a large group of people (and by appearing to endorse the theory themselves), populists seek
to convey that the excuse will be credible and thus effective.51 Closely related is the tendency to rely
on anecdotes -- for instance, isolated cases of voter fraud -- in order to argue certain phenomena are
widespread, ignoring statistics to the contrary. Also related is dog-whistling: "sending a message to
certain potential supporters in such a way as to make it inaudible to others whom it might alienate
or deniable for still others who would find any explicit appeal along those lines offensive" (Goodin
and Saward, 2005), which has been used to describe the Republican Party's "Southern Strategy"
                                                                          opez, 2014).52 As
to win white support in the South by appealing to racial tensions (Haney-L´
with "people say" and related language, "dog-whistles" generate two types of excuses: one for the
politician vis-a-vis the public, and one for the politician's supporters vis-a-vis others who disapprove
of the statement, allowing them to publicly support the politician and his or her policies without
incurring social stigma.53
    Our findings are also relevant for the debate about the influence of fake and misleading news
on society. While studies suggest that the persuasive effect of fake news is limited (Nyhan, 2018;
Allcott and Gentzkow, 2017), our study points to an alternative mechanism through which fake
news can affect public expression. In particular, fake news can generate a "persuasion multiplier":
   51
      This practice is, of course, also consistent with populists exploiting social learning channels in order to bolster
the persuasive power of their claims.
   52
      In a 1981 interview, Republican strategist and Republican National Committee chairman Lee Atwater described
the strategy as follows: "You start out in 1954 by saying, `N--, n--, n--.' By 1968 you can't say `n--': that hurts
you. Backfires. So you say stuff like forced busing, states' rights and all that stuff. You're getting so abstract now
[that] you're talking about cutting taxes, and all these things you're talking about are totally economic things and a
byproduct of them is [that] blacks get hurt worse than whites. And subconsciously maybe that is part of it. I'm not
saying that." (Lamis, ed, 1999)
   53
      Indeed, a third type of excuse may be a "self-excuse" for politician's supporters who do not want to admit to
themselves that they endorse racist positions, as in B´ enabou and Tirole (2011a).



                                                           27
rationales that plausibly persuade a small subset of the population and are commonly known to
exist can change public behavior among a much larger fraction of the population, increasing their
willingness to express otherwise-stigmatized views by increasing the effectiveness of their excuse.
    This insight has implications for debunking fake news spread online and offline. In particular,
our findings suggest that in order to prevent a given fake news story from spreading, it might
be insufficient to debunk it privately ; instead, it is crucial to generate common knowledge that
the excuse is invalid. This insight has valuable implications for institutional policy. Among other
platforms, Facebook has experimented with various strategies to curtail the spread of misinforma-
tion, including warning users before they post an article flagged as fake news and flagging fake or
misleading news when it appears on users' timelines (e.g., because a friend shared it). The former
initiative maps closely onto a "first-order" debunking in our model (private persuasion), while the
second initiative maps onto a "second-order" debunking (debunking one's audience). Yet to the
extent that Facebook does not yet debunk all users (more precisely, to the extent that the fact
that Facebook does not debunk all users is not common knowledge), it generates a ready-made
excuse for sharing fake news: posters can credibly claim that they were not warned the news was
fake.54 Our results suggest it is important not only to debunk both the poster and the audience,
but also to make it clear to the poster that the audience will know that he or she was debunked
before posting. This could be done by including a screenshot in the warning shown to the poster of
what his or her post will look like to others, in which the sentence "The poster was warned that this
link has been flagged as fake or misleading before posting" is clearly visible. An alternative and
simpler path would be to simply roll out the feature to the entire user-base, generating common
knowledge that all users are warned before posting fake news. Because the general equilibrium
results of such a change differ significantly from the partial equilibrium results by creating common
knowledge, current estimates of the effects of debunking on users' propensity to share fake news
may substantially understate the true effects that would be realized if platforms were to fully scale
up the feature.
    Our results suggest several directions for further research. First, what implications do our
results have for the "supply side" of excuses: can "excuse entrepreneurs" who are able to generate
common knowledge about plausible rationales to act in a potentially stigmatized manner cause
striking reversals of social norms, even if their persuasive impact is limited, and can similar patterns
  54
     Indeed, Facebook's fact-checking efforts have been widely criticized for a lack of transparency, and it is thus
certain that most Facebook users lack information about how the platform fights misinformation. (Nyhan, Brendan.
"Why the Fact-Checking at Facebook Needs to Be Checked." The New York Times, October 23, 2017.)



                                                        28
help explain the rising popularity of ideologically extreme media outlets? Moreover, can growing
partisan polarization in media consumption make excuses more effective by allowing partisans to
more credibly claim that they have not been exposed to information contradicting their views?




                                              29
References

Adena, Maja, Ruben Enikolopov, Maria Petrova, Veronica Santarosa, and Ekaterina
  Zhuravskaya, "Radio and the Rise of The Nazis in Prewar Germany," The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 2015, 130 (4), 1885­1939.

Alesina, Alberto, Armando Miano, and Stefanie Stantcheva, "Immigration and redistri-
  bution," Working Paper 24733, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2019.

Ali, S. Nageeb and Roland B´
                           enabou, "Image versus Information: Changing Societal Norms
  and Optimal Privacy," American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 2020, 12 (3), 116­164.

Allcott, Hunt and Matthew A. Gentzkow, "Social Media and Fake News in the 2016 Election,"
  Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2017, 31 (2), 211­36.

Andreoni, James and B. Douglas Bernheim, "Social Image and the 50­50 Norm: A Theo-
  retical and Experimental Analysis of Audience Effects," Econometrica, 2009, 77 (5), 1607­1636.

Ariely, Dan, Anat Bracha, and Stephan Meier, "Doing Good or Doing Well? Image Moti-
  vation and Monetary Incentives in Behaving Prosocially," American Economic Review, 2009, 99
  (1), 544­555.

Arrow, Kenneth, "The Theory of Discrimination," in Albert Rees and Orley Ashenfelter, eds.,
  Discrimination in Labor Markets, Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1973.

Bandura, Albert, Claudio Barbaranelli, Gian Vittorio Caprara, and Concetta Pas-
  torelli, "Mechanisms of Moral Disengagement in the Exercise of Moral Agency," Journal of
  Personality and Social Psychology, 1996, 71 (2), 364­374.

  , Gian Vittorio Caprara, Claudio Barbaranelli, Concetta Pastorelli, and Camillo Re-
  galia, "Sociocognitive Self-regulatory Mechanisms Governing Transgressive Behavior," Journal
  of Personality and Social Psychology, 2001, 80 (1), 125­135.

Becker, Gary S., The Economics of Discrimination, University of Chicago Press, 1957.

B´
 enabou, Roland and Jean Tirole, "Incentives and Prosocial Behavior," American Economic
  Review, 2006, 96 (5), 1652­1678.




                                               30
  and      , "Identity, Morals, and Taboos: Beliefs as Assets," The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  2011, 126 (2), 805­855.

Benabou, Roland and Jean Tirole, "Laws and Norms," Technical Report w17579, National
  Bureau of Economic Research 2011.

B´
 enabou, Roland, Armin Falk, and Jean Tirole, "Narratives, Imperatives, and Moral Rea-
  soning," Working Paper 24798, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2018.

Besley, Timothy, Anders Jensen, and Torsten Persson, "Norms, Enforcement, and Tax
  Evasion," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2019.

Bursztyn, Leonardo, Alessandra L. Gonz´
                                      alez, and David Yanagizawa-Drott, "Misper-
  ceived Social Norms: Women Working Outside the Home in Saudi Arabia," American Economic
  Review, 2020, 110 (10), 2997­3029.

  and Robert Jensen, "How Does Peer Pressure Affect Educational Investments?," Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 2015, 130 (3), 1329­1367.

  , Georgy Egorov, and Stefano Fiorin, "From Extreme to Mainstream: The Erosion of Social
  Norms," American Economic Review, 2020, 110 (11), 3522­48.

  , Thomas Fujiwara, and Amanda Pallais, "`Acting Wife': Marriage Market Incentives and
  Labor Market Investments," American Economic Review, 2017, 107 (11), 3288­3319.

Cho, In-Koo and David M. Kreps, "Signaling Games and Stable Equilibria," The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 1987, 102 (2), 179.

Cohen, Andrew, "How Voter ID Laws Are Being Used to Disenfranchise Minorities and the
  Poor," 2012.

Cunningham, Tom and Jonathan de Quidt, "Implicit Preferences Inferred from Choice,"
  Available at SSRN 2709914, 2016.

Dana, Jason, Roberto A. Weber, and Jason Xi Kuang, "Exploiting Moral Wiggle Room:
  Experiments Demonstrating an Illusory Preference for Fairness," Economic Theory, 2007, 33 (1),
  67­80.




                                                31
de Quidt, Jonathan, Johannes Haushofer, and Christopher Roth, "Measuring and Bound-
  ing Experimenter Demand," American Economic Review, 2018, 108 (11), 3266­3302.

DellaVigna, Stefano and Eliana La Ferrara, "Chapter 19 - Economic and Social Impacts of
  the Media," in Simon P. Anderson, Joel Waldfogel, and David Str¨
                                                                 omberg, eds., Handbook of
  Media Economics, Vol. 1 of Handbook of Media Economics, North-Holland, 2015, pp. 723­768.

  , John A. List, Ulrike Malmendier, and Gautam Rao, "Voting to Tell Others," The
  Review of Economic Studies, 2017, 84 (1), 143­181.

Enikolopov, Ruben and Maria Petrova, "Chapter 17 - Media Capture: Empirical Evidence,"
  in Simon P. Anderson, Joel Waldfogel, and David Str¨
                                                     omberg, eds., Handbook of Media Economics,
  Vol. 1 of Handbook of Media Economics, North-Holland, 2015, pp. 687­700.

Ewers, Mara and Florian Zimmermann, "Image and Misreporting," Journal of the European
  Economic Association, 2015, 13 (2), 363­380.

Exley, Christine L., "Excusing Selfishness in Charitable Giving: The Role of Risk," The Review
  of Economic Studies, 2016, 83 (2), 587­628.

Foerster, Manuel and Joel J van der Weele, "Persuasion, Justification and the Communica-
  tion of Social Impact," 2018.

Frank, Nathaniel, Unfriendly Fire: How the Gay Ban Undermines the Military and Weakens
  America, Macmillan, 2009.

Gentzkow, Matthew, Bryan Kelly, and Matt Taddy, "Text as Data," Journal of Economic
  Literature, 2019, 57 (3), 535­74.

Golman, Russell, "Acceptable Discourse: Social Norms of Beliefs and Opinions," Working paper,
  2020.

  , David Hagmann, and George Loewenstein, "Information Avoidance," Journal of Eco-
  nomic Literature, 2017, 55 (1), 96­135.

  , George Loewenstein, Karl Ove Moene, and Luca Zarri, "The Preference for Belief
  Consonance," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2016, 30 (3), 165­88.




                                                 32
Gonzalez-Barrera, Ana and Philip Connor, "Around the World, More Say Immigrants Are
  a Strength Than a Burden," Pew Research Center's Global Attitudes Project, 2019.

Goodin, Robert E. and Michael Saward, "Dog Whistles and Democratic Mandates," The
  Political Quarterly, 2005, 76 (4), 471­476.

Grigorieff, Alexis, Christopher Roth, and Diego Ubfal, "Does Information Change Attitudes
  Toward Immigrants?," Demography, 2020, 57 (3), 1­27.

Haaland, Ingar, Christopher Roth, and Johannes Wohlfart, "Designing Information Pro-
  vision Experiments," Working paper 8406, CESifo 2020.

Hamman, John R., George Loewenstein, and Roberto A. Weber, "Self-Interest through
  Delegation: An Additional Rationale for the Principal-Agent Relationship," American Economic
  Review, 2010, 100 (4), 1826­1846.

Haney-L´
       opez, Ian, Dog Whistle Politics: How Coded Racial Appeals Have Reinvented Racism
  and Wrecked the Middle Class, Oxford ; New York: Oxford University Press, 2014.

Hopkins, Daniel J, John Sides, and Jack Citrin, "The Muted Consequences of Correct
  Information about Immigration," The Journal of Politics, 2019, 81 (1), 315­320.

Jia, Ruixue and Torsten Persson, "Individual vs. Social Motives in Identity Choice: Theory
  and Evidence from China," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2019.

Kamenica, Emir, "Bayesian Persuasion and Information Design," Annual Review of Economics,
  2019, 11 (1), 249­272.

Kuran, Timur, Private Truths, Public Lies: The Social Consequences of Preference Falsification,
  Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1997.

Lacetera, Nicola and Mario Macis, "Social Image Concerns and Prosocial Behavior: Field
  Evidence from a Nonlinear Incentive Scheme," Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization,
  2010, 76 (2), 225­237.

Lamis, Alexander P., ed., Southern Politics in the 1990s, Baton Rouge: Louisiana State Uni-
  versity Press, 1999.




                                                33
Langer, Ellen J., Arthur Blank, and Benzion Chanowitz, "The mindlessness of ostensibly
  thoughtful action: The role of "placebic" information in interpersonal interaction.," Journal of
  Personality and Social Psychology, 1978, 36 (6), 635­642.

Lazear, Edward P., Ulrike Malmendier, and Roberto A. Weber, "Sorting in Experiments
  with Application to Social Preferences," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2012,
  4 (1), 136­163.

Lott, John R., "Undocumented Immigrants, U.S. Citizens, and Convicted Criminals in Arizona,"
  Working Paper, Social Science Research Network, 2018.

Mendelberg, Tali, The Race Card: Campaign Strategy, Implicit Messages, and the Norm of
  Equality, Princeton, N.J: Princeton University Press, 2001. OCLC: ocm46737493.

M¨
 uller, Jan-Werner, What Is Populism?, Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2016.

Nowrasteh, Alex, "The Fatal Flaw in John R. Lott Jr.'s Study on Illegal Immigrant Crime in
  Arizona," Cato Institute, 2018.

Nyhan, Brendan, "Fake News and Bots May Be Worrisome, but Their Political Power Is
  Overblown," The New York Times, 2018.

Ousey, Graham C. and Charis E. Kubrin, "Immigration and Crime: Assessing a Contentious
  Issue," Annual Review of Criminology, 2018, 1 (1), 63­84.

Perez-Truglia, Ricardo and Guillermo Cruces, "Partisan Interactions: Evidence from a Field
  Experiment in the United States," Journal of Political Economy, 2017, 125 (4), 1208­1243.

Perez-Truglia, Ricardo and Ugo Troiano, "Shaming Tax Delinquents," Journal of Public
  Economics, 2018, 167, 120­137.

Pew, "Most Border Wall Opponents, Supporters Say Shutdown Concessions are Unacceptable,"
  Pew Research Center's Report, 2019.

Phelps, Edmund S., "The Statistical Theory of Racism and Sexism," American Economic Re-
  view, 1972, 62 (4), 659­661.

Rao, Aakaash, "Starbility: Coefficient Stability Plots in R (v0.9)," Technical Report, Harvard
  University 2020.

                                               34
Rosenblum, Nancy L. and Russell Muirhead, A Lot of People Are Saying: The New Con-
  spiracism and the Assault on Democracy, Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press,
  2019.

Saccardo, Silvia and Marta Serra-Garcia, "Cognitive Flexibility or Moral Commitment? Ev-
  idence of Anticipated Belief Distortion," 2020.

Shalvi, Shaul, Francesca Gino, Rachel Barkan, and Shahar Ayal, "Self-Serving Justifica-
  tions: Doing Wrong and Feeling Moral," Current Directions in Psychological Science, 2015, 24
  (2), 125­130.

Snow, Mary, "National (US) Poll - July 30, 2019," Quinnipiac University Poll, 2019.

United Nations, "UN Expert Denounces the Propagation of Hate Speech Through Social Media,"
  Technical Report, United Nations 2020.

Wines, Michael and Alan Blinder, "Federal Appeals Court Strikes Down North Carolina Voter
  ID Requirement," The New York Times, 2016.

Wood, Thomas and Ethan Porter, "The Elusive Backfire Effect: Mass Attitudes' Steadfast
  Factual Adherence," Political Behavior, 2019, 41 (1), 135­163.

Yanagizawa-Drott, David, "Propaganda and Conflict: Evidence from the Rwandan Genocide,"
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2014, 129 (4), 1947­1994.

Zhuravskaya, Ekaterina, Maria Petrova, and Ruben Enikolopov, "Political Effects of the
  Internet and Social Media," Annual Review of Economics, forthcoming.




                                                35
Figures

                            Figure 1: Experiment 1: Structure of design

                                          Consent, attention check,
                                              demographics




                                        Information about Lott (2018)




                     No Excuse                                               Excuse
           - "Your matched respondent was                          - "Your matched respondent
          not informed about Dr. Lott's study"                  was informed about Dr. Lott's study"

       - Your matched respondent decided to                    - Your matched respondent decided to
     authorize the $1 donation to Fund the Wall              authorize the $1 donation to Fund the Wall




                                        Perceived motive (open-ended)
                                        "Why do you think your matched
                                      respondent chose to donate to Fund
                                                  the Wall?




                 Gullibility Scale                                Foreign Culture Tolerance Scale
      "If you had to guess, how do you think                   "If you had to guess, how do you think
     your matched respondent scored on the                    your matched respondent scored on the
                 Gullibility Scale?"                              Foreign Culture Tolerance Scale?"




                                    Post-treatment questions, perceived
                                           purpose, and feedback




                                                   Debrief




                                                      36
                                        Figure 2: Experiment 1: Type inference based on text analysis and scales


                                   0.12                  p<0.001                                               0.20               p<0.001
    Fraction using relevant word




                                                                                Fraction using relevant word
                                                                                                               0.15
                                   0.08

                                                                                                               0.10

                                   0.04
                                                                                                               0.05


                                                 0.068                 0.097                                              0.169               0.096
                                   0.00                                                                        0.00
                                             No Excuse             Excuse                                              No Excuse            Excuse

                                           (a) Gullibility: word count                                                 (b) Bias: word count

                                   80                                                                          80
                                                         p<0.001                                                                  p<0.001


                                   60                                                                          60
    Mean guess




                                                                                Mean guess




                                   40                                                                          40



                                   20                                                                          20


                                                60.6                   68.4                                              66.9                 63.1
                                    0                                                                           0
                                            No Excuse              Excuse                                             No Excuse             Excuse

                                              (c) Gullibility: scale                                                      (d) Bias: scale
Notes: Figure 2 displays the results from Experiment 2, conducted in February 2020 with a sample of 3,047
Democrats. Panel (a) shows the fraction of respondents who used words related to gullibility across the `No
Excuse' and the `Excuse' condition. Panel (b) shows the fraction of respondents who used words related to
intolerance across the `No Excuse' and the `Excuse' condition. Panel (c) shows the mean guess of the matched
respondent's score on the Gullibility Scale across the `No Excuse' and the `Excuse' condition. Panel (d) shows
the mean guess of the matched respondent's score on the (negative of the) Foreign Culture Tolerance Scale scale
across the `No Excuse' and the `Excuse' condition. The figure displays 95 percent confidence intervals as well as
p-values for tests of equality of means across the conditions.




                                                                               37
                                  Figure 3: Experiment 2: Structure of design

                                                          Consent, attention check,
                                                              demographics




                                                          Consent, attention check,
                No Excuse                                         Excuse
                                                              demographics                                      Control




                              Information about Lott (2018)




                                                                   Reconsent
                                               "I consent to researchers accessing...first and last
                                                       name, city, and operating system."




                                                Description of public donation decision and
                                                             website screenshot
                                               "The page lists individual donation decisions and
                                               whether each participant decided to authorize the
                                                         donation to Fund the Wall"




    No Excuse: Excuse manipulation                      Excuse: Excuse manipulation                   Control: Excuse manipulation
"The page states that all participants made        "The page states that all participants were
 their decisions before Dr. Lott's study was              told about Dr. Lott's study"                          (Blank)
                 published"




                                                              Donation decision
                                               "Would you like to authorize a $1 donation to Fund
                                                                   the Wall?"




                                                  Post-treatment questions and perceived
                                                                 purpose




                                                                    Debrief




                                                                        38
                            Figure 4: Experiment 2: Donation rates by group



                      0.8

                                                    p=0.0013

                                                                 p=0.00185
                      0.6
                                       p=0.942
      Donation rate




                      0.4




                      0.2




                             0.467                    0.476                       0.543
                      0.0

                             Control                No Excuse                    Excuse
Notes: Figure 4 displays the results from Experiment 1, conducted in January 2020 with a sample of 3,728
Republicans and Independents. The figure displays donation rates to "Fund the Wall" across the Control group,
the `No Excuse' group, and the `Excuse' group. The figure displays 95 percent confidence intervals as well as
p-values for tests of equality of means across the conditions.




                                                     39
Tables

                          Table 1: Experiment 1: Inferred donation motives

                                                              Dependent variable:
                                               Inference about partner's donation motive
                                          Used keyword                      Predicted inference about score
                                (1)           (2)               (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)
 Panel A: Inference about intolerance

 Excuse                     -0.070         -0.068          -0.072         -0.059         -0.058          -0.057
                             (0.012)        (0.012)         (0.009)        (0.017)        (0.017)         (0.013)
 Constant                    0.172           0.291            0.268        0.168            0.121          0.118
                             (0.009)         (0.072)          (0.055)      (0.012)         (0.099)        (0.079)

 Observations                  3,047          3,047            5,065         3,045          3,045           5,061
 R2                            0.010          0.029            0.025         0.004          0.023           0.021
 Adjusted R2                   0.010          0.024            0.022         0.004          0.019           0.018
 Panel B: Inference about gullibility

 Excuse                      0.031           0.032            0.029        0.109           0.109          0.101
                             (0.010)         (0.010)          (0.008)      (0.016)         (0.016)        (0.012)
 Constant                    0.069           0.118            0.113        0.088            0.019          0.027
                             (0.007)         (0.058)          (0.045)      (0.011)         (0.091)        (0.072)

 Observations                  3,047          3,047            5,065         3,045          3,045           5,061
 R2                            0.003          0.011            0.009         0.015          0.046           0.040
 Adjusted R2                   0.003          0.006            0.006         0.015          0.041           0.037
 Demographic controls           No             Yes              Yes           No             Yes             Yes
 Include pilot data             No             No               Yes           No             No              Yes
   Notes: The dependent variable in Columns 1-3 of Panel A is an indicator taking value 1 if the respondent
   uses a word relating to bias when describing why he or she thinks the matched respondent donated to Fund
   the Wall. The dependent variable in Columns 4-6 of Panel A is the predicted z -score of the (negative of the)
   Foreign Culture Tolerance Scale, where the prediction is based on the respondent's description of their matched
   respondent's motive. The dependent variables of Panel B are analogous, but instead consider words related to
   gullibility and the predicted score on the Gullibility Scale. Demographic controls include age, age squared, a
   set of race indicators, a Hispanic indicator, a male indicator, a set of education indicators, and a set of partisan
   affiliation indicators. Robust standard errors are reported.




                                                         40
Table 2: Experiment 1: Inferred bias and gullibility scores

                                       Dependent variable:
                              Inference about partner's score
                                (1)            (2)            (3)
 Panel A: Bias (z -score)

 Excuse                     -0.134         -0.133         -0.152
                             (0.051)        (0.051)        (0.039)
 Constant                     0.058          -0.174          0.006
                             (0.036)         (0.285)        (0.226)

 Observations                  1,524          1,524          2,532
 R2                            0.004          0.038          0.037
 Adjusted R2                   0.004          0.029          0.032
 Panel B: Gullibility (z -score)

 Excuse                      0.321          0.310          0.317
                             (0.050)        (0.050)        (0.039)
 Constant                   -0.155           -0.100         -0.224
                             (0.036)         (0.301)        (0.233)

 Observations                  1,523          1,523          2,533
 R2                            0.026          0.065          0.059
 Adjusted R2                   0.025          0.056          0.053
 Demographic controls           No             Yes            Yes
 Include pilot data             No             No             Yes
   Notes: The dependent variable in Panel A is the negative of the
   z -score of the respondent's guess as to his or her matched respon-
   dent's score on the Foreign Culture Tolerance Scale, where we take
   the negative to interpret higher values as greater bias. The depen-
   dent variable in Panel B is the z -score of the respondent's guess as
   to his or her matched respondent's score on the Gullibility Scale.
   Both scales were originally scored between 0 and 100. Demographic
   controls include age, age squared, a set of race indicators, a His-
   panic indicator, a male indicator, a set of education indicators, and
   a set of partisan affiliation indicators. Robust standard errors are
   reported.




                                 41
                                           Table 3: Experiment 2: Main results

                                                                        Dependent variable:
                                                                    Donated to Fund the Wall
                                          (1)          (2)              (3)               (4)              (5)            (6)

     Excuse                            0.063        0.065           0.074              0.066             0.052         0.071
                                       (0.020)      (0.018)         (0.016)            (0.027)           (0.025)       (0.014)
     Control                            -0.001       -0.005          -0.001                                              0.017
                                        (0.020)      (0.018)         (0.017)                                            (0.016)
     p-value (Excuse = Control) 0.0013              < 0.001          < 0.001                                           < 0.001
     Demographic controls                 No          Yes            Yes                No               Yes              Yes
     Waves included                      Main         Main       Main + Pilot        Replication      Replication         All
     DV mean                             0.488        0.488           0.497             0.497             0.497          0.498
     DV std. dev.                        0.500        0.500           0.500             0.500             0.500          0.500
42




     Observations                        3,751        3,751           4,457             1,373             1,373          5,913
     R2                                  0.004        0.187           0.197             0.004             0.130          0.171
     Adjusted R2                         0.003        0.183           0.194             0.004             0.120          0.168
       Notes: The dependent variable is an indicator taking value 1 if the respondent donated to Fund the Wall. Columns 1-2
       report results estimated on the sample from the main experiment; Column 3 pools the sample from the main experiment
       with the sample from the pilot; Columns 4-5 consider only the sample from the replication experiment; and Column 6
       pools all waves. Demographic controls include age, age squared, a set of race indicators, a Hispanic indicator, a male
       indicator, a set of education indicators, and a set of partisan affiliation indicators. Robust standard errors are reported.
                                            Table 4: Experiment 2: County heterogeneity

                                                                                     Dependent variable:
                                                                                 Donated to Fund the Wall
                                                       (1)          (2)             (3)              (4)             (5)            (6)

     Excuse                                         0.061        0.063           0.071             0.041           0.026         0.064
                                                    (0.020)      (0.019)         (0.016)          (0.029)         (0.027)        (0.014)
     Excuse × County Republican vote share -0.030               -0.038          -0.038           -0.069          -0.079         -0.047
                                           (0.021)               (0.019)         (0.017)          (0.027)         (0.026)        (0.014)
     Control                                         -0.002       -0.005         -0.002                                           0.015
                                                     (0.020)      (0.018)        (0.017)                                         (0.016)
     Control × County Republican vote share           0.013        0.011          0.011                                           0.014
                                                     (0.020)      (0.018)        (0.017)                                         (0.016)
     County Republican vote share                   0.052          0.020          0.017            0.012           0.027         0.018
43




                                                    (0.015)       (0.013)        (0.012)          (0.019)         (0.019)        (0.010)

     Demographic controls                              No          Yes            Yes              No              Yes             Yes
     Waves included                                   Main         Main       Main + Pilot      Replication     Replication        All
     DV mean                                          0.488        0.488          0.497            0.497           0.497          0.498
     DV std. dev.                                     0.500        0.500          0.500            0.500           0.500          0.500
     Observations                                     3,631        3,631          4,315            1,215           1,215          5,608
     R2                                               0.013        0.192          0.203            0.009           0.133          0.176
     Adjusted R2                                      0.012        0.188          0.199            0.007           0.120          0.173
       Notes: The dependent variable is an indicator taking value 1 if the respondent donated to Fund the Wall. The county Republican vote
       share is from the 2016 US Presidential election and is scaled to a standard normal distribution. Columns 1-2 include both Independents
       and Republicans, Columns 3-4 limit the sample to Republicans, and Columns 5-6 limit the sample to Independents. Columns 1, 3, and 5
       report results estimated on the sample from the main experiment, while Columns 2, 4, and 6 pool the sample from the main experiment
       with the sample from the pilot. Demographic controls include age, age squared, a set of race indicators, a Hispanic indicator, a male
       indicator, and a set of education indicators, and a set of partisan affiliation indicators. Robust standard errors are reported.
                                 Online Appendix
A     Theory Proofs

A.1    Proof of Proposition 1

The tolerant sender (i = 0) chooses to take the anti-immigrant action (a = 1) if


v 1{0=0} +  (0) b0 + (1 -  (0)) b1 = u0 (0,  (0)) < u0 (1,  (1)) = v 1{1=0} +  (1) b0 + (1 -  (1)) b1
                     v +  (0) b0 + (1 -  (0)) b1 <  (1) b0 + (1 -  (1)) b1
                                               v < ( (1) -  (0)) (b0 - b1 )
                                                        v
                                        (1) -  (0) >         ,
                                                     b0 - b1

where the final inequality follows from the inequality b0 - b1 > 0. The intolerant sender (i = 1)
chooses to take the anti-immigrant action (a = 1) if


v 1{0=1} +  (0) b0 + (1 -  (0)) b1 = u0 (0,  (0)) < u0 (1,  (1)) = v 1{1=1} +  (1) b0 + (1 -  (1)) b1
                           (0) b0 + (1 -  (0)) b1 < v +  (1) b0 + (1 -  (1)) b1
                                              -v < ( (1) -  (0)) (b0 - b1 )
                                                          v
                                        (1) -  (0) > -         .
                                                       b0 - b1

A.2    Proof of Proposition 2

No Excuse game In the No Excuse game, the receiver believes that the sender has not seen the
anti-immigrant information, so he expects the intolerant-persuadable sender to take the action and
the tolerant-persuadable sender not to take the action. If both the tolerant-nonpersuadable and
the intolerant-nonpersuadable senders do not take the action, Bayes' rule requires that  N E (1) = 0
                     p
and  N E (0) =   p+q (1-p) .   Letting Si and Gi denote type-i  {0, 1} non-persuadable and persuadable
senders, respectively, Bayes' rule gives:

                          Pr (G0 , S0 )         (1 - q ) p + qp           p             p
            N E (0) =                       =                      =            =               .
                         Pr (S0 , S1 , G0 )   1 - (1 - q ) (1 - p)   p + q - pq   p + q (1 - p)




                                                     44
Because the tolerant-nonpersuadable sender does not take the action, the optimality condition for
the intolerant-nonpersuadable sender, (2), yields the second inequality.

                                                             p           v
                      a0 = 0 
                              NE
                                 (1) -  N E (0) = -                           ,
                                                       p + q (1 - p)  b0 - b1
                                      p                v
                      a1 =0-                   -
                               p + q (1 - p)        b0 - b1
                                  p               v
                                          
                            p + q (1 - p)     b0 - b1
                                   p (b0 - b1 )
                           v1                   .
                                 p + q (1 - p)

   We now verify that no other pure-strategy equilibrium exists in the No Excuse condition. First,
observe that if a                            
                 0 = 1 then it must be that a1 = 1 from the optimality conditions. That is, we can
rule out equilibria in which a           
                              0 = 1 and a1 = 0. It remains to rule out the following equilibria: (1)
a                                      
 0 = 1 and a1 = 1; and (2) a0 = 0 and a1 = 1.


  (i) The receiver's posterior beliefs are:

                                             Pr (S0 )              qp
                                 N E (1) =                  =                ,  N E (0) = 1
                                         Pr (S0 , S1 , G1 )   1 - p (1 - q )
                                              qp                      1-p
                    N E (1) -  N E (0) =                 -1=-                    < 0.
                                         1 - p (1 - q )           1 - p (1 - q )

     This violates the optimality condition for S0 .

 (ii) The receiver's posterior beliefs are:


                                                 N E (1) = 0,  N E (0) = 1
                                    N E (1) -  N E (0) = -1.


     Thus, the optimality condition for S0 is satisfied. For the optimality condition for S1 to be
     satisfied, we need that
                                                  v
                                      -1 > -            v > b0 - b1 .
                                               b0 - b1
     But this contradicts the hypothesis of Proposition 2, which implies that

                                      p
                           v                  (b0 - b1 ) < b0 - b1  v  b0 - b1 .
                                p + q (1 - p)
                                    (0,1)




                                                  45
Excuse game          In the Excuse game, the receiver expects both types of persuadable senders to
donate. Since we look for an equilibrium in which the tolerant-nonpersuadable sender does not
                                                                                                     p(1-q )
donate and the intolerant-nonpersuadable sender donates, Bayes' rule requires  E (1) =                1-pq     and
 E (0)   = 1:

                        Pr (G0 )                         (1 - q ) p                  p (1 - q )
          E (1) =                      =                                           =             (0, 1) .
                    Pr (G0 , G1 , S1 )   (1 - q ) p + (1 - q ) (1 - p) + q (1 - p)    1 - qp

Because the tolerant-nonpersuadable sender does not donate, the intolerant-nonpersuadable sender's
optimality condition yields the first inequality:

                                                         p (1 - q )          v
                           a0 =0 =  E (1) -  E (0) =                -1
                                                          1 - qp          b0 - b1
                                   p (1 - q ) - 1 + qp         1-p         v
                                 =                       =-           
                                         1 - qp               1 - qp    b0 - b1
                                       1-p                v
                                 = -           0               ,
                                      1 - qp           b0 - b1
                                   p (1 - q )            1-p            v
                           a1 =1 =            -1=-               >-
                                    1 - qp              1 - qp       b0 - b1
                                    1-p           v
                                 =         <
                                   1 - qp      b0 - b1
                                        (1 - p) (b0 - b1 )
                                 = v >                      .
                                              1 - qp

We appeal to the intuitive criterion to rule out equilibria in which both tolerant- and intolerant-
nonpersuadable senders donate in equilibrium. In such an equilibrium, the receiver cannot use
Bayes' rule if he observes that the sender does not donate. Given on-path belief, the first inequality
implies that the intolerant-nonpersuadable sender cannot benefit by deviating to not donating,
regardless of the receiver's belief. In particular, in this equilibrium, we have ~ E (1) = Pr(G0 , S0 ) = p.
The intolerant-nonpersuadable type's equilibrium payoff is


                           u1 1,  E (1) = v + b ~ E (1) = v + pb0 + (1 - p) b1 .


The best that she can do by deviating to a = 0 is:


                                          max u1 (0,  ) = b ( ) = b0 .
                                           




                                                       46
Hence, a = 0 is dominated if


                          v + pb0 + (1 - p) b1 > b0  (1 - p) (b0 - b1 ) < v.


This is satisfied by the hypothesis of Proposition 2, since

                                                      (1 - p) (b0 - b1 )
                               (1 - p) (b0 - b1 ) <                      < v.
                                                           1 - qp

Hence, by the intuitive criterion, the receiver must believe that any deviation from a = 1 is made
by tolerant-nonpersuadable agents; i.e., ~ E (0) = 1. In this case, we have


                                   ~ E (1) - 
                                             ~ E (0) = - (1 - p) < 0.


This violates the optimality condition for S0 , which rules out the possibility that both the tolerant-
and intolerant-nonpersuadable senders donate in the (refined) equilibrium. Thus, the intuitive
criterion requires the receiver to believe that the sender is intolerant if he observers the sender
donating, which, in turn, implies that it is not optimal for the tolerant-nonpersuadable sender to
donate.
   We proceed to verify that other pure strategies cannot be part of any equilibrium. By the same
argument in the No Excuse game, we can rule out the case in which a           
                                                                   0 = 1 and a1 = 0. It remains
to rule out the possibility that a           
                                  0 = 0 and a1 = 0. In such an equilibrium,


                                    Pr (S0 )                    Pr (G0 )
                         E (0) =                 = p,  E (1) =               = p,
                                   Pr (S0 , S1 )               Pr (G0 , G1 )

so that  E (1)- E (0) = 0. But this violates the optimality condition for the intolerant-nonpersuadable
                      v
sender, since 0  - b0 - b1 < 0.
                                            (1-p)(b0 -b1 )      p(b0 -b1 )
   The condition on q ensures that 0 <         1-qp             p+q (1-p) ,   i.e. that there exists some v > 0




                                                      47
that satisfies the set of inequalities in the statement of Proposition 2.

                                                   p (b0 - b1 )   (1 - p) (b0 - b1 )
                                                  0<            -
                                                  p + q (1 - p)        1 - qp
                                         1-p            p
                                       =        <
                                         1 - qp   p + q (1 - p)
                        = (1 - p) (p + q (1 - p)) < p (1 - qp)
               = p + q (1 - p) - p2 - pq (1 - p) < p - qp2
                    = q (1 - p) - p2 - pq + qp2 < -qp2
                          = q - p2 - 2pq + 2qp2 < 0
                             = q 1 - 2p + 2p2 < p2
                                                            p2
                                             = q <                  .
                                                       2p2 - 2p + 1




                                                  48
B     Appendix Figures and Tables

B.1   Experiment 1

                       Table B1: Experiment 1: Sample representativeness

                                                      Experiment 1           Pew
                 Variables:                                 (1)              (2)
                 Age                                       41.60            46.67
                 Black                                     0.18              0.26
                 Asian                                     0.05              0.05
                 White                                     0.62              0.49
                 Hispanic                                  0.14              0.17
                 Male                                      0.47              0.39
                 Bachelors degree or higher                0.46              0.36
                 Observations                              5065             4005
                  Notes: Table displays mean characteristics for the Experiment 1 sample
                  and the 2018 Pew Research Center's American Trends Panel, Wave 39.
                  Attriters dropped from sample.



                         Table B2: Experiment 1: Balance of covariates


                                            Overall          Excuse     No Excuse     p-value
                                     mean      std.dev.       mean        mean        (E=NE)
          Variables:                  (1)         (2)             (3)      (4)              (5)
          Age                       41.376      15.639       41.703      41.048            0.247
          Black                      0.182       0.386        0.186       0.179            0.612
          Asian                      0.045       0.208        0.049       0.042            0.386
          White                      0.710       0.454        0.703       0.716            0.455
          Hispanic                   0.140       0.347        0.136       0.144            0.561
          Male                       0.450       0.498        0.451       0.448            0.840
          High school diploma        0.983       0.130        0.983       0.983            0.998
          Bachelors degree           0.446       0.497        0.454       0.439            0.391
         Notes: p-values based on robust standard errors reported. Attriters dropped from sample.




                                                      49
Table B3: Experiment 1: Relationship between perceived motive and scores

                                                Dependent variable:
                                       Inference about partner's score
                                          (1)           (2)           (3)
          Panel A: Bias (z -score)

          Used bias word              0.477          0.473         0.500
                                      (0.072)        (0.072)       (0.056)
          Constant                   -0.078          -0.301         -0.149
                                      (0.027)        (0.281)        (0.222)

          Observations                  1,524         1,524          2,532
          R2                            0.028         0.061          0.061
          Adjusted R2                   0.027         0.052          0.056
          Panel B: Gullibility (z -score)

          Used gullibility word       0.520          0.484         0.397
                                      (0.089)        (0.088)       (0.070)
          Constant                     -0.039        -0.055         -0.107
                                       (0.026)       (0.302)        (0.234)

          Observations                  1,523         1,523          2,533
          R2                            0.022         0.059          0.046
          Adjusted R2                   0.021         0.051          0.041
          Demographic controls            No            Yes           Yes
          Include pilot data              No            No            Yes
            Notes: The dependent variable in Panel A is the negative of the
            z -score of the respondent's guess as to his or her matched re-
            spondent's score on the Foreign Culture Tolerance Scale, where
            we take the negative to interpret higher values as greater bias.
            The dependent variable in Panel B is the z -score of the respon-
            dent's guess as to his or her matched respondent's score on the
            Gullibility Scale. Both scales were originally scored between 0
            and 100. Demographic controls include age, age squared, a set
            of race indicators, a Hispanic indicator, a male indicator, a set of
            education indicators, and a set of partisan affiliation indicators.
            Robust standard errors are reported.




                                          50
Table B4: Experiment 1: Condition prediction confusion matrix

                         Predicted Excuse             Predicted Excuse
   True Excuse                      212                         185
True No Excuse                      194                         188
                                                  Overall accuracy: 0.5135
  Notes: Each cell reports the number of individuals who were assigned to the
  condition (Excuse or No Excuse) in the corresponding row and who were
  classified by the Support Vector Machine as belonging to the condition in
  the corresponding column. The classifier was trained on a 75% sample of
  the data; the table reports prediction results on the test set of the remaining
  25% of the data. Overall accuracy is calculated as the proportion of correct
  predictions.


                Table B5: Experiment 2: Attrition

                                                      Dependent variable:
                                                             Attrited
                                                               (1)
 Age                                                           0.001
                                                              (0.002)
 Age squared                                                 0.00000
                                                            (0.00003)
 Black                                                        -0.013
                                                              (0.034)
 Asian                                                         0.008
                                                              (0.045)
 White                                                        -0.038
                                                              (0.030)
 Hispanic                                                      0.014
                                                              (0.022)
 Male                                                        -0.030
                                                              (0.014)
 High school                                                  -0.023
                                                              (0.049)
 Some college, no degree                                      -0.035
                                                              (0.048)
 Associate degree                                             -0.047
                                                              (0.051)
                                                 Continued on next page


                                     51
Table B5 ­ Continued from previous page
                                              Attrited
                                                (1)

Bachelor degree                               -0.067
                                              (0.049)
Post-bachelor degree                          -0.067
                                              (0.051)
Strong Democrat                               -0.021
                                              (0.015)
Excuse × Age                                  -0.003
                                              (0.003)
Excuse × Age squared                          0.00002
                                             (0.00003)
Excuse × Black                                 0.038
                                              (0.047)
Excuse × Asian                                -0.014
                                              (0.062)
Excuse × White                                 0.049
                                              (0.042)
Excuse × Hispanic                              0.026
                                              (0.031)
Excuse × Male                                 -0.004
                                              (0.020)
Excuse × High school                           0.017
                                              (0.062)
Excuse × Some college, no degree              -0.0003
                                              (0.060)
Excuse × Associate degree                     -0.007
                                              (0.066)
Excuse × Bachelor degree                       0.018
                                              (0.062)
Excuse × Post-bachelor degree                 -0.005
                                              (0.066)
Excuse × Strong Democrat                       0.014
                                              (0.022)

DV mean (no excuse)                            0.093
                                     Continued on next page

                             52
                   Table B5 ­ Continued from previous page
                                                                                 Attrited
                                                                                   (1)
                   DV mean (excuse)                                                 0.089
                   Observations                                                     3,352
                   R2                                                               0.014
                   Adjusted R2                                                      0.007




    Notes: The dependent variable is an indicator that takes value 1 if the respondent attrited post-randomization.
Robust standard errors are reported.


B.2     Auxiliary Experiment

                        Table B6: Punishment of intolerant vs. gullible types

                                                              Dependent variable:
                                                     Authorized $1 bonus to partner
                                                      (1)             (2)

                        Gullible partner            0.112                 0.110
                                                    (0.039)               (0.039)
                        Constant                    0.439                   0.166
                                                    (0.028)                (0.275)

                        Demographic controls           No                    Yes
                        Observations                   646                   646
                        R2                            0.012                 0.054
                        Adjusted R2                   0.011                 0.033
                           Notes: The dependent variable is an indicator taking value 1 if
                           the respondent authorized a $1 donation to their partner. The
                           omitted group is subjects matched with an Intolerant (rather than
                           Gullible) partner. Demographic controls include age, age squared,
                           a set of race indicators, a Hispanic indicator, a male indicator, a
                           set of education indicators, and a set of partisan affiliation indi-
                           cators. Robust standard errors are reported.




                                                         53
                       Figure B1: Punishment of intolerant vs. gullible types




Notes: Figure B1 displays the results from the survey eliciting differential punishment of intolerant vs. gullible
partners. The figure shows the fraction of respondents who chose to authorize a donation to their partner,
separately by experimental condition, as well as 95 percent confidence intervals.




                                                       54
B.3   Experiment 2

                   Table B7: Experiment 2: Sample representativeness

                                              Experiment 2              Pew
                                                     (1)                (2)
             Panel A: Republican
             Age                                    47.27              49.50
             Black                                  0.03                0.02
             Asian                                  0.03                0.03
             White                                  0.84                0.84
             Hispanic                               0.09                0.08
             Male                                   0.48                0.51
             Bachelors degree or higher             0.38                0.29
             Observations                           1983               2879
             Panel B: Independent
             Age                                    43.59              44.96
             Black                                  0.11                0.08
             Asian                                  0.05                0.04
             White                                  0.69                0.70
             Hispanic                               0.12                0.13
             Male                                   0.50                0.53
             Bachelors degree or higher             0.37                0.34
             Observations                           2487               2622
              Notes: Table displays mean respondent characteristics from the Exper-
              iment 2 sample and the 2018 Pew Research Center's American Trends
              Panel Wave, 39. Attriters dropped from sample.




                                               55
                           Table B8: Experiment 2: Balance of covariates


                                   Overall       Excuse     No Excuse      Control                 p-values
                           mean       std.dev.    mean         mean         mean       (E=NE)      (E=C)      (NE=C)
Variables:                   (1)         (2)       (3)          (4)           (5)           (6)      (7)           (8)
Age                        44.954      15.709    45.083       44.823        44.958         0.681    0.840         0.826
Black                      0.076        0.266     0.070        0.088        0.072          0.100    0.858         0.135
Asian                      0.043        0.203     0.041        0.042        0.046          0.877    0.567         0.677
White                      0.821        0.383     0.825        0.815        0.823          0.498    0.858         0.609
Hispanic                   0.110        0.313     0.113        0.108        0.110          0.691    0.829         0.852
Male                       0.499        0.500     0.493        0.507        0.497          0.484    0.830         0.618
High school diploma        0.976        0.152     0.977        0.975        0.977          0.821    0.981         0.798
Bachelors degree           0.378        0.485     0.392        0.368        0.374          0.229    0.352         0.770
Republican                 0.426        0.495     0.419        0.437        0.421          0.368    0.920         0.414
Notes: p-values based on robust standard errors reported. Attriters dropped from sample.

                 Figure B2: Experiment 2: Stability of estimated treatment effect




 Notes: Figure B2 displays the estimated treatment effects of the Excuse condition (relative to the No Excuse
 condition) on donation rates to Fund the Wall under every possible set of demographic controls. 95% confidence
 intervals are reported.




                                                      56
           Table B9: Experiment 2: Party heterogeneity

                                              Dependent variable:
                                            Donated to Fund the Wall
                                      Republicans             Independents
                                     (1)      (2)             (3)      (4)

Excuse                            0.067       0.078        0.068        0.074
                                  (0.028)     (0.024)      (0.024)      (0.023)
Control                           -0.009       -0.010        0.003        0.012
                                  (0.028)      (0.026)      (0.024)      (0.024)
Observations                       1,593        1,973        2,158        2,484
Demographic controls        Yes                Yes           Yes          Yes
p-value (Excuse = Control) 0.0076             < 0.001       0.0055       0.0082
Include pilot data                   No          Yes          No           Yes
DV mean                            0.669        0.673        0.354        0.357
DV std. dev.                       0.471        0.469        0.478        0.469
R2                                 0.070        0.050        0.132        0.048
Adjusted R2                        0.061        0.043        0.126        0.042
  Notes: The dependent variable is an indicator taking value 1 if the respondent
  donated to Fund the Wall. Columns 1-2 limit the sample to Republicans,
  while Columns 3-4 limit the sample to Independents. Columns 1-2 report
  results estimated on the sample from the main experiment; Column 3 pools
  the sample from the main experiment with the sample from the pilot; Columns
  4-5 consider only the sample from the replication experiment; and Column 6
  pools all waves. Demographic controls include age, age squared, a set of race
  indicators, a Hispanic indicator, a male indicator, a set of education indicators,
  and a set of partisan affiliation indicators. Robust standard errors are reported.




                                       57
                                        Table B10: Experiment 2: Perceived purpose of study

                                                                               Dependent variable:
                                      Excuse     Immigration attitudes         Public image      Information       Persuasion       Biased
                                       (1)               (2)                       (3)                (4)              (5)           (6)

     Excuse                           -0.005               0.009                  0.020              0.012           -0.013        -0.0001
                                      (0.003)             (0.015)                 (0.010)           (0.015)          (0.011)       (0.013)
     Control                          -0.003              0.129                   0.036             -0.015         -0.081         -0.037
                                      (0.003)             (0.015)                 (0.010)           (0.016)         (0.012)        (0.014)
     p-value (Excuse = Control)         0.63              < 0.001                   0.12             0.093          < 0.001         0.0082
     Demographic controls               Yes                 Yes                     Yes               Yes              Yes            Yes
     Include pilot data                 Yes                 Yes                     Yes               Yes              Yes            Yes
     DV mean                           0.007               0.226                   0.082             0.239            0.121          0.175
     DV std. dev.                      0.084               0.419                   0.275             0.427            0.326          0.380
58




     Observations                      4,537               4,537                   4,537             4,536            4,537          4,535
     R2                                0.004               0.027                   0.018             0.011            0.023          0.009
     Adjusted R2                       0.001               0.024                   0.014             0.007            0.019          0.006
       Notes: The dependent variable in each column is an indicator taking value 1 if the respondent's perceived purpose of the study was
       coded to fall into the corresponding category. "Excuse" takes value 1 if the respondent correctly inferred the study was about whether
       knowing that others will know one had an "excuse" for donating would affect the donation decision. "Immigration attitudes" takes value
       1 if the respondent stated the study was about attitudes toward immigration. "Public image" takes value 1 if the respondent stated
       the study was about whether knowing one's decision will be observable to others would affect the donation decision. "Information"
       takes value 1 if the respondent stated the study was about disseminating information about immigration. "Persuasion" takes value 1 if
       the respondent stated the researchers were attempting to persuade them either to donate or not to donate. "Bias" takes value 1 if the
       respondent stated the researchers were biased. "Other" takes value 1 if the respondent stated a purpose that did not fall into any of the
       above categories. Categories other than "Other" are not mutually exclusive. All specifications pool the main experiment and the pilot
       and contol for demographics and partisan affiliation. Demographic controls include age, age squared, a set of race indicators, a Hispanic
       indicator, a male indicator, and a set of education indicators. Partisan affiliation controls include dummies for strong Republican, weak
       Republican, Republican-leaning Independent, and Democrat-leaning Independent. Robust standard errors are reported.
           Table B12: Experiment 2: Attrition

                                      Dependent variable:

                                            Attrited
                                              (1)


Age                                         -0.002
                                            (0.003)

Age squared                                 0.0001
                                           (0.00003)

Black                                       -0.012
                                            (0.056)

Asian                                        0.062
                                            (0.064)

White                                        0.034
                                            (0.046)

Hispanic                                    -0.032
                                            (0.034)

Male                                       -0.067
                                            (0.020)

High school                                 -0.024
                                            (0.061)

Some college, no degree                     -0.042
                                            (0.060)

Associate degree                            -0.051
                                            (0.063)

Bachelor degree                             -0.023
                                            (0.060)

Post-bachelor degree                        -0.077
                                            (0.064)

Rep-leaning Ind                              0.009
                                            (0.026)

                                   Continued on next page


                           59
Table B12 ­ Continued from previous page

                                                Attrited
                                                  (1)


Weak Rep                                        -0.030
                                                (0.032)

Strong Rep                                      -0.039
                                                (0.026)

Excuse × Age                                    -0.003
                                                (0.004)

Excuse × Age squared                            0.00003
                                               (0.00004)

Excuse × Black                                   0.078
                                                (0.075)

Excuse × Asian                                  -0.049
                                                (0.089)

Excuse × White                                  0.0003
                                                (0.060)

Excuse × Hispanic                                0.028
                                                (0.047)

Excuse × Male                                    0.007
                                                (0.028)

Excuse × High school                             0.071
                                                (0.081)

Excuse × Some college, no degree                 0.039
                                                (0.080)

Excuse × Associate degree                        0.081
                                                (0.085)

Excuse × Bachelor degree                         0.081
                                                (0.081)

Excuse × Post-bachelor degree                    0.096
                                                (0.087)

                                       Continued on next page


                                60
                         Table B12 ­ Continued from previous page

                                                                            Attrited
                                                                              (1)


                         Excuse × Rep-leaning Ind                           -0.014
                                                                            (0.036)

                         Excuse × Weak Rep                                   0.045
                                                                            (0.045)

                         Excuse × Strong Rep                                 0.008
                                                                            (0.036)

                         DV mean (no excuse)                                 0.166
                         DV mean (excuse)                                    0.177

                         Observations                                        3,014
                             2
                         R                                                   0.035
                                    2
                         Adjusted R                                          0.025




Notes: The dependent variable is an indicator that takes value 1 if the respondent attrited post-randomization. The
sample is limited to respondents in the Excuse and No Excuse condition. Robust standard errors are reported.




                                                        61
Table B11: Experiment 2: Condition prediction confusion matrices

 Panel A: Excuse vs. No Excuse
                          Predicted Excuse             Predicted Excuse
   True Excuse                       213                         244
True No Excuse                       210                         210
                                                   Overall accuracy: 0.4823

 Panel B: Control vs. No Excuse
                          Predicted Excuse             Predicted Excuse
   True Control                      197                         180
True No Excuse                       136                         283
                                                   Overall accuracy: 0.6030

 Panel C: Control vs. Excuse
                          Predicted Excuse             Predicted Excuse
   True Control                      188                         159
   True Excuse                       136                         315
                                                   Overall accuracy: 0.6303

   Notes: Each cell reports the number of individuals who were assigned to the
   condition in the corresponding row and who were classified by the Support
   Vector Machine as belonging to the condition in the corresponding column.
   Each panel limits the data to the corresponding two conditions. The classi-
   fiers were trained on a 75% sample of the limited dataset; the table reports
   prediction results on the test set of the remaining 25% of the limited dataset.
   Overall accuracy is calculated as the proportion of correct predictions.




                                      62
C        Additional Survey

In May 2020, we conducted a survey among a broadly representative sample of 1,121 Republicans
in partnership with Luc.id.55


Design     At the time of the experiment, the United States and the world were grappling with
the COVID-19 pandemic, and many nations, including the US, had implemented restrictions on
international travel in order to limit the spread of the virus. The Trump administration also
cited the COVID-19 pandemic and the economic crisis it precipitated as a justification for severely
limiting immigration, limiting the issuance of green cards and eliminating the STEM OPT program,
which allowed graduates of US undergraduate institutions to remain in the country for one to three
years to work in a related field.56 A number of commentators argued that people were using
COVID-19 as an excuse for xenophobic behavior against Asian-Americans; moreover, President
Trump also claimed that the pandemic exacerbated the crisis on the US­Mexico border, renewing
calls for the construction of a border wall.57
     Motivated by these justifications, we inform participants that we are interested in their views
on whether the United States should implement a permanent ban on immigration from Mexico. We
tell participants that we will post their individual donation decision on our public study website,
showing them a screenshot of an example of the website displaying respondents' support for the
permanent ban on Mexican immigration. Participants are randomized into one of two conditions.
Those in the Excuse condition are asked whether they agree with the statement that "I support a
permanent ban on Mexican immigration to protect the US from contagious diseases, such as the
coronavirus," and are informed that if they indicate that they agree with the statement, this is
the wording that will appear on the study website. Those in the No Excuse condition are asked
whether they agree with the statement that "I support a permanent ban on Mexican immigration,"
and, again, are informed that if they agree, this is the wording that will appear on the website.
Thus, the key difference between the two conditions is whether a public justification is attached to
    55
      All survey instruments are available in Appendix G. Appendix Table C1 presents summary statistics and com-
pares our sample to the Pew American Trends Panel, confirming that our sample is indeed broadly representative.
Appendix Table C2 confirms that demographic characteristics of respondents are balanced across treatment condi-
tions.
   56
      See, for example, "Next Trump Immigration Target: OPT For International Students." Forbes, May 4, 2020.
   57
      See, for example, "Another Danger of COVID-19: Discrimination". UNICEF USA, April 10, 2020



                                                      63
respondents' support for the statement.58


Results     The findings, displayed in Figure C1 and Table C3, are striking: 32 percent of respon-
dents publicly support a permanent ban on Mexican immigration when they do not have an excuse,
while 51 percent of respondents support a permanent ban on Mexican immigration when provided
with the excuse -- a 59 percent, statistically significant increase (p < 0.001). These findings
underscore the quantitative importance of simple excuses as catalysts for xenophobic expression.

                        Table C1: Motivating survey: Sample representativeness

                                                     Survey                  Pew
                     Variables:                         (1)                   (2)
                     Age                              46.68                  49.50
                     Black                             0.02                  0.02
                     Asian                             0.04                  0.03
                     White                             0.85                  0.84
                     Hispanic                          0.08                  0.08
                     Male                              0.40                  0.51
                     Some college, no degree           0.23                  0.24
                     Bachelors degree                  0.30                  0.18
                     Observations                      1121                  2879
                       Notes: Mean of respondent characteristics in the motivating study and
                       the 2018 Pew Research Center's American Trends Panel Wave 39. At-
                       triters dropped from sample.




   58
      To rule out that the effect in the Excuse condition is driven by an increased salience of the disease protection
rationale, we ask all respondents in the No Excuse condition before asking the main question: "Do you worry that
Mexican immigration could make the country more vulnerable to contagious diseases, such as the coronavirus?"


                                                         64
             Table C2: Motivating survey: Balance of covariates


                                    Overall         Excuse      No Excuse         p-value
                            mean       std.dev.      mean         mean            (E=NE)
Variables:                    (1)         (2)         (3)           (4)             (5)
Age                         46.682      16.451       46.716       46.649           0.946
Black                       0.023        0.151       0.023        0.023            0.960
Asian                       0.039        0.194       0.046        0.032            0.245
White                       0.901        0.299       0.901        0.901            0.993
Hispanic                    0.084        0.277       0.088        0.079            0.585
Male                        0.402        0.491       0.396        0.409            0.651
High school diploma         0.991        0.094       0.989        0.993            0.546
Bachelors degree            0.301        0.459       0.307        0.294            0.617
Notes: p-values based on robust standard errors reported. Attriters dropped from sample.




                     Table C3: Motivating survey: results

                                                    Dependent variable:
                                          Publicly supports permanent ban
                                              (1)       (2)                (3)

       Excuse                            0.195        0.197           0.195
                                         (0.029)      (0.029)         (0.028)

       Demographic controls                   No        Yes               Yes
       Partisan affiliation controls          No        No                Yes
       DV mean                            0.416        0.416              0.416
       DV std. dev.                       0.493        0.493              0.493
       Observations                       1,121        1,121              1,121
       R2                                 0.039        0.080              0.143
       Adjusted R2                        0.038        0.065              0.129
         Notes: The dependent variable is an indicator taking value 1 if the respon-
         dent agreed that immigration from Mexico should be permanently banned.
         Demographic controls include age, age squared, a set of race indicators, a
         Hispanic indicator, a male indicator, a set of education indicators, and a
         set of partisan affiliation indicators. Robust standard errors are reported.




                                              65
                                         Figure C1: Covid Excuse




               0.6
                                                        p<0.001
Mean support




               0.4




               0.2



                                    0.32                                        0.51
               0.0
                               No Excuse                                      Excuse
   Notes: Figure C1 displays the results from the motivating survey experiment conducted in May 2020 with a
   sample of 1,121 Republicans. The figure shows the fraction of respondents supporting a permanent ban of
   Mexican immigration in the Excuse condition and in the No Excuse condition as well as 95 percent confidence
   intervals.




                                                       66
Supplementary Materials:
Experimental Instructions



Not intended for publication




             67
D     Survey instruments: Experiment 1

D.1   Consent and pre-treatment questions




                                     68
69
70
71
72
D.2   No Excuse condition




                            73
74
75
76
77
D.3   Excuse condition




                         78
79
80
81
82
D.4   Post-treatment questions and debrief




                                     83
84
E   Survey instruments: Experiment 2A




                             85
86
Information about Lott Study: Excuse and No Excuse condition




                                      87
Reconsent




Description of donation decision




                                   88
Website Excuse condition and No Excuse condition




                                      89
90
Donation: Excuse condition




                             91
92
Donation: No Excuse condition




                                93
94
Donation: control condition




                              95
96
Post-outcome measures




                        97
F   Survey instruments: Experiment 2B




                              98
99
100
101
102
103
104
105
F.1   No Excuse condition




                            106
107
F.2   Excuse condition




                         108
109
F.3   Post-treatment questions




                                 110
G     Survey instruments: motivating survey

G.1   Instructions: Excuse condition




                                       111
112
113
G.2   Instructions: No Excuse condition




                                    114
115
116
H     Survey instruments: Gullibility/Intolerance Dictator Game

H.1   Gullibility condition




                                117
118
H.2   Intolerance condition




                              119
120
