                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     THE EVOLUTION OF CEO COMPENSATION IN VENTURE CAPITAL BACKED
                              STARTUPS

                                        Michael Ewens
                                        Ramana Nanda
                                     Christopher T. Stanton

                                      Working Paper 27296
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27296


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2020




We are especially thankful to Bob Hall and Susan Woodward for sharing their code. We are also
grateful to Zoe Cullen, Matthew Denes (discussant), Roberta Dessi, Paul Gompers, Victoria
Ivashina, Ben Roth, Pian Shu (discussant), Kathryn Shaw (discussant), Stephen Hansen
(discussant), Juanita González-Uribe (discussant), Peter Thompson and participants at the NBER
Summer Institute, Western Finance Association (2020), CEPR, CUHK, CityU Hong Kong,
Georgia Tech, and Nanyang Technological University for helpful discussions. Nanda and Stanton
thank the Division of Research and Faculty Development at HBS for financial support. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Michael Ewens, Ramana Nanda, and Christopher T. Stanton. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Evolution of CEO Compensation in Venture Capital Backed Startups
Michael Ewens, Ramana Nanda, and Christopher T. Stanton
NBER Working Paper No. 27296
June 2020, Revised August 2020
JEL No. G24,G3,G32,J24,J3

                                         ABSTRACT

We document new facts on the evolution of founder-CEO compensation in venture capital-
backed startups. Having a tangible product ("product market fit") is a fundamental milestone in
CEOs' compensation, marking the point where liquid cash compensation increases significantly --
well before an IPO or acquisition. "Product market fit" also coincides with key human capital in
the startup becoming more replaceable. Although increases in cash compensation over the firm
lifecycle improves the attractiveness of entrepreneurship relative to a contract with at pay, we
find that low cash compensation in the early years can still deter entrepreneurial entry.


Michael Ewens                                  Christopher T. Stanton
California Institute of Technology             210 Rock Center
MC 228-77                                      Harvard University
1200 East California Avenue                    Harvard Business School
Pasadena, CA 91125                             Boston, MA 02163
and NBER                                       and NBER
mewens@caltech.edu                             christopher.t.stanton@gmail.com

Ramana Nanda
Harvard Business School
Rock Center 317
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
rnanda@hbs.edu
1     Introduction

Venture capital (VC) finances high-growth startups that play a disproportionate role in inno-
vation, job creation, and productivity growth (Kortum and Lerner 2000; Puri and Zarutskie
2012). These startups face several impediments when raising capital. Entrepreneurs must
first overcome adverse selection concerns. Once they raise capital, investors must then ad-
dress moral hazard issues. Venture capital (VC) investors have developed an extensive set of
tools that diminish financing frictions in ways traditional financing sources cannot. Solutions
include rigorous due diligence (Gompers et al. 2020), complex security design (e.g. Hellmann
1998; Kaplan and Str¨
                    omberg 2003; Ewens, Gorbenko, and Korteweg 2019), staged financ-
ing (Gompers 1995) and active investment through extensive control rights, such as board
seats (Hellmann and Puri 2002). However, despite the importance of VC-backed firms and
the wealth of information of these many solutions, little is known about the compensation
contracts of founder-CEOs in private, venture capital-backed firms.
    This gap is important for two reasons. First, exploring when professionalized CEO con-
tracts emerge in the firm's lifecycle reveals important features of how VCs implement dy-
namic contracts. Theory suggests that, at least initially, venture capital contracts have to
leave founders bearing substantial non-diversifiable risk at the birth of firms in order to
screen entrepreneurs. However, the value of screening is likely to fall as firm performance
becomes publicly observed, suggesting that incentive alignment should increasingly domi-
nate screening motives as firms mature. For example, Rajan (2012) models the lifecycle of
startups, in which venture capital investors first seek differentiated ideas, and then proceed
to standardize the firm. This process gradually reduces the dependence on soft assets like
founder human capital. Although empirical research has documented the role of VCs in
"professionalizing" firms along these lines (e.g., Hellmann and Puri (2002)), relatively little

                                              2
is known about the compensation contract between entrepreneurs and investors, and its evo-
lution over the lifecycle of the firm. Indeed, understanding the evolution of CEO contracts
as well as founder replacement (rather than firm failure) can not only reveal important fea-
tures of how VC implement dynamic contracts, but can also shed light on key inflection
points in firms' lifecycles that trigger this shift, in Rajan's (2012) language, from a focus on
`differentiation' to that of `standardization'.
       Second, since entrepreneurs are intricately tied to the ideas they commercialize at the
birth of new ventures, the compensation contract they face, and the related risk they need
to bear, are critically important for determining which ideas are brought to market (Knight
1921). Hall and Woodward (2010) highlight the extremely skewed distribution of outcomes
among venture capital backed firms and discuss the risk-tolerance necessary to enter en-
trepreneurship.1 A critical component of the risk borne by entrepreneurs is the amount
of time between starting a firm and an entrepreneur's ability to access a liquid source of
cash, either through salary, bonus compensation, or realized capital gains. The longer the
delay until founders can access liquid cash, the greater is their "burden of non-diversifiable
risk." Understanding the level and evolution of founder-CEO compensation helps document
the types of people for whom the burden of non-diversifiable risk is likely to be greatest,
and hence the sources of ideas that are most and least likely to be commercialized through
VC-backed entrepreneurship.
       In this paper, we first explore whether, and if so how, founder-CEO compensation in
VC-backed firms responds to a dynamic information environment such as achieving key
milestones. The nature of any response sheds light on the tools used to incentivize the
CEOs of high-growth entrepreneurial firms. To do so, we use individual data on executive
   1
    Conditional on this entry decision, Hellmann and Wasserman (2017) highlight the important role of the
founding teams' first split of equity for startup outcomes.


                                                   3
compensation in VC-backed startups to study both the level and evolution of CEO compen-
sation. We link, at the individual executive-level, their salary, bonus, and equity holdings
to firm-level information on financing, revenue, headcount, and product milestones. We also
observe whether the executive is a founder or not, and we have rich covariates on the startup
firm's industry, location, and age.
      We show that founder cash compensation is indeed minimal at the birth of ventures,
exactly as predicted by financial contracting theories that emphasize screening in the face
of adverse selection. However, development of a tangible, marketable product (colloquially
referred to as "product market fit" among entrepreneurs and VC investors) stands out as a
critical milestone that drives an apparent transition in the compensation contract between
investors and founder-CEOs to one that is more standard in mature firms. In Section 3,
we document several facts related to CEO compensation that are consistent with product
market fit ­ as opposed to correlates of unobserved firm or founder quality ­ being the point
at which professional contracts begin to emerge.2 After product market fit, `standardization'
overtakes `differentiation', and founders become more replaceable.
      Having documented this milestone as a key inflection point in the compensation contracts
of CEOs, we turn next to studying how quickly product market fit is achieved, as a means to
quantify the attractiveness of the entrepreneurial career path. Most entrepreneurs transition
to entrepreneurship from wage employment. In addition to being more risky than wage
employment, entrepreneurship also entails starting off with minimal liquid cash compensation
(even if paper wealth is large). Individuals' pre-entrepreneurship wages, as well as their net
wealth, therefore play an important role in determining their opportunity costs and the
  2
    Bengtsson and Hand (2011) use a now-defunct CompensationPro database (run at the time by Venture-
Source) to show that VC-backed firm CEO compensation responds strongly to fundraising success. Our data
allow us to distinguish product progress from fundraising events.



                                                  4
degree to which they can smooth consumption. This in turn impacts whether they find it
financially attractive to pursue VC-backed entrepreneurship (Hall and Woodward 2010).
   Importantly, however, because cash compensation increases substantially following prod-
uct market fit, we note that it is not just the initial level of cash compensation, but rather the
speed with which milestones are achieved (and hence uncertainty resolved) that determines
the extent of risk facing entrepreneurs (Manso 2016; Dillon and Stanton 2018). For example,
within three years since firm birth, 80% of the founder-CEOs in our sample have either failed
or have achieved the product-market and operating milestones that signal a transition to a
standardized contract.
   In Section 4, we apply this insight of relatively quick resolution of uncertainty to Hall
and Woodward's (2010) analysis of the risk entrepreneurs face. We use their model to
understand the conditions under which VC-backed entrepreneurship makes financial sense
for an individual with standard levels of risk aversion. Given the level and evolution of CEO
compensation we observe in the data, the model suggests that individuals selecting into
VC-backed entrepreneurship are likely to either have earned less than $400,000 in their pre-
founding job or to have accumulated assets above $500,000 prior to entering entrepreneurship.
   In the final part of the paper, we validate the predictions of the model by studying the
biographies and work histories of a sub-sample of CEOs drawn at random from the universe
of startups in the US. This provides descriptive evidence on what types of jobs precede
startup founding and where startup CEOs transition to work after their employment with
the firm ends.
   Consistent with evidence that founders of high-growth ventures have typically worked
for several years prior to entering entrepreneurship (Azoulay et al. 2020), we find that, on
average, founder-CEOs are 36 years old and have nearly 12 years of pre-founding experience.


                                                5
We also find that most founding CEOs of VC-backed startups were in mid-level positions
in their firms immediately prior to entry. Those with senior job titles or those among the
higher paying jobs in their firms prior to entry are rarely seen in our data, suggesting that
these individuals find the opportunity cost too great to make it worthwhile to experiment
with entrepreneurship.
   Our findings relate to several strands of literature. First, our paper is related to principal-
agent problems for both CEO compensation and contracts between investors and entrepreneurs
(Holmstrom and Milgrom 1987; Aghion and Bolton 1992; Edmans, Gabaix, and Jenter 2017).
This work has highlighted the importance of contracts that screen entrepreneurs under asym-
metric information. Our findings are consistent with recent analysis in (Edmans et al. 2012),
who derive dynamic contracts where past performance is rewarded with intermediate cash
liquidity. This new evidence from private firms suggests that contracts for the CEOs of
publicly traded firms originate well before firms go public, consistent with Rajan's (2012)
model of standardization by VC investors.
   Our results also highlight an under-appreciated role played by venture capital investors­
as that of intermediate liquidity providers ­ which they might be uniquely positioned to do
as hands-on investors who are able to resolve information asymmetry more effectively than
passive capital providers. This role of venture capitalists as liquidity providers may also help
explain the sectors where VCs are more actively involved in financing innovation.
   Finally, our paper is related to the literature on selection into entrepreneurship. Past
work has documented the role of paid employment as a source of ideas and training for po-
tential entrepreneurs and the conditions leading them to select into entrepreneurship (Bhid´
                                                                                           e
2003; Gompers, Lerner, and Scharfstein 2005; Babina, Ouimet, and Zarutskie 2017; Kim
2018). While some theoretical work in this realm has examined the financial trade-offs be-


                                                6
tween entrepreneurship and paid employment (Anton and Yao 1995; Hellmann 2007), others
have outlined the frictions associated with this entry decision in terms of non-diversifiable
risk (Hall and Woodward 2010) and the potential behavioral drivers that might be required
to justify the amount of entrepreneurial entry we see in the economy (°
                                                                      Astebro et al. 2014).
We show that within VC-backed Information Technology ventures, the relatively short du-
ration of low salary combined with liquid cash compensation thereafter makes the certainty
equivalent of VC-backed entrepreneurship positive for a substantial share of potential en-
trepreneurs, even if they are risk averse.
    Nevertheless, our work also points to frictions at the very top end of the human cap-
ital distribution, where potential entrepreneurs have sufficiently high outside options that
the risk-adjusted return to VC-backed entrepreneurship is negative. It also highlights the
greater frictions present in providing entrepreneurs intermediate liquidity in sectors where
uncertainty is not resolved quickly (Ewens, Nanda, and Rhodes-Kropf 2018) or in sectors
where founder-CEOs require specialized experience or have higher outside options. The
degree to which these individuals' ideas are not commercialized (or commercialized inside
incumbent firms) as well as the aggregate impact of this selection remains an interesting area
of further work.



2     Data and Summary Statistics

2.1    Description of Data

Our core dataset is based on two cross sections of compensation surveys from Advanced HR
(AHR), a leading data provider for VC-backed startups and their investors. AHR collects
individual-level compensation data from private startups that have received investments from


                                              7
venture capital investors who participate in the survey. We are aware of no other compen-
sation data for startups that offers similar coverage on the scale that AHR provides. Each
survey contains individual-level information on salary, bonus, fully diluted equity, and co-
founder status. The individual-level records also contain a number of coarsened, categorical
startup-level characteristics, such as revenue, total employment, cumulative venture financ-
ing raised, and product-related milestones. To protect confidentiality, our data and the data
shared with venture capital investors are anonymous and are not linked to individuals or
startups over time.
   Startups become eligible for survey inclusion if they have received investment from the
venture-capital investors who cooperate with the survey. Completion of the survey by the
startups in their portfolio is strongly encouraged by venture capital investors, who are typ-
ically members of the startup's board. Both VCs and startups get access to benchmarking
data in exchange for responses. Many venture capital investors, including nearly all of the
most prominent and well-known venture capital funds, participate in the survey.
   We use data from AHR's 2015 and 2017 survey waves for technology companies (which
do not include data on biotech and healthcare startups). The 2015 survey contains data
from 933 portfolio companies that received funding from 70 VC investors; the 2017 survey
has data on 1,552 portfolio companies associated with 115 venture capital investors.3 Our
core sample focuses on US based CEOs in startups founded after 1996.4
   3
     The increase in the number of portfolio companies arises largely from the increase in investors who
participate in the 2017 wave, including earlier-stage seed funds, and corporate venture arms.
   4
     We drop 24 startups that are listed as having only growth capital or that have received 6+ rounds of
funding. We exclude 38 clean tech investments in 2015 and 35 clean tech investments in 2017. We also
exclude startups if we do not know the location of the CEO (eliminating 2 observations).




                                                   8
2.2       Validation of Survey Data

We validate the data in two ways using data from VentureSource, a popular commercial
data provider which has a information on the near-population of VC-backed startups during
the years in which the surveys were conducted. In a first exercise to assess any possible
response bias among the portfolio companies from the VC firms that participate, we restrict
the universe of startups to those that have received any funding from one of the VCs who
cooperate with the survey. Table 1 displays this comparison between the AHR data and
the eligible VentureSource startups.5 In the pooled sample, the AHR data covers 58%
of the VentureSource firms eligible for survey inclusion, indicating a strong response rate
among startups. We also assess whether the AHR sample appears to be representative of
the amount of investment and the age distribution. Across the firm age and investment
amount distribution, the AHR data appear to match the eligible survey firms well. While
the response rate remains high across survey waves, the number of firms rises in the 2017
wave. This occurs for two reasons. First, there are more startups receiving funding over
time (see Table 2). Second, as noted above, a larger number of VC investors participate in
the 2017 survey.
       Table 2 compares AHR coverage with the universe of startups in VentureSource in 2015
and 2017 - to examine whether the types of firms backed by VCs who participate in the
survey are similar to firms backed by VCs who do not participate. The AHR data covers
25% of all VentureSource firms that are under 10 years old as of the relevant survey year.
It is evident from Table 2 that the AHR data is tilted somewhat towards firms that have
raised more capital than those in the VentureSource universe. This difference largely come
   5
    We focus on firms born within 10 years of a survey year. To avoid so called `zombie' firms, we drop
firms that have not achieved an exit and not raised another round of financing within four years of their last
funding event.


                                                      9
from the set of VC funds in the survey versus the universe of private investors. For example,
VC funds participating in the 2017 survey had a median of $1.4 billion in assets under
management, whereas non-participating VC funds had a median of $85 million in assets
under management. As a result, the funds in the survey managed 42% of total industry
assets and deployed nearly 49% of the dollar-weighted investments in the VentureSource
universe. Although our results may reflect the firms that receive funding from well-reputed
investors, in later analyses we re-weight the AHR survey data to reflect the joint distribution
of firm age and capital raised in the VentureSource universe; these results are very similar
to un-weighted specifications, suggesting that the milestone based changes in compensation
that we document are robust to the sample composition.


2.3    Summary Statistics

Table 3 displays descriptive statistics for the AHR sample. The data are presented in two
panels based on variables that capture observable information and firm performance mile-
stones. The first panel splits by funding round, capturing how many rounds of outside
investment the firm has raised. The next panel presents data broken down for firms based
on revenue. Both panels are sorted from earlier to later stages for each variable, which cor-
responds with the column on average firm age. Note, however, that this progression is not
deterministic, and there is variation in firm age in each column. Later, we control for firm
age when assessing how each of these factors influences compensation.
   Focusing on Panel B, we distinguish pre-revenue firms that are "Pre-Product" and those
that are "Post-Product". Pre-Product firms are those that report "Early / Product Defini-
tion" as their development stage. Post-Product firms report "Product Development, "Prod-
uct in Beta", "Shipping Product" or "Profitable" as their product development stage. All


                                              10
firms with strictly positive revenue are "Post-Product" firms. There is a dramatic increase
in compensation for "Post-Product" firms that have yet to realize any revenue.
    In what remains, we use "product market fit" and "Post-Product" as synonyms. Our
operationalization of product market fit is coded as the first tangible product milestone
reported in the data and thus represents the earliest possible inflection point where product
progress might affect compensation.
    Progressing through rows in each panel of Table 3, mean CEO cash compensation in-
creases with the stage considered. CEO compensation starts off at around $100,000 but rises
quite considerably thereafter. Across panels, the CEOs of mature firms, (Post-Series B, with
greater than $10 million in revenue), earn, on average, over $270,000 per year in cash com-
pensation. Also relevant is the variability around these averages. The standard deviation
of total cash compensation increases with milestones in each panel.6 These early summary
statistics suggest that startup CEOs earn intermediate liquidity in the form of cash after
achieving milestones. The last column of the table shows that CEO's hold less than 40% of
the as-if-converted equity by the first financing round.7 The steep decline in equity stakes
demonstrates the dilution that comes with capital raising. Subsequent analyses evaluate the
most plausible alternative channels that may explain the stylized facts in Table 2.
    Table 4 is designed to assess whether the large increases in cash compensation over the
life of the firm are driven in part by a compositional shift in the share of non-founders
who transition to the CEO role. Among pre-revenue firms, 96% of CEOs are founders
   6
     Note however that the coefficient of variation is actually quite high for firms that are in the first category.
This is largely driven by a subset of CEOS of very early-stage, pre-product companies who take de-minimis
salaries; in about 15% of these firms, the CEO earns less than $20,000 per year. Thus, the variation at very
early stages comes from CEOs who earn significantly less than the mean.
   7
     The CEO is likely one of two to three founding team members that will collectively own more than the
reported number in Table 3. See Hellmann et al. (2019) for an analysis of within-founding team ownership
dynamics.



                                                        11
or co-founders. This drops to 83% for firms with between 0 and $10 million in revenue.
Importantly, while we find an increasing share of non-founders in the CEO role as milestones
are achieved (and the firm becomes viable in the absence of its founders), Table 4 shows
that even among founder-CEOs, compensation increases considerably after the firm has
achieved product and financial milestones. While there is a gap between non-founders and
founders, with non-founders receiving greater average cash compensation, what is essential
is that founder-CEOs experience significant lifecycle growth in compensation that begins to
resemble the compensation of outside professionals at later stages.8
    There are several possible reasons why a gap remains between founders and non-founders.
One possibility is that equity holdings and cash compensation are substitutes. Referring back
to Table 3, the final column shows CEOs' mean fully diluted equity, or what fraction of the
firm the CEO would own if a liquidity event occurred today and all options holders and
venture investors converted their holdings into common shares.9 While average fully diluted
equity for the CEO is negatively correlated with firm stage in Table 3, Table 4 shows that
non-founder CEOs hold considerably lower equity than founders. Although our focus is not
on causal analysis of the substitutability of these compensation instruments, the hypothesis
that equity and cash compensation are partially substitutes would suggest that founder-
CEOs have even more similar compensation to non-founders than indicated by the mean
differences in their levels of cash pay.
   8
     Although our focus is on founders in the CEO position, Tables A1 and A2 in the Internet Appendix
provide detail on the positions of non-CEO founders and the evolution of their pay.
   9
     Most venture investors hold convertible preferred shares that convert into common stock after favorable
firm outcomes. Employee options are assumed to have vested and are exerciseable. Average fully diluted
equity is 20% of the firm for Series A CEOs; it falls to 10% by Series C.




                                                    12
3        Product Market Fit as a Fundamental Milestone

Having documented the general patterns around the evolution of CEO compensation, we
turn next to a multi-variate analysis. The goal is to identify specific milestones associated
with shifts in CEO compensation. An important finding is that product market fit, even
after controlling for its correlates (such as firm age or substantial external financing), appears
to be a significant inflection point both in the evolution of the firm and the evolution of the
founder's compensation contract. We demonstrate this fact by looking at the evolution of
(1) the level of cash compensation, (2) variation in cash compensation, (3) the bonus share
of cash compensation for CEOs, and (4) founder vs. non-founder CEOs. We now turn to
documenting these patterns in greater detail.


3.1       Evolution of the level of CEO cash compensation

We start by providing graphical evidence on the evolution of total cash compensation and
its relationship with having a product. We focus on founder-CEOs as the unit of analysis to
capture changes in cash compensation for those who begin their tenure at the earliest stages
of the firm lifecycle. Figure 1 provides evidence on the importance of achieving product
market fit as a pre-condition for increases in CEO-compensation. The top left panel of
Figure 1 displays how average cash compensation and the interquartile range change with
firm age. Similar to the patterns seen in Table 3, cash compensation for founder-CEOs
increases dramatically with firm age.10
       One explanation for this relationship is that information about the future prospects for
the company is revealed as firms age, and cash compensation responds to this news. The
  10
    Note that this analysis is conditional on surviving firms, but surviving firms are the relevant sample for
assessing founder risk. Upon firm failure or an executive's exit, he or she earns their outside compensation.
We later assess whether startup experience itself changes the outside option relative to other career paths.

                                                     13
remaining panels in Figure 1 help to disentangle alternative explanations. The top right
panel of Figure 1 conditions on "Pre-Product" firms that have no revenue and have not yet
achieved viable product definition.11 These firms have low total cash compensation and a
flat gradient with respect to age. The panel itself is not truncated at 4 years of age--instead,
firms that do not have a product rarely survive to their fifth year. This panel suggests that
the overall increase in compensation with firm age stems from the increasing number of
surviving firms that have achieved product market milestones and the death of firms that
fail to achieve milestones.
       The bottom panels plot similar figures, but instead of focusing on age, the x-axis is capital
raised. Capital is related to firm milestones, yet conditional on capital raised, pre-product
firms in the bottom right panel have lower average pay and a more compressed interquartile
range of pay than the unconditional plots. These figures suggest that having a viable product
is a significant inflection point for CEO compensation.
       Table 5 displays regression results where the dependent variable is log total cash com-
pensation for the founder-CEOs of VC-backed firms. The regression is


                          log(Compi ) = Xi  + Firm Agei + Controlsi +        i                    (1)


where X is a matrix of milestones. The parameter ^ is the partial correlation between an

increase in X on compensation after netting out the effects of controls and other character-
istics.
       The first column contains baseline results with the fewest possible controls. Log cash
compensation is positively related to firm revenue, with substantial increases coming from
  11
    Pre-Product firms are defined in Table 3 and are those that report "Early / Product Definition" as
their development stage. Post-Product firms report "Product Development, "Product in Beta", "Shipping
Product" or "Profitable" as their product development stage.


                                                  14
firms that have positive revenue relative to the baseline of pre-revenue firms. Subsequent
columns add additional controls to assess how other firm characteristics change the impor-
tance of development milestones. Column 2 adds firm age. While the parameter estimates on
the revenue indicators fall, having positive revenue is still associated with an approximately
56% increase in pay (exp(0.447) - 1) relative to pre-revenue firms.
   Column 3 tests for the importance of product market fit, with striking results. This
column includes the Post-Product Definition dummy for whether the firm has made it beyond
the Pre-Product stage, as described in Table 3 and Figure 1. This separates the degree to
which revenue is driven by the existence of a product from the degree of traction with
customers due to pricing, marketing, and the like. Controlling for these factors, product
definition/development itself remains a significant milestone. In this column, the revenue
gradient remains positive, but it is far less pronounced relative to Column 2, suggesting that
the inflection point for cash compensation is around having a tangible product. The product
definition dummy, revenue dummies, and firm age together explain 39.7% of the variance in
log cash compensation. Subsequent columns add additional characteristics, as noted in the
bottom of the table. Even controlling for cumulative venture capital investment, total rounds
of funding, industry, region, and firm age, the coefficient on the Post-Product Definition
indicator implies that having a tangible product is associated with a cash compensation
increase of approximately exp(0.338) - 1 = 40%. Together these additional controls raise the
r-squared, but product definition remains economically significant and meaningful. Column 6
addresses whether these results generalize to the universe of startup firms compared to those
in the survey by re-weighting the data such that the AHR sample matches the cross-section of
VentureSource in each survey year. We target firm age and capital raised in this re-weighting
exercise. The main results remain very similar to those without the re-weighting.


                                             15
   We further probe whether our estimates are robust to unobserved firm or founder quality,
and conclude that unobservables would need to be implausibly large to explain our results.
Note that we do not observe the evolution of CEO compensation within a firm, but rather
trace out the evolution based on firms at different points in their lifecycles that were captured
when the survey was conducted. Because of this, one might be concerned that our estimates
omit the quality of firms or founders that investors may observe at early stages. In other
words, firms that survive to later stages are potentially of higher quality, and the difference
in cash compensation may be driven by the selected sample of firms that progress to later
stages, rather than a substantive evolution of firms to higher levels of cash compensation as
they achieve milestones. To assess how selection on unobserved knowledge about a firm's ex-
ante traction would change our conclusions, we conduct an approximate worst-case-scenario
analysis in which we assume it is only the firms with the highest pre-product pay that
survive to reach subsequent milestones. The ingredients for this calculation are relatively
simple: conditional on survival to year 3, 82% of surviving firms in the AHR have hit revenue
milestones. In longitudinal data, 20% of all firms fail by year 3 (see Internet Appendix Figure
A1 which displays the cumulative hazards for different types of exits from the VentureSource
universe). Using these statistics, we compute the difference in mean pay for the surviving
3-year-old firms that have positive revenue and the conditional distribution of pay for pre-
revenue firms above the .2 + .18/.82 = 42nd percentile of the distribution. Even against this
worst-case-scenario (that presumes surviving post-product firms are drawn from the top of
the initial compensation distribution), we find an increase in log total compensation of 0.29
(a 34 percent increase in levels) due to having a tangible product (the standard error is .053).
Thus, selection on unobserved quality is unlikely to explain the importance of milestones for
CEO compensation in the cross-section of firms.


                                               16
       A different question is whether our results are representative of a longer time series, es-
pecially one where VC funding was less "frothy." To assess whether we are simply capturing
an ephemeral moment in VC funding history, we bring to bear hand-collected data on cor-
porate filings of new IPOs among VC-backed startups.12 Every firm filing an S-1 for an IPO
must provide 3 years of compensation history for the CEO and other top executives. Using
these recorded filings, Figure 2 displays median total cash compensation in 2015 dollars for
firms that IPO over the time series.13 At least among successful firms that eventually be-
come public, compensation in this selected sample looks reasonably stable over time. This
suggests we are capturing systematic features of the contracting environment, rather than a
shift over time that reflects a new era of VC funding or a reduction in governance.


3.2       Variance of CEO Compensation

As shown above, the evolution of the level of CEO compensation has an inflection point
around the product market fit milestone, suggesting a shift from a "screening" contract to a
"professionalized" contract. Further, we might expect that the variance of CEO pay is very
low across firms prior to product market fit ­ as they are given a relatively similar screening
contract. Variation in pay would be expected to rise after product market fit, as firms achieve
other size-based milestones. Figure 1 shows evidence of this because the interquartile range
of cash compensation is much smaller for pre-product firms, and compensation variability
increases only after achieving milestones.
       To more formally examine the variance of CEO compensation, we first note that the
sample in Table 5 excludes firms with very low cash compensation, as cash compensation
  12
      Baker and Gompers (1999) collected similar data for their analysis of the transition of VC-backed startups
from private to public firms.
   13
      If the S-1 does not contain compensation data, then we collect the first post-IPO DEF 14-A proxy
statement filing.

                                                      17
close to zero is an extreme outlier in logarithms. Internet Appendix Table A3 gets around
this issue by using a Poisson regression, as suggested by Silva and Tenreyro (2006). In Figure
3, we display these estimates from Poisson regressions as predicted densities of the level of
cash compensation. We take the fitted values and show how the distribution changes for
firms with different rounds of funding and different product status and revenue levels. As
shown in Figure 3 Panel A, most firms at seed stage have relatively low predicted pay relative
to other firms. The mean shifts up substantially for Series A firms, but the variability also
increases significantly. Because these are predicted densities, this variability comes from
increased variance in the X matrix for Series A firms. Not all Series A firms have achieved
relevant product market milestones, but those that do see significant increases in cash pay
for their founder-CEOs. By Series B, the mean shifts up again because most firms have hit
funding milestones, while the lower tail of the distribution begins to disappear. The change
becomes more stark for Series C firms, as nearly all firms at Series C have achieved basic
operational milestones and the thick right tail of compensation comes from firms that have
achieved significant revenue. The CEOs of these firms are paid accordingly, as suggested
by Rosen (1982) and Gabaix and Landier (2008). This progression as a function of product
status and revenue is made more clear in Panel B of Figure 3. In this panel, pre-product
firms have a narrow density with a low mean. Post-product but pre-revenue firms have
a distribution that is shifted to the right and is more variable. Variability increases with
revenue and the pay distribution continues to shift rightward.
   Figure 3 and Table 5 also show that once product market fit has been achieved, variation
in CEO pay across firms grows substantially. As has been documented in prior work on
publicly-traded firms (Gabaix and Landier 2008), variation in CEO pay appears strongly
related to measures of firm size. For example, as seen in Table 5, dummies for firm revenue


                                             18
alone explain over 30% of the variance in log CEO compensation; adding product milestone
and firm age increases the R-squared to about 40%. Interestingly, we find that adding VC
financing round, funding amount, region, and industry dummies only increases the r-squared
to 44%. Region fixed effects are jointly insignificant in a Wald test in Table 5, Column 5.
Thus, among these firm-, industry- and region-level factors, the majority of the variation in
pay is driven by variation in underlying firm fundamentals, swamping the geographic and
industry differences that have been shown to be important in other contexts (Moretti 2010).


3.3       Evolution of the bonus share

The bonus share of total compensation increases significantly and systematically with mile-
stones. It averages 5.5% for pre-product firms, 5.3% for post-product but pre-revenue firms,
and 14.5% for post-revenue firms. The fact that bonus setting is explicit (the data captures
target bonus) suggests that our results stem from changes at the board level rather than the
CEO dictating pay unilaterally.
       Figure 4 displays the relationship between bonus share, log total compensation and log
firm revenue. What is particularly striking is the very low pay (and minimal bonus pay) for
firms with minimal revenue. In Panels A and C, the leftmost data point is pre-revenue firms.
After excluding these firms in Panels B and D, the relationship between log compensation
and log revenue looks nearly linear. As revenue grows, the bonus share increases with it,
suggesting that boards are setting objectives that trigger compensation liquidity at higher
frequency than exit events.14 This analysis suggests that milestones and compensation are
positively related. There is virtually no bonus prior to product market fit. Total cash
compensation increases at a greater rate than salary with respect to firm size, so that bonus
  14
    Table A4 in the Internet Appendix provides regression versions of this graphical presentation but instead
looks at coefficients on log salary and log total compensation separately.

                                                     19
pay comprises a larger share of cash compensation in larger firms. The linear relationship
between log size and log compensation, as well as the increasing share of bonus in overall
compensation for larger firms, has been documented in prior empirical work looking at CEO
compensation in publicly traded firms (Shue and Townsend 2017). In fact, we show that
the relationship between log cash compensation and log firm revenue among the firms in
our sample looks quite similar to the relationship in publicly traded firms (see Internet
Appendix Figure A2 and Internet Appendix Table A5). To be clear, our goal is not to
document parity in the contracts between public CEOs and those in our sample, rather it
is to show that several of the stylized facts we know about public company CEO contracts
appear to emerge in VC-backed startups prior to going public but not before the existence of
a tangible product. In other words, product market fit appears to be a key milestone where
professionalized and standardized contracts emerge.


3.4     Founder and Non-Founder CEOs

3.4.1   Founder CEO Turnover vs. Firm Exit

Our third set of results looks at founder turnover before and after product market fit. Rajan
(2012) theorized that at the birth of a new firm, the key human capital in a venture is not
replaceable, requiring the entrepreneur to have significant control to allow her to create a
differentiated idea/organization. This key human capital becomes more replaceable once
the firm undergoes a transition from differentiation to standardization. If indeed product
market fit is a key milestone for CEOs transitioning from "screening" to "professionalized"
or standardized contracts, this suggests that it might also be the important inflection point
in firms' lifecycles where they transition from differentiation to standardization.
   We should therefore expect to have very few instances prior to a firm achieving product

                                              20
market fit where the founder is replaced but the firm survives. However, the hazards for
founder-exit and firm-exit should diverge after product market fit. Consistent with this, the
summary statistics in Table 4 reflect an increased likelihood of observing non-founders in
the CEO role as firms gain revenue.
   After controlling for age, industry, and geography, are we more likely to observe non-
founders as CEOs in post-product compared to pre-product firms? Table 6 contains this
analysis, where we regress a dummy for having a non-founder in the CEO position on mea-
sures of product-market fit. We conduct this analysis separately on the AHR data and,
via proxy measures, on the VentureSource Data. The first three columns include the Post-
Product definition dummy along with different combinations of controls/fixed effects for the
AHR data. The coefficients are generally between 0.044 to 0.052 on the Post-Product defi-
nition dummy, indicating that founders are more likely to have been replaced as CEOs after
product market fit compared to before. This analysis conditions on surviving firms, suggest-
ing that firm failure is the source of dissolution among pre-product firms that are unable
to achieve product market fit rather than a change in leadership. Columns 4 and 5 split
the sample by the amount of VC investment raised. Column 4 shows a much smaller (and
statistically insignificant) coefficient among firms with under $10 million in VC funding com-
pared to the much larger estimate of 0.21 in Column 5. This is because very few firms have
any CEO turnover in the absence of raising money, both pre- and post-product firms, which
makes it hard to distinguish between any turnover events early in the fundraising process.
Among firms that have raised more than $10 million in VC funding, Column 5 shows that
pre-product firms are much more likely to retain the CEO. This result is quite surprising, but
is consistent with our narrative of standardization. That is, holding constant covariates, one
might have expected that VC investors in firms that have raised substantial capital would


                                             21
have been more likely to replace CEOs prior to product market fit. Instead, consistent with
the hypothesis that key human capital is hard to replace before standardization, these pre-
product firms are much more likely to be observed with a founder as CEO. Column 6 shows
that this relationship holds even when the sample is restricted to pre-revenue firms.
   To investigate whether the connection between turnover and product-market fit holds
in a larger sample, the last three columns of Table 6 report similar regressions using the
VentureSource sample. Because VentureSource provides a view of the executive team at
every financing event, we can accurately assign turnover events. Columns (7) and (8) report
the regressions for the sample years 2015 and 2017, while the last column reports results
for all years since 2015. The results have similar signs: product market fit is positively
correlated with a founder-CEO being replaced. The coefficients imply a 34% increase in the
probability of founder-CEO replacement relative to the sample mean.


3.4.2   Founder vs. Non-Founder CEO Compensation

The same shift in the firm lifecycle that enables founder replacement is associated with
a steeply increasing cash compensation profile for founder-CEOs. We now examine how
founder-CEOs' compensation arrangements mimic those of non-founders' after product mar-
ket fit. The clarification that this comparison is largely centered after product market fit is
important because there are few pre-product firms with non-founder CEOs.
   As noted above, Table 4 provides summary statistics on cash compensation and fully
diluted equity holdings, split by firm revenue and founder-status. Within similar levels of
revenue, non-founders receive more cash and have less equity. Unfortunately, our data do
not allow us to compare how non-founder CEOs' contracts compare with the founders they
replace, but we can assess whether firm characteristics explain some of these differences.


                                              22
Non-founding CEOs lead companies that are on average older and larger, indicating that
turnover is not random (see Figure 5 for firm age and the share of founders in the CEO
position). The source of selection is not clear from past work.15 However, Figure 7 displays
differences in the distribution of log compensation residuals after adding controls for various
firm milestones and operational stages. The results from these regressions indicate that non-
founders are rare among young firms and firms with little capital investment. While there
is a large region where founders and non-founder CEOs have the same pay, the distribution
of compensation residuals is shifted somewhat upward for non-founders even after adding
controls. Despite the differences in the averages, the overlap in the distribution suggests that
many founders are receiving approximately "market like" or "professionalized" compensation
as benchmarked by non-founder CEOs as part of the standardization process of the firm.
   Moreover, the data also show that firms either achieve product market fit or fail within a
short period of time, which suggests that attempting entrepreneurship can be conceptualized
as experimentation (Manso 2016; Dillon and Stanton 2018). Nevertheless, the length of
time the CEO needs to face a screening contract as well as the CEO's outside options will
determine the degree to which potential entrants find it financially attractive to experiment
with entrepreneurship.
  15
     Prior studies about why founding CEOs are replaced point to bi-modal reasons for turnover (Wasser-
man 2003). Some turnover occurs in firms that are struggling (Ewens and Marx 2017). Other firms ex-
perience turnover when venture investors perceive the need for extremely fast growth for which founders
are ill-equipped. The canonical example is Google, where Eric Schmidt was brought in to provide "adult
supervision."




                                                  23
4     Founder CEO Compensation and Selection into En-

      trepreneurship

As noted above, VCs can and do provide founder-CEOs intermediate liquidity once they
transition to a professionalized contract, but VCs cannot effectively screen entrepreneurs
while their startups are differentiated (before they have achieved milestones) and thus do
not provide them generous salaries. The expected time taken to achieve product market
fit and the entrepreneurs' outside options therefore affect the risk of entrepreneurship for
founders. Since, as noted above, founders and firms are indistinguishable at the birth of
firms, the types of individuals who choose not to found ventures will impact the ideas that
are commercialized through VC-backed entrepreneurship.
    To understand the degree to which this risk impacts the ideas that are commercialized
and the people who select into entrepreneurship, we first must understand the time it takes to
achieve product market fit. To explore how compensation and milestones evolve with time,
we would ideally want to recover the joint distribution of outcome timing for {exit, achieving
milestones, failure}. As noted above, this is difficult in the compensation survey because the
data do not contain firm and individual identifiers. For each cohort of firms, we would need
to track outcomes from birth, but we don't have the ability to do so in the AHR data because
it contains cross-sections that condition on survival. However, for our purposes, the relevant
exercise is whether firms persist without hitting a milestone, as limping along at low pay and
prolonging failure may not be a good outcome for the entrepreneur. Therefore, conditional on
survival in the data, we examine the probability of failing to achieve a milestone (continuing
to persist at low pay). The fraction of firms achieving different milestones is displayed in
Figure 6, showing that nearly all firms that survive after the first three years have achieved


                                             24
the revenue milestones.
   Together with this information, we then build on one of the best-known benchmark mod-
els in this literature, from Hall and Woodward (2010), which incorporates many realistic
features of the financial contract between investors and entrepreneurs, including liquidation
preferences, stochastic exit values, and stochastic time to a liquidity event. Hall and Wood-
ward are also among the first to use realistic risk preferences while modeling entrepreneurs'
consumption and asset accumulation decisions.
   One contribution of our compensation analysis is that it gives us the ability to revisit
the Hall and Woodward consumption-savings problem, by building in the possibility that
entrepreneurs who meet milestones may receive an increasing path of cash compensation
while the firm remains private. The entrepreneur's ex-ante problem is to choose consumption
in the face of uncertain future assets. Future assets are uncertain because the share of firm
value that accrues to an entrepreneur in a liquidity event is a random variable with substantial
variability. Prior to a liquidity event, these future assets do little for consumption, as there is
substantial uncertainty over their value and borrowing against equity is likely to be difficult.
As a result, the entrepreneur must consume out of either salary or more liquid forms of
wealth. To fix ideas, let t+1 be the probability of a liquidity event at date t + 1 while the
stochastic payoff to the entrepreneur, X, is conditional on an exit at t + 1. We simplify Hall
and Woodward's notation, leaving implicit the entrepreneur's control over human wealth,
and write the ex-ante value function for an entrepreneur with liquid and semi-liquid assets
At at time t as:

                                         1
             V (At ) = max u(ct ) +         (1 - t+1 )Ewt V ((At - ct )(1 + r) + wt )
                          ct <At        1+r
                               1
                          +       t+1 EX V ((At - ct )(1 + r) + Xt+1 )
                              1+r

                                                 25
       The entrepreneur solves for a consumption path with expected entrepreneurial wage
sequence arising from the time-specific density {f (wt )}T
                                                         t and takes into account the post-

venture value function

                                             1 + r rA + w
                                       V =        u(      )
                                               r     1+r

where w is the non-entrepreneurial wage.
                                                                                            c1- -1
       Hall and Woodward assume that the flow utility is isoelastic, with u(ct ) =            1-
                                                                                                     where 
is the coefficient of relative risk aversion. They evaluate several values of  , but a somewhat
standard level of risk aversion would suggest that   2 is reasonable. They also assume
that entrepreneurs earn an annual pre-tax salary of $150,000 over the entire life of the
firm, and they then evaluate the certainty-equivalent value of entrepreneurship compared
to different values of the non-entrepreneurial wage. However, Table 4 documents how cash
compensation in VC-backed firms evolves after resolving irreducible uncertainty ­ such as
producing a product. CEO pay then increases substantially as firm revenue grows.
       The path of pay that we document over the firm lifecycle potentially alters conclusions
about the risk borne by entrepreneurs. To assess what our data mean for the burden of
non-diversifiable risk in entrepreneurship, we make a very simple adjustment to the Hall
and Woodward baseline analysis. Instead of solving the entrepreneur's consumption-savings
problem assuming that the pay over a venture's lifetime is a constant $150,000, we instead get
the entrepreneurs expected value function using the time path of actual cash compensation
in the data. To do so, we integrate over the distribution of value functions using the exact
cash-compensation data for every cross-section by firm age.16 Mean cash compensation
  16
    This small tweak may still remain too simple, as we abstract from founder-CEO replacement. However,
upon replacement, if the founder earns his or her outside wage, the problem is no different from that analyzed
here. In section 5 we provide evidence that is consistent with the view that there is no systematic penalty


                                                     26
starts at around $110,000 for new firms and is nearly $400,000 for 10 year old firms, but
our approach accounts not only for the changing mean over a venture's lifetime but also for
potential differences in higher-moments as well.17
    Figure 8 displays our results and compares them to the Hall and Woodward benchmark.
The region above and to the left of each line is the area in Outside Salary-Wealth space
where the certainty equivalent of entrepreneurship is positive. The line itself traces out the
identity of the marginal entrepreneur under each model. The shaded region indicates the
individuals for whom the implied payoff from entrepreneurship is positive using our modified
compensation moments compared to those in Hall and Woodward. For example, in the Hall
and Woodward benchmark, a potential entrepreneur with an outside salary of $900,000 would
require nearly $11 million in wealth to make entrepreneurship pay. By contrast, under our
estimates, the wealth required for someone earning $900,000 per year falls to $7.25 million.
    Compared to Hall and Woodward's results, the threshold wealth required to enter en-
trepreneurship falls in our version of the problem despite the lower average pay in the early
years of entrepreneurship. This stems in part from entrepreneurship as experimentation
(Kerr, Nanda, and Rhodes-Kropf 2014; Manso 2016; Dillon and Stanton 2018), where CEOs
who do not achieve product market fit do not persist in the venture. A second difference is
that after product market fit, pay surpasses the Hall and Woodward assumption of $150,000
in liquid compensation. Thus, entrepreneurship looks relatively more attractive for these
reasons despite the lower initial salaries in our setup.
    Despite this improvement, a clear region remains where the certainty equivalent is neg-
associated with trying entrepreneurship and returning to paid employment.
   17
      Our approach requires that we compute the expected value function over the sequence of future densities
of cash compensation using backwards recursion, solving for the agent's consumption policy rule. One
limitation, however, is that we only build in cross-sectional differences in the densities, as our data does not
allow us to account for serial correlation in pay. We also pool the compensation data for firms aged 10+, as
we have somewhat thin cells for firms beyond 10 years of age.


                                                      27
ative. How big is this region, or how many individuals might we expect to be precluded
from entrepreneurship? Below the x-axis in Figure 8 is the population percentile of the
income distribution corresponding to the level of outside compensation. These estimates are
taken from the NBER's version of the IRS Statistics of Income files and utilize data from
W2s for a stratified random sample of tax filings.18 The right y-axis contains percentiles
of the wealth distribution corresponding to the required wealth cutoffs on the leftmost y-
axis. These wealth percentiles are interpolated from data provided in Saez and Zucman
(2016).19 According to the figure, the vast majority of the population likely has a positive
certainty equivalent from VC backed entrepreneurship. For example, under our calculations,
an individual with an outside salary of $400,000 would require around $500,000 in liquid
assets (about 1.6 times annual pre-tax salary), which seems like a quite reasonable level of
wealth if the person in question has worked for several years. Because of progressive tax-
ation, relatively fewer individuals earning $600,000 salaries are likely to be above the $1.8
million (3 times annual pre-tax salary) wealth threshold than those at $4 million. Therefore,
our estimates suggest that a bound on the fraction of the population who have a negative
certainty equivalent from VC backed entrepreneurship is than about 1-.9944 = 0.56% of all
individuals. Those who might have a negative certainty equivalent are those in relatively
high paying jobs (above $400,000 per year) but who have limited accumulated wealth. For
example, these might be individuals who have progressed rapidly in their careers, earning
high salaries, yet have limited wealth (possibly because of educational debt from obtaining
professional degrees).20 Since the value of ideas commercialized in entrepreneurship is ex-
  18
     We use data items 85 and 86 from the SOI data, which contain W2 earnings for individual filers and
married joint filers. Individuals without W2 earnings are not included in the percentile estimates.
  19
     To perform this interpolation, we take the log of the minimum wealth at different percentiles of the
distribution and the log of the percentile and then use linear interpolation. We then exponentiate the
interpolated log percentile.
  20
     Individuals who progress quickly in a career in consulting or finance can earn $ 1 million or more. We


                                                    28
tremely skewed, it is possible that these high flyers with limited wealth are exactly those who
the social planner might want to encourage to experiment with VC backed entrepreneurship.
The remainder of the paper takes up the question of whether there is evidence that potential
founders in this category are less likely to appear in the data.21



5      Pre-Entry Background of Founders

To provide more color on the question of who is selecting into entrepreneurship, we turn next
to providing a descriptive analysis of the pre-founding backgrounds of VC-backed founder-
CEOs. While this analysis conditions on those who successfully raised VC finance for their
venture (and hence does not appropriately account for the risk set of individuals seeking to
select into VC-backed entrepreneurship) it nevertheless allows us to do two things. First,
we are able to paint a more accurate picture of the individuals who are the founder-CEOs
of VC-backed firms, not just in terms of salary but also in terms of their educational qual-
ifications and prior work experience. Second, by examining and estimating the pre-entry
compensation of founder-CEOs based on their job titles, we are able to partially validate the
empirical exercise conducted in Section 4, namely that we should not see a large number of
individuals in our sample with extremely large pre-entry salaries, unless they also seem to
have substantial wealth.22
estimate that the wealth required for someone earning $900,000 a year needs to be at least $7.25 million to
find it worthwhile to experiment with entrepreneurship.
   21
      Note that our model assumes that outcomes in entrepreneurship are not correlated with a founder's
outside salary, which allows us to isolate how contract features change the attractiveness of entrepreneurship
for different founders who face the same prospects of resolving uncertainty. A different analysis of the self
employed (who are not VC backed entrepreneurs) suggests that the returns to experimentation are positively
correlated with general ability, or a common factor that is correlated across sectors (Dillon and Stanton 2018).
   22
      An additional goal of the analysis, is to validate the assumption in the model of a stable "outside" salary
that is not harmed by founding a venture.




                                                       29
5.1       Source of Biographical Data

Given the extensive resources needed to manually collect biographical data, we focus our
analysis on the subset of firms in the VentureSource sample that received a first round of
venture capital financing in 2010 or 2011.23 Our primary source of biographical data are
LinkedIn profiles. Of the 1,665 startups that pass our sampling filters and have a founder
identified in VentureSource, we were able to collect 1,415 Public LinkedIn profiles (85%) for
at least one founder. We use the LinkedIn profiles to estimate founder age (by assuming
that they graduate from college at age 22) and details about higher education. Job history
profiles allow us to calculate the number of prior jobs and years of pre-startup labor market
experience the individual had as well as the job title they held right before starting their
VC-backed venture.24
       As noted above, the LinkedIn data allow us to isolate the firm that the founder worked
at right before they started their VC-backed venture, and their title at that firm. Since the
LinkedIn data detailed above do not provide salary data, we randomly select founders with
LinkedIn profiles for a deeper biographical search, while attempting to estimate their salaries
based on data from Glassdoor. Glassdoor collects anonymous salary and other compensation
data from its users and provides salary estimates at the job title, geography and/or industry-
level. We used the average salary reported by Glassdoor for the job title the individual held
in the firm they worked at, including additional compensation (cash bonus, commissions
and profit sharing). If the industry or geography salary estimate was unavailable, then we
took the national average for the salary plus additional compensation as an estimate for that
  23
     Note that in in order to remain consistent with our AHR sample, we restrict our sample to informational
technology.
  24
     Not all LinkedIn profiles are complete; about 20% of profile lack education data and 7% have no listed
jobs. Both could be explained by a lack of public disclosure by the individuals or a true lack of these features.




                                                       30
individual.
       Glassdoor also provides its own list of titles and salaries for specific companies. We collect
the full set of title and average salary pairs for a founder's pre-founding employer when
available. By comparing the salary associated with the individual's title to the maximum
salary provided for individuals in that firm, we are able to provide an estimate of where in
the corporate hierarchy the individual sat in the firm they worked at right before entering
VC-backed entrepreneurship.


5.2        Characteristics of VC-backed Founder-CEO

Column 1 of Table 7 documents the characteristics of the 1,415 individuals we collected
biographical data on. Founders were roughly 36 years old at founding with an estimated 12
years of job experience across four jobs prior to founding. These founders are also highly
educated: almost a quarter have an MBA, 40% have a non-MBA Master's degree, 6% have
a PhD and 3% have a JD.
       The second column of Table 7 provides salary estimates for the individuals about whom
we collected Glassdoor data. Although we selected a 10% random sample of individuals to
examine further, we were only able to find information for 103 of these individuals. Compar-
ing the age and educational background of those with salary information shows that these
individuals were much less likely to have been founders before25 and were more likely to have
both an MBA or a non-MBA Masters degree. In other words, these were even more highly
educated than the typical founder in our LinkedIn sample.
       With this caveat of the selection among the founders whose salary we were able to locate,
Column 2 of Table 7 shows that the average salary is about $232,000 and the 75th percentile
  25
   This is partly mechanical as sometimes the job right before was as a founder of another startup, and
small startups are less likely to appear in Glassdoor.

                                                  31
is $248,000. Columns 3 and 4 split the sample of 103 founders for whom we have salary
information into those whose salaries are below $300,000 vs. those that are not. We choose
this as a conservative threshold assuming that these individuals may have other guaranteed
income and unreported bonuses that could increase their total cash compensation to be
closer to $400,000. Column 3 shows that approximately 90% of the founders in this sample
have cash compensation that was below $300,000 in the position they held prior to starting
VC-backed entrepreneurship. For these individuals, the average salary in their prior job was
approximately $175,000. Consistent with this finding, they were somewhat younger and had
fewer years of labor market experience than those earning over $300,000. Column 4 of Table 7
documents that those earning above $300,000 had an average salary of over $650,000. These
individuals were extremely highly educated, with all of them having a Master's or higher
degree. They were also significantly older and had more years of labor market experience.
   While we do not have wealth data available for these individuals, the estimates from
our model suggest that an individual with a salary of $650,000 a year would need at least
$3 million in wealth for them to find the risk of entrepreneurship worth undertaking. It is
certainly plausible to expect that an individual earning $650,000 would have accumulated
this amount of wealth, given that, on average, these individuals have over 15 years of labor
market experience.
   Put differently, the biographical data we collect appears very consistent with predictions
of the model in that founders either appear to leave from jobs where their pre-entry salary
was low enough to find it worthwhile to experiment with entrepreneurship or, in the event
that their salary was very high, had sufficient experience to plausibly accumulate enough
wealth to undertake the risk of entry. In both cases, their cash compensation and/ or wealth
is likely to be within the range where it would be attractive to try venture capital backed


                                             32
entrepreneurship even in the presence of standard levels of risk aversion.26
    While we do not observe the full risk set of individuals who were considering entrepreneur-
ship, our results appear to suggest that the modal individual starting VC-backed entrepreneur-
ship is in a mid-level position in their firm prior to entry. This is not only seen from the
overwhelming majority of entrants in our biographical sample who earn below $300,000 but
also seen in Figure 9 which compares the average salary for individuals' titles in Glassdoor
with the maximum salary available for their firm. As can be seen from Figure 9, 58% of the
individuals in our sample have an estimated salary above the median salary, yet their salary
is on average 43% of maximum reported salary in Glassdoor for their prior employer.
    Our biographical data also suggest that those with a career in finance or other indus-
tries where salaries are often higher than the thresholds examined here (e.g. Shu (2016))
may not find it attractive to select into entrepreneurship based on standard levels of risk
aversion. To the extent that this precludes individuals from entering entrepreneurship, the
analysis also helps pinpoint the industry and job backgrounds of potential founders whose
ideas are more likely to be commercialized inside large firms as opposed through VC-backed
entrepreneurship.
  26
     The degree to which founding a firm and failing impacts an individual's salary if they return to paid
employment is also decision-relevant for founders. In Table A6 of the Internet Appendix, we show that
among individuals in our overall sample of 1,415 founders, those whose startups failed appeared to face
minimal systematic penalties in terms of the job title they had post startup failure relative to the title they
had right before entry. This analysis is suggestive only, as it is based on founders for whom we could establish
a job title post-failure, but is consistent with other research on experimentation with entrepreneurship (e.g.
(Manso 2016; Dillon and Stanton 2018) that finds little penalty for trying entrepreneurship and returning
to wage employment.




                                                      33
6     Conclusion

Despite the importance of VC-backed firms for the economy and the wealth of informa-
tion about VC contracts, we know very little about the compensation contracts provided to
founder-CEOs in private, venture capital-backed firms. Understanding the evolution of CEO
compensation in VC-backed firms not only helps us learn about inflection points and mile-
stones that underpin investor governance, but also sheds light on the evolution of liquid cash
compensation a founder-CEO receives ­ which has a direct bearing on the degree to which
different individuals will find it worthwhile to leave paid employment and commercialize
their ideas using sources of finance such as venture capital.
    We address this gap by using novel survey data on the salary, bonus and equity holdings
for CEOs of Venture Capital-backed startups. Although the data are anonymous in order
to protect the confidentiality of the individual executives, compensation data is matched
to firm-level information on founding date and coarsened measures of financing, revenue,
headcount, and product development.
    We have several key findings. First, we document that having a tangible, marketable
product is a fundamental milestone in terms of CEO compensation, marking a shift from a
"screening contract" where the CEOs have minimal cash compensation to a "professionalized
contract," comprising a substantial salary and bonus that both grow with firm size in a
manner similar to the compensation of non-founder CEOs.
    Second, we highlight the reason that "product market fit" may mark a shift in CEO
compensation is that it also marks an apparent inflection in the lifecycle of the firm ­ from
differentiation, where human capital in a venture is not replaceable (and is synonymous with
the firm), to standardization, where key human capital becomes more replaceable.
    Third, we show that the vast majority of startups either fail or achieve product market fit

                                              34
within three years. This improves the certainty equivalent of attempting entrepreneurship.
Our estimates suggest that fewer than 0.56% of all individuals have a negative certainty
equivalent of entrepreneurship. Finally, we note that individuals who might have a negative
certainty equivalent are those in relatively high paying jobs (above $450,000 per year) but
who have limited accumulated wealth. Indeed an examination of biographical data suggests
that the modal founder of a VC-backed startup was in middle-management prior to starting
their firm.
   Our results highlight an under-appreciated role played by venture capital investors­ that
of intermediate liquidity providers ­ which they might be uniquely positioned to do as hands-
on investors who are able to resolve information asymmetry more effectively than passive
capital providers. Nevertheless, our work also points to frictions at the very top end of the
human capital distribution, where this intermediate liquidity provision may not be sufficient
for the risk-adjusted return to VC-backed entrepreneurship to be positive. It also highlights
the greater frictions present in providing entrepreneurs intermediate liquidity in sectors where
uncertainty is not revealed as quickly (Ewens, Nanda, and Rhodes-Kropf 2018) or in sectors
where founder-CEOs require specialized experience or have higher outside options. The
degree to which these individuals' ideas are not commercialized (or commercialized inside
incumbent firms) as well as the aggregate impact of this selection remains an interesting area
of further work.




                                              35
References
Aghion, Philippe and Patrick Bolton. 1992. "An incomplete contracts approach to financial con-

  tracting." The Review of Economic Studies 59 (3):473­494.

Anton, James and Dennis A Yao. 1995. "Start-ups, Spin-offs, and Internal Projects." Journal of

  Law, Economics, and Organization 11 (2):362­78.

°
Astebro, Thomas, Holger Herz, Ramana Nanda, and Roberto A Weber. 2014. "Seeking the roots of

  entrepreneurship: insights from behavioral economics." The Journal of Economic Perspectives

  28 (3):49­69.

Azoulay, Pierre, Benjamin Jones, Daniel Kim, and Javier Miranda. 2020. "Age and High-Growth

  Entrepreneurship." American Economic Review: Insights 2 (1):65­82.

Babina, Tania, Paige Ouimet, and Rebecca Zarutskie. 2017. "Going entrepreneurial? IPOs and

  new firm creation." Working Paper .

Baker, Malcolm P and Paul A Gompers. 1999. "Executive ownership and control in newly public

  firms: The role of venture capitalists." Working paper .

Bengtsson, Ola and John RM Hand. 2011. "CEO compensation in venture-backed firms." Journal

  of Business Venturing 26 (4):391­411.

Bhid´
    e, Amar V. 2003. The Origin and Evolution of New Businesses. Oxford University Press.

Dillon, Eleanor and Christopher Stanton. 2018. "Self-employment Dynamics and the Returns to

  Entrepreneurship." Working Paper .

Edmans, Alex, Xavier Gabaix, and Dirk Jenter. 2017. "Executive compensation: A survey of theory

  and evidence." In The Handbook of the Economics of Corporate Governance, vol. 1. Elsevier,

  383­539.

                                               36
Edmans, Alex, Xavier Gabaix, Tomasz Sadzik, and Yuliy Sannikov. 2012. "Dynamic CEO com-

  pensation." The Journal of Finance 67 (5):1603­1647.

Ewens, Michael, Alexander S Gorbenko, and Arthur Korteweg. 2019. "Venture capital contracts."

  NBER Working Paper .

Ewens, Michael and Matt Marx. 2017. "Founder replacement and startup performance." The

  Review of Financial Studies 31 (4):1532­1565.

Ewens, Michael, Ramana Nanda, and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf. 2018. "Cost of experimentation and

  the evolution of venture capital." Journal of Financial Economics 128 (3):422­442.

Gabaix, Xavier and Augustin Landier. 2008. "Why has CEO pay increased so much?"              The

  Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (1):49­100.

Gompers, Paul, Josh Lerner, and David Scharfstein. 2005. "Entrepreneurial spawning: Public

  corporations and the genesis of new ventures, 1986 to 1999." The Journal of Finance 60 (2):577­

  614.

Gompers, Paul A. 1995. "Optimal investment, monitoring, and the staging of venture capital."

  The journal of finance 50 (5):1461­1489.

Gompers, Paul A, Will Gornall, Steven N Kaplan, and Ilya A Strebulaev. 2020. "How do venture

  capitalists make decisions?" Journal of Financial Economics 135 (1):169­190.

Hall, Robert E and Susan E Woodward. 2010. "The Burden of the Nondiversifiable Risk of En-

  trepreneurship." American Economic Review 100 (3):1163­1194.

Hellmann, Thomas. 1998. "The allocation of control rights in venture capital contracts." The Rand

  Journal of Economics 29 (1):57­76.

------. 2007. "When do Employees Become Entrepreneurs?" Management Science 53 (6):919­933.

                                               37
Hellmann, Thomas and Manju Puri. 2002. "Venture capital and the professionalization of start-up

  firms: Empirical evidence." The Journal of Finance 57 (1):169­197.

Hellmann, Thomas and Noam Wasserman. 2017. "The first deal: The division of founder equity in

  new ventures." Management Science 63 (8):2647­2666.

Hellmann, Thomas F, Paul H Schure, Chloe Tergiman, and Dan H Vo. 2019. "Ownership dynam-

  ics within founder teams: The role of external financing." Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal

  13 (3):256­287.

Holmstrom, Bengt and Paul Milgrom. 1987. "Aggregation and linearity in the provision of in-

  tertemporal incentives." Econometrica 55 (2):303­328.

Kaplan, Steven N and Per Str¨
                            omberg. 2003. "Financial contracting theory meets the real world: An

  empirical analysis of venture capital contracts." The Review of Economic Studies 70 (2):281­315.

Kerr, William R, Ramana Nanda, and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf. 2014. "Entrepreneurship as exper-

  imentation." The Journal of Economic Perspectives 28 (3):25­48.

Kim, J Daniel. 2018. "Is there a startup wage premium? Evidence from MIT graduates." Research

  Policy 47 (3):637­649.

Knight, Frank H. 1921. Risk, Uncertainty and Profit. Courier Corporation.

Kortum, Samuel and Josh Lerner. 2000. "Assessing the contribution of venture capital to innova-

  tion." RAND Journal of Economics 31 (4):674­692.

Manso, Gustavo. 2016. "Experimentation and the Returns to Entrepreneurship." Review of Fi-

  nancial Studies 29:2319­2340.

Moretti, Enrico. 2010. "Local labor markets." NBER Working Paper .



                                               38
Puri, Manju and Rebecca Zarutskie. 2012. "On the life cycle dynamics of venture-capital-and

  non-venture-capital-financed firms." The Journal of Finance 67 (6):2247­2293.

Rajan, Raghuram G. 2012. "Presidential address: The corporation in finance." The Journal of

  Finance 67 (4):1173­1217.

Rosen, Sherwin. 1982. "Authority, control, and the distribution of earnings." The Bell Journal of

  Economics 13 (2):311­323.

Saez, Emmanuel and Gabriel Zucman. 2016. "Wealth inequality in the United States since 1913:

  Evidence from capitalized income tax data." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 131 (2):519­

  578.

Shu, Pian. 2016. "Innovating in Science and Engineering or "Cashing In" on Wall Street? Evidence

  on Elite STEM Talent." Harvard Business School Technology & Operations Mgt. Unit Working

  Paper (16-067).

Shue, Kelly and Richard Townsend. 2017. "Growth through Rigidity: An Explanation of the Rise

  in CEO Pay." Journal of Financial Economics 123 (1):1­21.

Silva, JMC Santos and Silvana Tenreyro. 2006. "The log of gravity." The Review of Economics

  and Statistics 88 (4):641­658.

Wasserman, Noam. 2003. "Founder-CEO Succession and the Paradox of Entrepreneurial Success."

  Organization Science 14 (2):149­172.




                                               39
Appendix A                Data for Hall and Woodward replication
We use data from VentureSource and Correlation Ventures (a quantitative VC fund) to create the

sample of financings for the Hall and Woodward extension. Startups first financed between 2000

and 2006 with a known exit valuation form the main sample. Exit valuations include acquisition

prices, zeros for failed firms, or public market capitalizations 7.5 months after IPO if the startup

went public. As in Hall and Woodward, the non-failure exit data skew towards positive exits. The

age at exit is calculated as the number of years from firm founding (sourced from incorporation

filings) to the exit date. Failure dates are assumed to be one year after the startup's last known

VC financing.




                                                40
                            Figure 1: Founder-CEO Cash Compensation by Firm Age and Capital Raised

Figure displays founder-CEO cash compensation by firm age and capital raised. The left panels include all firms and the right
panels restrict the sample to firms that are still in the product definition or ideation phase. Firm age for pre-product firms
ends at 4 because there are no older pre-product firms in the AHR data. There are also no pre-product firms with over $100
million in venture capital raised.




                                                        All Firms                                                                     Pre-Product Firms
     Mean and Inter-Quartile Range




                                                                                         Mean and Inter-Quartile Range
       0 100 200 300 400 500




                                                                                           0 100 200 300 400 500




                                      0          2      4         6    8       10                                              1           2              3      4
                                                            Firm Age                                                                           Firm Age


                                                        All Firms                                                                    Pre-Product Firms
     Mean and Inter-Quartile Range
        0 100 200 300 400 500




                                                                                          0 100 200 300 400 500




                                     0-1
                                          0M        25M 5 - 50M - 100M 100M+                                      0-1
                                                                                                                         0M          25M 5 - 50M - 100M       100M
                                                                                                                                                                  +
                                               10 -    2      50                                                              10 -      2       50
                                                        Capital Raised                                                                   Capital Raised




                                                                                    41
Figure 2: Compensation for Highest Paid Executives for Newly Public VC-Backed Startups

Figure displays the median salary for the CEO listed on a VC-backed firm's S-1 filing at IPO. If a CEO is not listed, then we
take the individual at the top of the table. Some S-1s do not have enough information about compensation, so in these cases
we collect the firm's first 14-A filing to get CEO compensation. All dollars are real, 2015 dollars. The median age at IPO
(dashed line) reports the median age of VC-backed firms that went public over the sample period. Age is defined as years
from first VC financing to IPO date.




                                                             42
Figure 3: Predicted Densities of Founder-CEO Cash Compensation by Funding Round,
Product Status, and Revenue.

This figure displays density plots of predicted cash compensation in levels, taken from the Poisson regression analog of
Equation (1). For notes on this specification, see Internet Appendix Table A3. Panel A plots predicted cash compensation by
funding round. Panel B plots cash compensation by product and revenue status. To improve readability, firms with greater
than $100 million in revenue or above Series D or greater are not included in the plots despite being in the regression.



                                                             Panel A: By Funding Round
                                 .00003
                                    .00002
                         Predicted Density
                       .00001    0




                                             100000      200000            300000      400000      500000         600000
                                                                           Total Cash Comp

                                                                      Seed                  Series A
                                                                      Series B              Series C



                                                      Panel B: By Product and Revenue Status
                                 .00006
                                   .00004
                        Predicted Density
                       .00002    0




                                             100000      200000        300000       400000        500000      600000
                                                                        Total Cash Comp

                                                         Pre-Product                  Post-Product, Pre-Revenue
                                                         0 to 25 Million              25 to 100 Million




                                                                              43
Figure 4: Founder-CEO Bonus Share and Total Cash Compensation is Increasing in Firm
Size

This figure displays binned scatterplots of different components of founder-CEO cash compensation in the AHR data as a
function of log revenue. Panels (A) and (B) consider the expected bonus as a share of total cash compensation. Panels (C)
and (D) consider the log of total cash compensation, which includes salary and bonus. Pre-revenue firms form the left dots in
Panels A and C. Panels B and D exclude pre-revenue firms.




                                      A. Bonus Share                                                B. Bonus Share w/o Pre-Rev. Firms
                  .25




                                                                     .25
                                                                     .2
                .2
     Log Salary




                                                                     .15
        .15




                                                                     .1
                  .1




                                                                     .05
                  .05




                                 5     10           15      20                                     14       15    16       17   18       19
                                        Log Revenue                                                               Log Revenue


                                     C. Log Cash Comp                                                   D. Log Cash w/o Pre-Rev. Firms
                            13




                                                                     11.8 12 12.2 12.4 12.6 12.8
        Log Total Cash Comp
     11.5    12     12.5




                                 5     10           15      20                                     14       15    16       17   18       19
                                        Log Revenue                                                               Log Revenue




                                                             44
                                          Figure 5: Fraction of Firms Lead by Founder-CEOs in the AHR Data

Figure plots the fraction of surviving firms in the AHR data that have founder-CEOs. The sample is pooled over survey waves.
                       1
    Fraction of Firms with Founder-CEOs
             .6        .4     .8




                                          0             2              4                   6          8                        10
                                                                                Firm Age




                                                                           45
              Figure 6: Revenue and Product Milestones Achievement by Firm Age

This figure displays data from the pooled AHR sample on the fraction of surviving firms at each age that have achieved
product development milestones or that have positive revenue.




                             Fraction of Firms Achieving Milestones
    1
    .8
    .6
    .4
    .2




          1            2            3           4               5      6              7            8            9        10
                                                                Firm Age

                                          Has Revenue                             Post Product Dev




                                                            46
Figure 7: Differences in Residual Log Cash Compensation Between Founder CEOs and
non-Founder CEOs in VC-backed Startups

This figure plots residuals from regressions of log total pay on different controls. Residuals from pooled regressions are plotted
separately for founder and non-founder CEOs. Each plot corresponds to a different regression specification with different
controls. The "Base" panel (A) includes year and industry fixed effects. Panel (B) adds revenue and headcount fixed effects.
Panel (C) adds firm age and Panel (D) adds fixed effects for the amount of capital raised and the number of funding rounds.




                                  A. Base                                                    C. Add Firm Age
         1.5




                                                                            1.5
            1




                                                                               1
      Density




                                                                         Density
     .5




                                                                        .5
         0




                                                                            0




                -6        -4           -2         0            2                   -6      -4           -2         0                 2
                               Log Total Cash Pay                                               Log Total Cash Pay

                          Founder                 Non-Founder                              Founder                  Non-Founder



                     B. Add Headcount and Revenue                                        D. Add Capital Raised
         1.5




                                                                            1.5
            1




                                                                               1
      Density




                                                                         Density
     .5




                                                                        .5
         0




                                                                            0




                -6        -4           -2         0            2                   -6      -4           -2         0                 2
                               Log Total Cash Pay                                               Log Total Cash Pay

                          Founder                 Non-Founder                              Founder                  Non-Founder




                                                               47
     Figure 8: Comparison of Entrepreneurship Attractiveness Under Different Scenarios

This figure compares the certainty equivalent of entrepreneurship under a fixed contract with $150,000 in pay over the life of a
venture (top line) to a contract where compensation increases with firm age due to milestones, taking moments from the
Advanced HR data (bottom line). The coefficient of relative risk aversion is assumed to be 2. The area above each line is the
region where the certainty equivalent is positive. Hall and Woodward's fixed contract is the solid line. The certainty
equivalent based on the contract using observed compensation moments is the line with blue circles. The shaded region gives
the additional entrepreneurship under our estimates. The percentiles of the outside salary distribution from are taken from
the Statistics of Income (SOI) data stored at the NBER. We use data items 85 and 86 from the SOI data, which contain W2
earnings for individual filers and married joint filers. Individuals without W2 earnings are not included in the percentile
estimates. Wealth percentiles are interpolated from data provided in Saez and Zucman (2016).




                                                              48
Figure 9: Distribution of Pre-Founding Salary as a Percentage of the Maximum Salary Found
in Glassdoor

This figure reports summary statistics of the founder's pre-founding salary and the salary data for other positions at their
pre-founding employer. For each such employer, we collect the full set of titles and average salaries from Glassdoor. From this,
we compute the maximum salary. We next find the best match for the founder's pre-founding title within this Glassdoor title
list and use it to assign the founder a pre-founding salary. The figure reports the distribution of the ratio of the founder's
pre-founding salary and the maximum.




                                                               49
                        Table 1: Comparison of Compensation Data and Venture Investments by Eligible Funds

     This table compares the AHR data to an outside dataset, the VC investments in VentureSource, conditioning on the fund(s) participating in the AHR
     survey in each year. The Venture Source data were downloaded in 2018 Q4 and, to match the AHR sample, we exclude firms in healthcare, energy,
     industrial goods, and unknown industries. We exclude firms in both samples that are greater than 10 years old. We drop Venture Source firms that have
     more than 4 years elapsed since raising their last round of capital. We exclude non-standard financings (e.g. Initial Coin Offerings, spinoffs, or restarts)
     and also attempt to exclude mature firms that access private capital later in their lifecycle by dropping firms that have traditional private equity (rather
     than VC) investors in the first round, large debt rounds in their first round of financing (greater than $3 million), or first rounds of financing with greater
     than $50 million in investment.




                                                                        Share of Pooled                                                      Share of  AHR Fraction 
                                                                        Venture Source                                                      Pooled AHR  of  Venture 
                                   2015 Count   2017 Count Pooled Count     Sample                   2015 Count     2017 Count Pooled Count   Sample      Source
                                                                              Panel A: By Firm Age




50
          Founded This Year            74           51              125             3%                   29                49       78         3%           62%
             1 Year Old                159          181             340             9%                   108               161     269         12%          79%
             2 Years Old               256          323             579             15%                  133               215     348         15%          60%
             3 Years Old               311          334             645             17%                  133               203     336         15%          52%
             4 Years Old               291          332             623             16%                  119               210     329         15%          53%
             5 Years Old               187          320             507             13%                  63                185     248         11%          49%
             6 Years Old               161          253             414             11%                   72               136     208          9%          50%
             7 Years Old               114          164             278              7%                   58                80     138          6%          50%
            8+ Years Old               150          238             388             10%                  112               190     302         13%          78%
                Total                  1703        2196             3899            100%                 827           1429        2256        100%         58%

                                                          Panel B: By Total Venture Capital Raised (Millions of Dollars)

        $0  $10 Million Raised         649          929             1578            40%                  320               628     948         42%          60%
               1025                    419          464             883             23%                  163               265     428         19%          48%
                2550                   296          373             669             17%                  151               245     396         18%          59%
                5075                   125          176             301             8%                   80                108     188         8%           62%
               75100                   76           74              150             4%                   45                69      114         5%           76%
                100+                   138          180             318             8%                   68                114     182         8%           57%
                Total                  1703        2196             3899            100%                 827           1429        2256        100%         58%
                         Table 2: Comparison of Compensation Data and the Universe of Venture Investments

     This table compares the AHR data to an outside dataset, the universe of VC investment in Venture Source. The Venture Source data were downloaded in
     2018 Q4 and, to match the AHR sample, we exclude firms in healthcare, energy, industrial goods, and unknown industries. We exclude firms in both
     samples that are greater than 10 years old. We drop Venture Source firms that have more than 4 years elapsed since raising their last round of capital. We
     exclude non-standard financings (e.g. Initial Coin Offerings, spinoffs, or restarts) and also attempt to exclude mature firms that access private capital later
     in their lifecycle by dropping firms that have traditional private equity (rather than VC) investors in the first round, large debt rounds in their first round
     of financing (greater than $3 million), or first rounds of financing with greater than $50 million in investment.




                                                                         Share of Pooled                                                      Share of  AHR Fraction 
                                                                         Venture Source                                                      Pooled AHR  of  Venture 
                                   2015 Count    2017 Count Pooled Count     Sample                   2015 Count     2017 Count Pooled Count   Sample      Source
                                                                               Panel A: By Firm Age
           Founded This Year           230           133             363             4%                   29                49       78         3%           21%




51
              1 Year Old               573           418             991             11%                  108               161     269         12%          27%
              2 Years Old              757           691             1448            16%                  133               215     348         15%          24%
              3 Years Old              833           753             1586            18%                  133               203     336         15%          21%
              4 Years Old              692           727             1419            16%                  119               210     329         15%          23%
              5 Years Old              462           643             1105            12%                  63                185     248         11%          22%
              6 Years Old              315           503             818              9%                   72               136     208          9%          25%
              7 Years Old              236           334              570             6%                   58                80     138          6%          24%
             8+ Years Old              341           383             724             8%                   112               190     302         13%          42%
                 Total                 4439         4585             9024            100%                 827           1429        2256        87%          25%

                                                           Panel B: By Total Venture Capital Raised (Millions of Dollars)

         $0  $10 Million Raised        2851         2817             5668            63%                  320               628     948         42%          17%
                1025                    757          779             1536            17%                  163               265     428         19%          28%
                 2550                   427          499             926             10%                  151               245     396         18%          43%
                 5075                   158          208             366             4%                   80                108     188         8%           51%
                75100                   89           87              176             2%                   45                 69     114         5%           65%
                 100+                   157          195             352             4%                   68                114     182         8%           52%
                 Total                 4439         4585             9024            100%                 827           1429        2256        100%         25%
                                                     Table 3: Descriptive Statistics for All CEOs

     Data come from a survey of startups who are encouraged to participate by their investors. The sample includes cross-sections for U.S. based CEOs in
     technology (consumer, enterprise, hardware, other technology) firms for 2015 (N = 933), and 2017 (N = 1552). Changing numbers of observations across
     years arise because 1) there are more investments, especially in seed and early-stage rounds, and 2) new funds are added to the survey (although top tier
     VC firms are included in every survey wave). Cell means are reported on data that pool the survey years. The survey protects anonymity by coarsening
     revenue, number of employees (headcount), and total capital raised. Panel B reports data for the coarsened revenue category. Among pre-revenue firms we
     distinguish those that are "Pre-Product" and those that are "Post-Product". Pre-Product firms are those pre-revenue firms that report "Early / Product
     Definition" as their development stage. Post-Product firms report "Product Development, "Product in Beta", "Shipping Product" or "Profitable" as their
     product development stage. All firms with strictly positive revenue are "Post-Product" firms. Average cumulative venture capital raised and average
     headcount are computed using the mid-point of each category. For averages involving the top category, we use the conditional mean for the category
     calculated from uncensored data in VentureSource. The survey reports the exact value of each executive's salary, target bonus, and fully diluted equity in
     the firm. Total target cash compensation is the sum of salary and target bonus. CEO's equity ownership is calculated using fully diluted equity in the firm
     on an as-converted basis, including any option pools and convertible preferred stock. Fully diluted equity is reported for the CEO, it is not the total
     founders' equity in the firm.




                                                                        Cumulative                          Mean of CEO's  Std. Dev of Total 
                                           Share of      Firm age     Venture Capital       Average        Total Target Cash  Target Cash     CEO's Equity 
                                            firms         (years)      Raised ($ M)        Headcount        Compensation Compensation          Ownership




52
        Panel A: By round of financing

        Seed                                 26%            2.2             3.3                 10              98,882             70,344             37%
        Series A                             24%            3.9             15.2                42              198,187           118,598             20%
        Series B                             20%            5.2             40.0                87              268,698           129,529             14%
        Series C                             14%            7.0             78.1               146              338,194           155,783             10%
        Series D                              9%            8.3            120.4               186              398,911           136,367              8%
        Series E and beyond                   8%           10.3            181.5               214              443,662           154,707              6%

        Panel B:  By revenue

        PreProduct, PreRevenue               18%            1.8             3.8                 7               85,049             62,479             39%
        PostProduct, PreRevenue               8%            2.5             22.7                26              178,168            91,884             22%
        $0$10M                               40%            4.4             27.5                48              213,486           115,812             18%
        $10M$25M                             14%            7.2             64.5               118              311,715           131,300             12%
        $25M$50M                             10%            8.6            104.9               195              391,208           140,105             10%
        $50M$100M                             6%            8.7            141.2               235              451,279           164,594              9%
        $100M+                                4%            9.1            161.5               274              449,043           242,598             12%
                      Table 4: Summary Statistics on Founder vs. Non-Founder CEOs of VC Backed Firms

     Notes: Descriptive Statistics are drawn from the proprietary survey data and pool years 2015, and 2017. Non-founders make up 20.5 percent of the overall
     sample.




                          Share of CEOs                        Founder CEOs                                             NonFounder CEOs
                             that are       CEO's Total                   Base Salary   CEO's     CEO's Total Target             Base Salary Share 
                         founders or co     Target Cash    CEO's Base    Share of Cash  Equity          Cash                          of Cash       CEO's Equity 




53
      Firm Revenue          founders       Compensation      Salary      Compensation Ownership    Compensation CEO's Base Salary Compensation       Ownership

      Pre Revenue             96%            108,701        103,150           95%       35%           247,098          214,286           87%             9%

      $0$10M                  83%            186,898        173,982           93%       21%           347,876          277,574           80%             6%

      $10M$25M                67%            265,516        232,021           87%       15%           406,546          306,610           75%             5%

      $25M$50M                53%            333,789        277,579           83%       14%           456,903          329,827           72%             5%

      $50M$100M               61%            402,382        308,999           77%       13%           529,358          358,834           68%             4%
      $100M+                  64%            382,422        316,696           83%       15%           569,796          380,341           67%             5%
                 Table 5: Regressions of Log Cash Compensation on Milestones for VC Backed Founder-CEOs

     This table reports regressions of Log Cash Compensation (salary + bonus) on firm characteristics and milestones from the AHR survey. The sample is
     restricted to founder-CEOs. Survey data are coarsened to protect firm anonymity, so we use indicators for different milestone categories. The regression in
     Column 6 is re-weighted to reflect the Venture Source distribution of firm age and capital raised within each survey year. Robust standard errors in
     parentheses. Post Series D and Post Series E (omitted due to space) are similar to Post Series C. The Post Product Definition indicator is a dummy that
     the firm has moved past early stage product definition into: product development, a beta product, shipping product, or profitable sales. The sample
     excludes CEOs with under $5 in total cash compensation. Poisson regressions including these CEOs (Table 1) are similar.



                                                          (1)              (2)               (3)                (4)               (5)               (6)

      Post Product Definnition                                                            0.596***          0.477***          0.338***           0.364***
                                                                                           (0.059)           (0.057)           (0.068)            (0.076)
      Revenue (Baseline is PreRevenue)
      $0M$10M                                          0.565***         0.447***            0.003             0.013             0.014              0.054
                                                        (0.037)          (0.045)           (0.084)           (0.083)           (0.084)            (0.098)
      $10M$25M                                         0.975***         0.714***           0.263**            0.144             0.094              0.188
                                                        (0.042)          (0.055)           (0.092)           (0.090)           (0.091)            (0.107)
      $25M$50M                                         1.170***         0.849***          0.401***           0.242*            0.202*             0.281*




54
                                                        (0.054)          (0.064)           (0.097)           (0.097)           (0.097)            (0.117)
      $50M$100M                                        1.340***         0.988***          0.540***          0.357***           0.314**           0.436***
                                                        (0.069)          (0.080)           (0.109)           (0.107)           (0.106)            (0.128)
      $100M+                                           1.230***         0.875***          0.424**             0.228             0.226              0.124
                                                        (0.118)          (0.123)           (0.145)           (0.139)           (0.137)            (0.178)
      VC Funding Round (Seed is Baseline)
      Post Series A                                                                                                           0.284***           0.259***
                                                                                                                               (0.062)            (0.064)
      Post Series B                                                                                                           0.454***           0.393***
                                                                                                                               (0.080)            (0.079)
      Post Series C                                                                                                           0.544***           0.475***
                                                                                                                               (0.092)            (0.096)
      Firm Age Dummies                                                      Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                 Y 
      Cumulative VC Raised Dummies                                                                              Y                 Y                 Y
      Region and Industry Dummies                                                                               Y                 Y                  Y
      Unreported Venture Round Dummies                                                                                            Y                  Y
      Reweighted                                                                                                                                     Y
      RSquared                                           0.318            0.354             0.397             0.422             0.444             0.357
      Observations                                       1920             1920              1920              1920              1920              1920
                                Table 6: Analysis of Having a Non-Founder as CEO Among Surviving Firms

     This table reports regression results where a dummy for the presence of a non-founder as CEO is regressed on measures of product market fit. Columns
     (7)-(9) repeat the analysis of columns (1)-(6) using VentureSource. VentureSource allows us to track executive replacement from 2010 to the present, the
     dates of the replacement and the identity of the new CEO. In columns (7) and (8) we consider the sub-sample of years where startups are alive in 2015 and
     2017. "Post-product Definition" is equal to one if VentureSource reports that the company "Has Revenues" or "Profitable" (observed at every new
     financing). Column (9) takes advantage of the full panel and all years. Here a unit of observation is a startup-year, where startups are tracked from first
     VC financing to either exit, founder-CEO replacement or end of sample (whichever comes first)." All specifications have year fixed effects. Robust standard
     errors in parentheses.



                                                                            AHR Sample                                                  Venture Source
                                             (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)            (7)            (8)           (9)




55
      Post Product Definition              0.0512***   0.0518***     0.0435*        0.0114     0.2080**      0.0603**        0.0138*       0.0134*       0.0101***
                                           (0.0120)     (0.0126)     (0.0204)      (0.0173)    (0.0658)      (0.0204)        (0.0074)      (0.0074)      (0.00458)

      Firm Age                                Y            Y            Y             Y            Y             Y              Y              Y            Y
      Industry                                             Y            Y             Y            Y             Y                             Y            Y
      Region                                               Y            Y             Y            Y             Y                             Y            Y
      Revenue                                                           Y             Y            Y
      Capital Invested                                                             < $10M       > $10M
      Only PreRevenue Firms                                                                                      Y
      All Years                                                                                                                                              Y
      RSquared                             0.242         0.252        0.256         0.133        0.210         0.151         0.0196         0.0337          0.0282
      Observations                         2485          2485         2485           963         1522           649          3,293          3,293           11,030
                                       Table 7: Characteristics of Founder-CEOs at time of founding

     The table reports the summary statistics of biographical data collected for 2011­12 startups with founders outside the healthcare sector (described in
     Section 2). Column (1) reports the summary statistics for the full sample of founders. Column (2) reports the statistics of a smaller sample where we have
     collected and categorized a founder's pre-founding employment history. Column (3) is the subset of founders in (2) that have a pre-founding salary less
     than $300,000. Column (4) reports the summary statistics for the sub-sample of founders that have salary greater than $300,000.



                                                                                          Random subsample with detailed biographies

                                                                         Subsample with pre        Those in subsample with 
                                                     Full LinkedIn                                                              Those in subsample where pre
                                                                           entry cash comp          preentry cash comp < 
                                                        sample                                                                  entry cash comp is > $300,000
                                                                              estimates                    $300,000
      Number of Founder CEOs                             1,415                   103                          91                              12
      Share of Founder CEOs                                                     100%                         88%                             12%




56
      Age at founding (yrs.)                             35.9                   36.0                        35.2                            42.3
      # years prefounding job exp.                       11.9                   11.4                        10.9                            15.5
      # jobs prefounding                                  4.4                    4.5                         4.4                             4.9
      Founder of Startup before?                         0.10                   0.05                        0.05                             0.00
      Non MBA masters degree                             0.40                   0.51                        0.51                            0.50
      MBA                                                0.22                   0.31                        0.32                            0.25
      Ph.D.                                              0.06                   0.04                        0.02                            0.25
      JD                                                 0.03                   0.00                        0.02                            0.08
      Ivy league (any level)                             0.02                   0.01                        0.01                            0.00
      PreFounding Salary (avg)                                                 231,906                     174,410                         667,942
      PreFounding Salary (25th percentile)                                     134,000                     125,900                         341,200
      PreFounding Salary (50th percentile)                                     181,500                     176,000                         403,900
      PreFounding Salary (75th percentile)                                     247,900                     235,900                         539,500
Internet Appendix

                               Table A1: Non-CEO Positions for Founders

Notes: This table displays non-CEO positions in the AHR data and the fraction of observations where the person has a
co-founder title.



                                                                                        Fraction Founder or 
   Title                                                   Observations
                                                                                             Cofounder

   President                                                     180                             58.3%
   CTO                                                          1,167                            61.1%
   COO                                                           451                             38.6%
   CFO                                                           637                              3.6%
   CRO                                                           253                              9.1%
   Chief Product or Strategy Officer                             307                             43.6%
   Other CLevel                                                  688                             17.4%
   Executive Scientist or Architect                              127                             48.8%
   General Manager                                               127                              7.1%
   VP Engineering                                                946                             10.6%
   VP Product or Strategy                                        723                             16.3%
   Other VP                                                      3885                             5.4%




                                                           57
Table A2: Regressions of Log Cash Compensation on Milestones for VC Backed Founders
in non-CEO Roles

Notes: This table reports regressions of Log Cash Compensation (salary + bonus) on firm characteristics and milestones from
the AHR survey. The sample is restricted to founders in non-CEO positions. Survey data are coarsened to protect firm
anonymity, so we use indicators for different milestone categories. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Post Series D and
Post Series E (omitted due to space) are similar to Post Series C. The Post Product Definition indicator is a dummy that the
firm has moved past early stage product definition into: product development, a beta product, shipping product, or profitable
sales.



                                               (1)             (2)              (3)              (4)             (5)
   Post Product Definition                                                   0.688***        0.547***         0.414***
                                                                              (0.043)         (0.045)          (0.060)
   Revenue (Baseline is PreRevenue)
   $0M$10M                                  0.541***        0.438***          0.004            0.012           0.031
                                             (0.032)         (0.038)          (0.042)         (0.041)          (0.041)
   $10M$25M                                 0.829***        0.605***         0.169**           0.087            0.044
                                             (0.042)         (0.049)          (0.054)         (0.053)          (0.053)
   $25M$50M                                 1.024***        0.752***         0.316***        0.221***         0.185**
                                             (0.042)         (0.051)          (0.055)         (0.055)          (0.058)
   $50M$100M                                1.118***        0.837***         0.403***        0.289***         0.229***
                                             (0.045)         (0.053)          (0.057)         (0.061)          (0.062)
   $100M+                                   1.063***        0.807***         0.369***        0.256***         0.270***
                                             (0.059)         (0.065)          (0.068)         (0.074)          (0.080)
   VC Funding Round (Seed is Baseline)
   Post Series A                                                                                              0.256***
                                                                                                               (0.064)
   Post Series B                                                                                              0.309***
                                                                                                               (0.071)
   Post Series C                                                                                              0.318***
                                                                                                               (0.081)
   Firm Age Fixed Effects                                      Y                Y                Y                Y 
   Cumulative VC Raised Fixed Effects                                                            Y                Y
   Region and Industry Fixed Effects                                                             Y                Y
   Series Fixed Effects                                                                                           Y
   Reweighted
   RSquared                                   0.300           0.334           0.402            0.432            0.467
   Observations                               2202            2202            2202             2202             2202




                                                             58
   Figure A1: Cumulative Hazards for Different Outcomes in the VentureSource universe.

The figure reports the hazard of exits for startups financed between 2002 and 2010 excluding firms in the cleantech or biotech
spaces. All startup exits are defined as of 8 years after their first VC financing (so each year has the same time to exit).
"Failed/Low acq." are exits where there startup has failed or has a reported acquisition value less than 1.5X capital invested.
A startup listed as still private as of the end of the sample, but who has not raised a new round of capital in three years (as of
year 8) is set to failed. "Acq." includes all other acquisitions.




                                                                    59
Figure A2: The cash compensation-size elasticity for post-revenue VC-backed and publicly
traded firms.

Data on private firms come from the AHR survey. Data on public firms is taken from Execucomp and scraped Proxy
statement filings. For public firms, we drop financials and utilities. The sample of public firms in the compensation data
over-weights large firms relative to the Compustat universe of publicly traded firms, so we re-weight the compensation data to
reflect the Compustat universe. The sample excludes CEOs with under $5 in salary or under $5 in total cash compensation.
                14     13.5
     Log Total Cash Comp
    12.5       13
                12




                              14    16                     18           20                              22                   24
                                                             Log Revenue

                                                           Private             Public




                                                              60
              Table A3: Poisson Regressions of Cash Compensation on Milestones for VC Backed Founder-CEOs

     This table reports Poisson regressions of cash compensation (salary + bonus) on firm characteristics and milestones from the AHR survey. The sample is
     restricted to founder-CEOs. Survey data are coarsened to protect firm anonymity, so we use indicators for different milestone categories. The regression in
     Column 6 is re-weighted to reflect the Venture Source distribution of firm age and capital raised within each survey year. Robust standard errors in
     parentheses. Post Series D and Post Series E (omitted due to space) are very similar to Post Series C. The Post Product Definition indicator is a dummy
     that the firm has moved past early stage product definition into: product development, a beta product, shipping product, or profitable sales.




                                                        (1)              (2)                (3)                (4)               (5)                  (6)
       Post Product Defin (Ideation stage)                                               0.616***          0.496***           0.365***          0.363***
                                                                                          (0.050)           (0.050)            (0.058)           (0.068)
       Revenue (Baseline is PreRevenue)
       $0M$10M                                       0.543***         0.401***             0.054             0.039              0.074            0.014
                                                      (0.033)          (0.037)            (0.054)           (0.052)            (0.051)           (0.060)
       $10M$25M                                      0.894***         0.609***            0.152*             0.049              0.001             0.095
                                                      (0.040)          (0.048)            (0.063)           (0.061)            (0.061)           (0.073)
       $25M$50M                                      1.120***         0.783***           0.329***          0.192**             0.152*           0.221**
                                                      (0.046)          (0.053)            (0.067)           (0.066)            (0.067)           (0.082)




61
       $50M$100M                                     1.309***         0.945***           0.490***          0.327***           0.291***          0.408***
                                                      (0.047)          (0.055)            (0.069)           (0.071)            (0.072)           (0.096)
       $100M+                                        1.261***         0.902***           0.445***          0.267**            0.273**             0.188
                                                      (0.084)          (0.084)            (0.094)           (0.092)            (0.093)           (0.131)
       VC Funding Round (Seed is Baseline)
       Post Series A                                                                                                          0.263***          0.230***
                                                                                                                               (0.048)           (0.054)
       Post Series B                                                                                                          0.377***          0.306***
                                                                                                                               (0.064)           (0.070)
       Post Series C                                                                                                          0.455***          0.359***
                                                                                                                               (0.074)           (0.086)
       Firm Age Dummies                                                   Y                  Y                 Y                  Y                   Y 
       Cumulative VC Raised Dummies                                                                            Y                  Y                   Y
       Region and Industry Dummies                                                                             Y                  Y                   Y
       Unreported Venture Round Dummies                                                                                           Y                   Y
       Reweighted                                                                                                                                     Y
       Pseudo RSquared                                 0.390            0.441              0.479             0.507              0.527                0.419
       Observations                                    1976             1976               1976              1976               1976                 1975
     Table A4: Log Cash Compensation for VC-backed Founder-CEOs Appears Linear With Respect to Log Firm
     Revenue

     The table reports regressions of log cash compensation on log revenue. Columns 1 and 5 contain year, industry, and headcount fixed effects. Columns 2
     and 6 add region, funding series, and cumulative capital raised fixed effects. Columns 3 and 7 add indicators for product development stage milestones.
     Columns 4 and 8 restrict the sample to firms with positive revenue that have moved beyond the product development stage.



                                                               Log Salary                                    Log Total Cash Compensation (Salary + Bonus)
                                           (1)          (2)             (3)           (4)              (5)             (6)           (7)               (8)
                                                                                 Without Pre                                                       Without Pre
                                                    Full Sample                                                    Full Sample
                                                                                Revenue firms                                                     Revenue firms




62
      Log of Firm Revenue               0.180***     0.0845***      0.0899***     0.0965***         0.227***        0.117***      0.122***          0.128***
                                        (0.0117)      (0.0129)       (0.0128)      (0.0133)         (0.0132)        (0.0151)      (0.0150)          (0.0158)
      Post Product Definition                                       0.332***                                                      0.339***
                                                                     (0.0884)                                                     (0.0897)
      Fixed Effects
      PreRevenue Dummy                     Y             Y                  Y                          Y                Y             Y
      Region                                             Y                  Y          Y                                Y             Y                 Y
      Funding Series                                     Y                  Y          Y                                Y             Y                 Y
      Cumulative Capital Raised                          Y                  Y          Y                                Y             Y                 Y
      RSquared                           0.306         0.412          0.421          0.301           0.330            0.422         0.429             0.325
      Observations                       1918          1918           1918           1339            1920             1920          1920              1339
     Table A5: The Elasticity of Cash Compensation with Respect to Revenue in Mature VC-backed and Publicly
     Traded Firms

     The table reports regressions of log salary and log total cash compensation on the log of firm revenue and interactions for publicly traded firms. Data on
     private firms come from the AHR survey. Data on public firms is taken from Execucomp and scraped Proxy statement filings. For public firms, we drop
     financials and utilities. The sample of public firms in the compensation data over-weights large firms relative to the Compustat universe of publicly traded
     firms, so we re-weight the compensation data to reflect the Compustat universe. The sample excludes CEOs with under $5 in salary or under $5 in total
     cash compensation. All columns contain year fixed effects.



                                                                     Log Salary                                     Log Total Cash Compensation
                                                        (1)              (2)              (3)                 (4)              (5)                 (6)
       Log of Firm Revenue                          0.181***         0.183***         0.181***            0.191***         0.242***            0.239***




63
                                                    (0.00956)        (0.00962)        (0.00967)           (0.00978)        (0.0111)            (0.0112)
       Public Firm                                  0.243***           0.299            0.258               0.129*         1.383***            1.333***
                                                     (0.0481)         (0.302)          (0.303)             (0.0512)         (0.318)             (0.319)
       Public Firm * Log Revenue                                      0.00327         0.000916                            0.0724***           0.0695***
                                                                      (0.0160)        (0.0160)                             (0.0170)            (0.0170)
       Post Product Definition                                                        0.731***                                                0.740***
                                                                                      (0.0709)                                                 (0.0716)

       PreRevenue Dummy                                  Y                Y                Y                   Y                Y                   y
       RSquared                                       0.318            0.318             0.327              0.313            0.314               0.323
       Observations                                   4729             4729              4729               4734             4734                4734
                            Table A6: Transition Matrix of Job Titles for Founder CEOs of Failed Startups

     Notes: This table reports the transition matrix of title changes (i.e. job moves) for the subset of founders who have at least one pre- and one post-founding
     job title. The sample of founders is described in Section 5.1. The titles are found in the founder's LinkedIn profile and are associated with distinct
     companies, rather than moves within-firm. Titles are coded as a hierarchy that takes the top position available. If the founder has "CEO" anywhere in
     their title, then that is coded as a 1 and all others titles are 0. If a founder has "Founder, CTO" in pre-founding history, then she will be listed as "C-level"
     rather than "Founder." "Other title" captures a set of over 100 different titles not contained in the other categories that we cannot classify hierarchically.



                                                                                                        Share of postfounding titles




64
                                                  Share of prefounding           Clevel, founder          VP / Mid           Associate / 
       Prefounding job Titles                                                                                                                      Other title
                                                        job titles                 or investor             career             Analyst

       Clevel, founder or investor                          41%                        53%                   13%                  5%                   29%
       VP / Mid career                                      28%                        47%                   11%                  3%                   39%
       Associate/Analyst                                     9%                        50%                   8%                   0%                   42%
       Other title                                          22%                        50%                   11%                  3%                   36%
       Total                                                 135                        67                    15                   5                    48
