                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          SOCIAL PROXIMITY TO CAPITAL:
                      IMPLICATIONS FOR INVESTORS AND FIRMS

                                       Theresa Kuchler
                                           Yan Li
                                          Lin Peng
                                      Johannes Stroebel
                                         Dexin Zhou

                                     Working Paper 27299
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27299


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2020




We thank Elsa Allman, Yakov Amihud, Zhi Da, Phil Dybvig, Abhinav Gupta, Zhiguo He, Xing
Huang, Chi-Ching Hung, Narasimhan Jegadeesh, Wenlan Qian, Charles Lee, Cameron Peng,
Oliver Rehbein, Simon Rother, Wei Xiong, Hongjun Yan, Jun Yang, as well as seminar
participants at Baruch, NYU Stern, the New York Fed, and the International Macroeconomics
and Finance Conference for helpful comments. Lin Peng acknowledges the Krell research grant
and the Wassarman research grant for financial support. For part of this project, Stroebel and
Kuchler were research consultants at Facebook. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Theresa Kuchler, Yan Li, Lin Peng, Johannes Stroebel, and Dexin Zhou. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Social Proximity to Capital: Implications for Investors and Firms
Theresa Kuchler, Yan Li, Lin Peng, Johannes Stroebel, and Dexin Zhou
NBER Working Paper No. 27299
June 2020
JEL No. G2,G3,G4

                                          ABSTRACT

We use social network data from Facebook to show that institutional investors are more likely to
invest in firms from regions to which they have stronger social ties. This effect of social
proximity on investment behavior is distinct from the effect of geographic proximity. Social
connections have the largest influence on investments of small investors with concentrated
holdings as well as on investments in firms with a low market capitalization and little analyst
coverage. We also find that the response of investment decisions to social connectedness affects
equilibrium capital market outcomes: firms in locations with stronger social ties to places with
substantial institutional capital have higher institutional ownership, higher valuations, and higher
liquidity. These effects of social proximity to capital on capital market outcomes are largest for
small firms with little analyst coverage. We find no evidence that investors generate differential
returns from investments in locations to which they are socially connected. Our results suggest
that the social structure of regions affects firms' access to capital and contributes to geographic
differences in economic outcomes.

Theresa Kuchler                                  Johannes Stroebel
Stern School of Business                         Stern School of Business
New York University                              New York University
44 West 4th Street                               44 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012                               New York, NY 10012
and NBER                                         and NBER
tkuchler@stern.nyu.edu                           johannes.stroebel@nyu.edu

Yan Li                                           Dexin Zhou
Baruch College                                   Baruch College
Yan.Li@baruch.cuny.edu                           Dexin.zhou@baruch.cuny.edu

Lin Peng
Department of Economics and Finance
Baruch College, City University of New York
lin_peng@baruch.cuny.edu
1    Introduction
There are substantial regional differences in economic outcomes across the United States. For example,
firms located in metropolitan and coastal regions are often more productive, more innovative, and more
valuable than firms in other parts of the country (see Baum-Snow and Pavan, 2011; Moretti, 2012). A
growing literature explores a variety of explanations for these disparities. For example, Dougal et al.
(2018) argue that coastal cities with better amenities are able to attract more high-skilled workers, al-
lowing firms located in these areas to capture some of the resulting increases in productivity. In this
paper, we propose a new and complementary explanation. In particular, we argue that the geographic
structure of a region's social network influences the allocation of capital to local firms, and thereby con-
tributes to differences in firm outcomes. We first show that -- conditional on physical distance and other
controls -- institutional investors are more likely to invest in firms located in regions to which they have
stronger social ties (even though we find that investments in socially proximate regions do not generate
excess returns). We then document that firms in regions that are socially connected to institutional cap-
ital have higher liquidity and higher valuations, and argue that this relationship is likely caused by the
social proximity to capital instead of omitted variables.
     To measure social connectedness between firm and investor locations, we use the Social Connect-
edness Index (SCI) introduced by Bailey et al. (2018a). This measure is based on friendship links on
Facebook, the world's largest online social networking service with 239 million active users in the U.S.
and Canada as of the end of 2017. Given Facebook's scale, the relative representativeness of its user
body, and the fact that Facebook is primarily used to connect real-world friends and acquaintances, the
SCI provides a comprehensive measure of the geographic structure of U.S. social networks. We quantify
the social connectedness between a firm and an institutional investor as the relative probability of two
Facebook users located in the headquarter counties to be connected via a friendship link on Facebook.1
     Our focus on the role of social connections in shaping public equity investments by institutional in-
vestors is driven by three considerations. First, institutional investors play a key role in providing cap-
ital, market liquidity, and corporate governance for U.S. firms (see Gompers and Metrick, 2001; Blume
and Keim, 2012; Aghion et al., 2013). Access to institutional capital can therefore be crucial for firms to
finance their operations and to grow. Second, data on both the location and the investments of institu-
tional investors are publicly available. Third, there is substantial geographic variation in the location of
institutional investors across the United States. For example, the Tri-State Area (New York, New Jersey,
and Connecticut) with the largest concentration of institutional assets under management (AUM) only
accounts for about one-third of total U.S. institutional AUM. This variation in the location of institu-
tional investors, combined with substantial differences in the geographic structure of social networks
across U.S. counties, creates sizable variation in firms' social proximity to institutional capital.
     We first document that institutional investors invest more in firms located in regions that they are
socially connected to. In our baseline specification, we control for firm and institution × industry fixed
1 Present-day friendship links between counties are determined by a large number of factors, including historical migration
 movements. For example, the Great Migration of African-Americans from the South to Northern industrial cities in the
 1940s-1960s shows up as stronger present-day friendship links between Chicago and Mississippi. As a result, we argue that
 the investor Northern Trust, based in Chicago, is disproportionately connected to the firm Trustmark Corporation, based in
 Mississippi. See Bailey et al. (2018a) for a detailed discussion of the determinants of social connectedness in the United States.


                                                                1
effects to alleviate concern that our results might be picking up other confounding factors such as in-
vestors locating in regions that are socially connected to industry clusters important to the investors'
mandates. After flexibly controlling for the geographic distance between the locations of firms and in-
vestors, we find that a 10% increase in the social connectedness between firm and investor locations is
associated with a 1.9% increase in the weight of the firm in the investor's portfolio.
     An extensive literature has documented that investors have a preference for geographically prox-
imate firms, a feature often referred to as "home bias" (e.g., Coval and Moskowitz, 1999; Baik et al.,
2010; Bernile et al., 2015). Consistent with this literature, we find that the shorter the geographic dis-
tance between a firm and an investor, the more investment occurs. However, controlling for the social
proximity between firms and investors renders the effect of physical distance statistically insignificant
or even changes its sign in some specifications. Moreover, the inclusion of controls for physical distance
does not affect the estimated effect of social distance on investments. These findings suggest that in
many of these prior studies, physical proximity may have served as a proxy for social proximity.
     Next, we explore heterogeneity in the effect of social connectedness on investment decisions along
characteristics of investors and firms. The effect of social connections on investments is largest for firms
that are small or have low analyst coverage. Investors are likely to be less familiar with these firms, but
stronger social connections may allow them to be more aware of their existence, or to have better true
or perceived information about them. In addition, the effects are larger for institutions that rely more
heavily on non-financial and intangible factors rather than quantitative accounting measures. Smaller
institutional investors with fewer resources are also disproportionately more likely to invest in firms
from locations they are socially connected to.2 We also explore how managers' characteristics relate to
the tendency of investing in socially-proximate stocks. We find that older fund managers are generally
more likely to invest in firms to which they are socially connected; we do not find significant differences
based on the managers' gender or business education background (i.e., having an MBA degree).
     The previous cross-sectional analyses control for both firm and institution × industry fixed effects.
Despite these tight controls, one might worry about possible omitted variables at the firm-investor-pair
level that correlate with social connectedness between firm and investor locations, but that also indepen-
dently affect the investor's propensity to hold stocks of a particular firm. While any such variable would
be unlikely to generate the heterogeneities shown above, we next provide further identification using
panel data of institutional holdings from June 2007 through December 2016. We focus on the subsample
of firms that changed their headquarters' location during the sample period, and include institution ×
firm fixed effects to capture any time-invariant determinants of an institution's preference for holding
a particular stock. The within-institution-firm-pair variation in social connectedness continues to ex-
plain investment patterns: when a firm moves its headquarters from a location that is weakly connected
to an investor to a location that is more strongly connected to that investor, the investor increases its
investment in that firm. This result dramatically reduces the scope for potential omitted variables to
2 This finding is consistent with the results in Pool et al. (2012), who document that managers from smaller fund families
 particularly overweight firms from their home-state in their investment decisions. Similarly, Hirshleifer et al. (2019) find that
 earnings announcements made by firms with greater social-network-centrality attract more attention from both institutional
 and retail investors, and generate more immediate price reactions and weaker post announcement drifts. Those results are
 also stronger for smaller firms and firms with low institutional ownership.



                                                                2
explain the observed relationships between social connectedness and investment behavior. Instead, our
findings are more consistent with a causal effect of social connectedness on investment decisions.
    In the second part of the paper, we ask whether the tendency of institutional investors to dispropor-
tionately invest in areas to which they are socially connected aggregates up to affect equilibrium capital
market outcomes for firms. That is, do firms located in regions with higher social proximity to institu-
tional capital attract more overall institutional investment? And does social proximity to institutional
capital affect other capital market outcomes such as valuations and secondary market liquidity?
    To address these questions, we first construct a measure of each location's social proximity to insti-
tutional capital. Specifically, for each county, we calculate the weighted average institutional AUM in
all other U.S. counties, where the weight is the social connectedness between the focal county and the
other counties. Under this measure, counties with more friendship links to locations with high-AUM
institutions are said to be more socially proximate to capital. We also construct a corresponding measure
of physical proximity to institutional capital as a key control variable.
    We first show that our institution-firm-level results aggregate up and that, conditional on physical
proximity to capital and other controls, firms located in regions that are more socially proximate to insti-
tutional capital have higher institutional ownership. Quantitatively, a 10% increase in social proximity
to capital is associated with an 18.7 basis points increase in total institutional ownership.
    We then examine whether social proximity to institutional capital affects firms' valuations. There
are at least two possible mechanisms for such a relationship. First, since firms in regions with more so-
cial connections to institutional capital are more broadly held by institutional investors, these investors
can better share those firms' risks and would thus demand a lower rate of return. This is similar to pre-
dictions from the equilibrium model in Merton (1987), in which more-widely-known firms have larger
investor bases, which results in better risk sharing and higher valuations. Second, Scheinkman and
Xiong (2003) show that, in a dynamic setting with short-sale constraints and time-varying investors dis-
agreement, valuations disproportionately reflect the assessments of the most optimistic investors. Since
firms known to more investors in general are also more likely to attract the attention of particularly
optimistic investors, valuations might increase with social proximity to capital.
    Consistent with these potential mechanisms, we find that firms located in regions that are socially
closer to institutional investors have higher valuations. In particular, a 10% increase in social proximity
to capital is associated with a 1% increase in a firm's market-to-book ratio and a 0.57% increase in its
Tobin's Q. These results are robust to including a large number of firm and county controls, such as
the physical proximity to capital and state × industry fixed effects. We also show that the effect of
social proximity to capital on firm valuation is generally the highest for smaller firms with lower analyst
coverage, precisely those firms for which we previously found the largest effects of social connectedness
on institutional investment flows.
    Given that institutional investors have been shown to play an important role in liquidity provision
(Blume and Keim, 2012; Rubin, 2007), we also analyze the effect of social proximity to capital on firms'
secondary market liquidity. We find that a 10% increase in social proximity to capital is associated with
a 0.86% reduction in effective spreads and a 2.7% reduction in the Amihud (2002) illiquidity measure.
As before, these effects are larger for smaller firms with lower analyst coverage. These results suggest


                                                     3
that social connectedness improves a firm's access to institutional capital and leads to beneficial firm
outcomes such as higher valuation and secondary market liquidity.
    Our results so far exploit cross-sectional variation in social proximity to capital to estimate its effects
on secondary market liquidity and valuations. We control for many firm and county characteristics
to absorb other factors that could affect our outcomes of interest. Nevertheless, one might worry that
there is something about these counties (or firms in those counties) other than social proximity to capital
that leads them to have higher liquidity and valuations (independent of their ownership structures).
For example, firms in places with high social proximity to capital might just happen to be less risky,
for reasons that are not accounted for by the comprehensive set of control variables used in the prior
literature. One might also speculate that places with high social proximity to capital have more well-
known firms, conditional on industry and other controls, and thus will have higher liquidity provision
from all investors. We find such reasoning to be unconvincing. It would not only fail to explain our
earlier result that it is only the connected institutions that invest more in these firms, but could also not
explain why small firms benefit disproportionately from high social proximity to capital.
    However, to further address such concerns, we exploit an exogenous shock to a subset of capital
providers that resulted in differential cross-sectional liquidity impacts due to stocks' heterogeneous so-
cial connectedness to areas affected by the shock. Specifically, we study the effects of Hurricane Sandy,
the second-costliest Hurricane in the U.S. history. Hurricane Sandy's landfall in the Mid-Atlantic region
on October 22, 2012 resulted in $71.4 billion in damages, led to major flooding in New York city's trans-
portation systems, and left six million people without power and thousands of homes destroyed. We
provide evidence suggesting that, during this period, institutional investors in the affected Mid-Atlantic
region were likely to reduce their liquidity provision.
    We then focus on the liquidity dynamics of firms located in areas that were not directly affected by
Sandy. Consistent with our overall narrative, we find that during Hurricane Sandy, firms with a high
social proximity to institutional capital in the Mid-Atlantic states experienced a relative reduction in
their stock liquidity. Regular seasonal patterns in the relative liquidity of firms with social proximity to
capital in the Mid-Atlantic states do not account for our findings. This provides further support that our
results are not driven by omitted firm-level characteristics that affect liquidity provision by all investors.
Instead, they reinforce the notion that what matters for explaining the higher liquidity of firms with
greater social proximity to capital is the liquidity provision from investors in those parts of the country
to which a firm has social connections.
    Overall, these results provide ­ to the best of our knowledge ­ the first evidence that social proximity
to capital affects aggregate firm outcomes such as liquidity and valuations. While a number of papers
have documented that various social interactions can affect individual investment decisions, our novel
measure of social connectedness allows us to show that these effects can have aggregate implications.
    In the final part of the paper, we explore the implications of our results for the investment perfor-
mance of institutional investors. Do investors achieve higher returns by allocating their investments
to regions they are socially connected to? If institutional investors obtain an information advantage
through their social connections, we should observe higher risk-adjusted returns for institutions that
invest more in areas they are socially connected to (see Cohen et al., 2008; Hong et al., 2005; Hong and


                                                      4
Xu, 2019; Pool et al., 2015; Rehbein et al., 2020). On the other hand, if investments in socially proximate
firms are driven by investor awareness of such firms without proprietary information, we do not expect
investors to outperform, and suboptimally diversified portfolios could even lead them to underperform.
        We examine institutional investors' performance along three dimensions: (i) across-institution com-
parisons of returns for investors with a differential general propensity to invest in connected firms, (ii)
comparisons at the institutional holding level, where we compare an institution's high-connectedness
holdings to its low-connectedness holdings, and (iii) comparing an institution's high-connectedness
holdings to high-connectedness stocks the institution chooses not to hold. We first estimate an insti-
tution's propensity to invest in socially proximate firms and sort institutions into deciles based on that
propensity. Comparing across these deciles, we find no significant variation in investor performance,
measured by excess returns, CAPM, Fama and French (2015) five-factor alphas, risk, or Sharpe Ratios.
When we look within institutions, we also find no differential performance between an institution's
connected holdings and its non-connected holdings. Thus, our results do not support the idea that in-
stitutional investors obtain valuable information through social connections as measured by Facebook
friendship links.3 Instead, our results are more consistent with an interpretation in which institutional
investments in socially proximate firms are driven by an increased awareness of these firms.

2       Social Connectedness and Institutional Investments
In the first part of the paper, we document that institutional investors are more likely to invest in firms
located in counties to which they are socially connected to. We begin by describing our measures of
social connectedness between U.S. counties, as well as the construction of our investment variables.

Measuring Social Connectedness. To measure social connectedness between U.S. counties, we use the
Social Connectedness Index provided by Bailey et al. (2018a). This measure was created using anonymized
information on the universe of friendship links between U.S.-based Facebook users as of April 2016.
Facebook is the world's largest online social networking service: by the end of 2017, it had more than
2.1 billion monthly active users globally and 239 million active users in the U.S. and Canada. A survey
of Facebook users from 2015 found that more than 68% of the U.S. adult population and 79% of online
adults in the U.S. used Facebook (Duggan et al., 2016). That same survey showed that Facebook usage
rates among U.S.-based online adults were relatively constant across income groups, education levels,
and race, as well as among urban, rural, and suburban residents; usage rates were slightly declining
in age. In the U.S., Facebook mainly serves as a platform for real-world friends and acquaintances
to interact online, and people usually only add connections on Facebook to individuals whom they
know in the real world. As a result, networks formed on Facebook more closely resemble real-world
social networks than those on other online platforms, such as Twitter, where uni-directional links to
non-acquaintances are common. Consistent with this, Bailey et al. (2018a,b, 2019a,b,c, 2020a,b), Kuchler
et al. (2020), Rehbein et al. (2020) and Bali et al. (2019) provide evidence that friendships observed on
Facebook are a good proxy for real-world U.S. social connections.
3 Thediverging conclusion in the literature on whether interactions through social networks can help improve investment
 performance may be due to the fact that different social networks might be differentially able to convey real information.



                                                            5
To measure social connectedness between geographic areas, Bailey et al. (2018a) map Facebook users to
their respective county locations using information such as the users' regular IP addresses. They then
construct a measure of the relative number of friendship links between each county pair, Friendshipsi, j .
Our measure of social connectedness between two counties corresponds to the (relative) probability that
a Facebook user in county i is friends with a Facebook user in county j:

                                                                       Friendshipsi, j
                              Social Connectednessi, j =                                        ,                           (1)
                                                               Populationi × Population j

where Populationi corresponds to the total population in county i. Figure 1 shows heatmaps of our
measure of Social Connectednessi, j for San Francisco, CA, in Panel A and for Cook County, IL in Panel
B. Darker colors correspond to stronger social connections to the focal counties. Both San Francisco
County and Cook County are home to a substantial number of institutional investors, so these maps
show differences in the relative connectedness to institutional capital in those location. San Francisco
County is strongly connected to nearby counties in coastal California. However, social connectedness
is not solely determined by physical proximity. For example, San Francisco County also has strong
connections to other urban areas, such as New York or Chicago, as well as to college towns across the
United States. This is likely driven by connections of college graduates moving from college towns to
San Francisco for career opportunities. Cook County, which includes the city of Chicago, is strongly
connected to counties in the Southern states along the Mississippi River. This pattern is likely the result
of the large-scale migration of African-Americans from Southern states to Northern industrial cities
during the Great Migration. More generally, these plots show that two adjacent counties can have very
different social connectedness to institutional investors in San Francisco and Chicago. Such variation
will help us distinguish between the effects of physical proximity and social proximity to capital.

                                               [Insert Figure 1 near here]

Institutional Holdings Data. We obtain information on institutional investors' holdings from the
Thomson Reuters Institutional (13F) Holdings data set. Information is reported at the level of the fund
family, not the level of the individual fund. In our baseline analysis, we use institutional investment data
from June 2016, which most closely corresponds to the time when we observe social connectedness. We
then expand our analysis to panel regressions with holdings data from 2007 to 2016. We combine insti-
tutional investors' holdings data with information on stock prices from CRSP to construct measures of
the total investment by each fund in each firm.4 In particular, for each institution-firm pair, we construct
a measure of institutional holding, % PFi, j , which corresponds to the share of firm i in investor j's portfo-
lio, where each institution's assets under management ­ its AUM ­ is the sum of the equity values held
by that investor:
                                               Ownership ($) of investor i in firm j
                                  % PFi, j =                                         ,                                      (2)
                                                    AUM ($) of investor i

4 We
   limit our analysis to stocks listed on NYSE, Nasdaq, and NYSE MKT that have a price greater than $5. We also only
consider fund families that hold at least five stocks. We only analyze firms and funds located in the 48 contiguous U.S. states.



                                                              6
We obtain institutional investors' headquarter locations from Bernile et al. (2015, 2019), who collect this
information from Nelson's Directory of Investment Managers and by searching SEC filings.5 We obtain
firms' historical headquarter locations from Compustat.
       Overall, we have information on 3,083 firms and 2,820 fund families. Panel A of Table 1 presents
summary statistics on institution-firm pairs (see also Appendix Table IA.1). The mean of %PF indicates
that for the average firm-institution pair, the firm constitutes 0.04% of the institution's public U.S. equity
portfolio. Most firm-institution pairs (up to the 90th percentile) have zero investments by the fund in
the firm, consistent with the fact that many institutions do not hold highly diversified portfolios.

                                                [Insert Table 1 near here]

2.1     Empirical Analysis
We use the following regression specification to investigate how the social connectedness between the
location of firm i's headquarter and the location of institutional investor j's headquarter affects investor
j's decision to invest in firm i:

                    %PFi, j = exp [ Log Social Connectednessi, j +  Xi, j + i +  j×ind(i) ] ·             i, j .             (3)

This functional form is motivated by the binscatter plots in Figure 2, which suggest a linear relation-
ship between Log %PF and Log Social Connectednessi, j , both with and without controlling for the geo-
graphic distance between firms and investors.6 The vector Xi, j includes controls for various measures of
the geographic distance between firm i and investor j, as well as indicator variables for whether the firm
and investor are located in the same state or county. Our baseline specification also includes firm and
institution fixed effects. Regression 3 is estimated using Poisson Pseudo Maximum Likelihood (PPML)
to account for the censoring of investments at zero.7 We cluster standard errors by firm and investor.

                                               [Insert Figure 2 near here]

We report results from regression 3 in Table 2. The first column shows our baseline estimates. The coeffi-
cient on Log Social Connectednessi, j is positive and statistically significant, consistent with institutional
investors overweighting firms that are headquartered in counties to which the investors are socially
connected to. The coefficient estimate implies an elasticity of 0.189, suggesting that a 10 percent increase
in social connectedness is associated with a 1.89 percent increase in % PF. Importantly, the inclusion of
firm fixed effects ensures that this finding is not driven by characteristics that might make firms located
in socially connected counties more prone to attracting institutional investments on average.
       One concern is that social connectedness may be correlated with economic linkages or business ties
between two counties that might also affect investments directly. For example, investors may be located
5 We  are grateful for Gennaro Bernile, Alok Kumar, and Johan Sulaeman for sharing these data sets. We extend the data set by
  collecting additional institutional location data from SEC filings.
6 In the analysis in Figure 2, we drop all observations where % PF equals zero. However, our PPML estimation procedure

  allows the inclusion of these observations in our regression analysis.
7 This regression is widely used in the trade literature, which also faces a left-censoring of trade flows between countries (see

  the discussion in Silva and Tenreyro, 2006). We use the estimation procedure implemented in Correia et al. (2019).



                                                               7
in regions that are socially proximate to industry clusters important to the investors' mandates. To rule
out such concerns, we next also include institution × Fama-French 48 industry fixed effects to account
for institutions' preferences to locate in areas that are socially connected to a particular set of industries.
Column 2 shows that the inclusion of institution × industry fixed effects increases the regression R2 from
32% to 51%, suggesting that the industry preference explains a substantial portion of cross-sectional
variation in funds' holding choices. Nevertheless, the coefficient of Log Social Connectednessi, j remains
unchanged, suggesting that our results are robust with respect to such industry-related ties.

                                                [Insert Table 2 near here]

In column 3, we examine the role of physical distance, on investment choices. Consistent with the home
bias literature, we find that institutional investors tend to overweight firms that are headquartered in
close geographic proximity (e.g., Coval and Moskowitz, 1999).8 In column 4, we include both Log Social
Connectedness and Log Distance as explanatory variables, two variables that are highly correlated with
one another ( = -0.69). Log Social Connectedness remains positively related to a firm's weight in
institutional portfolios, with a coefficient estimate slightly higher than that from column 2. The effect
of geographic distance becomes smaller and even changes sign. This finding therefore helps to advance
the literature on home bias, which often interprets geographic home bias as a result of strong connection
between fund managers and corporate executives located close by (e.g., Coval and Moskowitz, 1999,
2001; Baik et al., 2010; Bernile et al., 2015). Our results are consistent with this interpretation, but indicate
that Social Connectedness is a richer proxy for social networks than physical distance is.
       The next specifications explore whether our measure of social connectedness picks up a potentially
non-linear relationship between physical distance and institutional investment decisions. In column 5,
we control for the geographic distance between county pairs using 500-tile dummies (Appendix Fig-
ure IA.1 reports the coefficients on these dummies). The effect of social connectedness on investments
even increases somewhat in this specification. In column 6, we further add indicators for whether
the firm-institution pair is located in the same county or the same state, allowing us to control for the
word-of-mouth interaction over short distances (e.g., Hong et al., 2004). Finally, column 7 explores the
monotonicity of the relationship between social connectedness and investments by including quintile
indicators of Social Connectedness as explanatory variables. Coefficients for quintiles 2 to 5 represent
the relative increases in investments compared to the first quintile of social connectedness. There is a
monotonic increase in portfolio weights across quintiles of social connectedness.9
8 We  also calculate the percentage home-bias measure used in Coval and Moskowitz (1999). Institutions in our sample exhibit
  a percentage bias of 6.54% using the equal-equal weighting scheme and 1.2% in the value-value weighting scheme. These
  measures are qualitatively consistent with, but quantitatively lower than those reported in Coval and Moskowitz (1999), who
  report 9.32% and 11.2% using the equal-equal and value-value weighting schemes, respectively. These difference are consis-
  tent with Bernile et al. (2019), who document a declining trend in home bias in recent years. Additionally, our analyses are at
  the fund-family level, while Coval and Moskowitz (1999) analyze individual funds, which are likely to be less diversified.
9 We also conduct a number of tests to ensure the robustness of our baseline results to alternative specifications. Column 1 of

  Appendix Table IA.2 reports the result when we drop firms and institutions located in New York and California, two states
  with heavy presence of both investors and firms. Column 2 reports the result when we winsorize our dependent variable at
  the 99th percentile to remove extreme outliers. Columns 3 and 4 report the result using OLS regressions: in column 3, the
  dependent variable is % PF and in column 4, it is a dummy variable indicating whether there is non-zero institutional holding
  as the dependent variable. Our results are robust using all the aforementioned specifications.



                                                               8
The key takeaway from these findings is that institutional investors tend to overweight firms they are
socially connected to. As discussed in the introduction, our interpretation of this result is that institu-
tional investors either have a (perceived) information advantage by being socially connected to a firm's
county, or that institutional managers are prone to familiarity biases with respect to the firms located
in socially connected counties. We next provide evidence for this interpretation by exploring both firm
and investor heterogeneity.

Heterogeneity by Investor Characteristics. We first split institutional investors based on their Bushee
(2001) classification. Bushee (2001) groups fund families into three categories. Transient fund families
are short-term-focused investors with high levels of portfolio turnover and diversification. Quasi-indexer
families are characterized by low portfolio turnover and high diversification. Dedicated fund families
tend to take large stakes in firms and have low portfolio turnover. They rely less on quantitative ac-
counting measures and are more likely to use non-financial and intangible factors to make investment
decisions. Based on these descriptions of investment strategies, one would expect that our proposed
channels (i.e., information advantage or familiarity bias) would make the investments of dedicated in-
stitutions most sensitive to social ties to firms.
    To explore this prediction, we interact the Bushee-type indicators with Log Social Connectednessi, j .
The results are reported in Panel A of Table 3. Column 1 shows the baseline result, where we control for
firm × Bushee-type and institution × industry fixed effects. We find that, consistent with our hypoth-
esis, 'dedicated' institutions have the highest propensity to invest in firms headquartered in counties
they are socially connected to. The investments of transient investors are least affected by social con-
nectedness, and differences between investor types are large and statistically significant. This finding
is unaffected by including controls for the physical distance between firm and fund, even when those
are interacted with Bushee-type indicators. Indeed, in the specification with the richest controls, the
investments of dedicated investors react four times more strongly to variation in social connectedness
than the investments of transient investors do.

                                          [Insert Table 3 near here]

In Panel B of Table 3, we split investors into terciles based on their total AUM. We find that investments
of small institutions respond more than twice as much to social connectedness than investments of large
institutions. Panel C of Table 1 shows that this is not just the result of 'dedicated' investors having lower
AUM; the split by institution size therefore provides additional information about the heterogeneity in
institutions' tendencies to invest based on social connectedness. As before, the heterogeneous response
is robust to a variety of controls for the geographic distance between funds and firms. This result is
consistent with the interpretation that small institutions have fewer resources to conduct large-scale
research, and that their managers are thus more prone to invest in the limited number of stocks that
they are aware of (e.g., as suggested by Pool et al., 2012).

Heterogeneity by Firm Characteristics. Next, we explore the heterogeneity of investment sensitivity
to social connectedness across various firm characteristics. In particular, we split firms based on size


                                                      9
and analyst coverage as proxies for the availability of information through other channels (see Hong
et al., 2000). There are at least two reasons why investments in small and informationally opaque firms
may be disproportionately affected by social connectedness. First, managers may perceive having an
information advantage for opaque firms they are socially connected to. Alternatively, to the extent that
social connectedness increases investor awareness of firms, these effects are likely to be less important
for large firms with national brands.
      The first test presented in Panel A of Table 4 is based on splitting firms by their size (i.e., their
market equity at the end of the prior quarter). We group firms into size terciles, labeled as Small Cap,
Mid Cap, and Large Cap, respectively. The baseline specification in column 1 shows that the relationship
between social connectedness and investments is indeed highest for small firms, and lowest for the large
firms. The differences are large and highly statistically significant. In columns 2-4, we add our standard
controls for geographic distance, interacted with fixed effects for firm size terciles. Our basic results are
not affected by the addition of these control variables.

                                                [Insert Table 4 near here]

We also split firms based on analyst coverage, as analysts are an important information intermediary
in financial markets.10 These results are reported in Panel B of Table 4. Column 1 shows the baseline
results. We find that investments in low-analyst-coverage firms respond twice as much to social con-
nectedness as investments in high-analyst-coverage firms. Our results are robust to including controls
for geographic distance interacted with analyst-coverage-tercile indicators. Taken together, our firm
heterogeneity tests suggest that investment in small firms with little analyst coverage are most strongly
affected by social connectedness to potential investors.11

2.2    Fund Manager Characteristics, Social Connectedness, and Fund Investment
Our next analysis turns to a sample of actively managed U.S. domestic equity mutual funds.12 Focusing
on individual funds rather than institutions allows us to shed light on how different fund manager char-
acteristics affect the relationship between social connectedness and managers' investment decisions.13
10 Analyst   coverage is based on the number of analysts issuing an earnings forecast on the current fiscal year, following Hong
   et al. (2000). We obtain measures of analyst coverage for each firm from I/B/E/S summary file in the quarter prior to the
   institutional holding report date.
11 Since firm size and analyst coverage are positively correlated, we further explore whether analyst coverage has explana-

   tory power in the loading on Log Social Connectedness beyond firm size. We first perform an independent two-way sort
   that classifies firms into three terciles by firm size and analyst coverage respectively. Then we map the 3 × 3 size­analyst
   coverage matrix into nine indicator variables and interact them with Log Social Connectedness. Results from this regres-
   sion are reported in Appendix Table IA.3. We find that even after controlling for firm size, investment sensitivity to social
   connectedness is highest for firms with low analyst coverage.
12 The mutual fund holding data are from Thomson Reuters Mutual Fund Holdings Data. This sample differs from the institu-

   tion sample, as institutions also include entities such as banks, pension funds, hedge funds, and insurance companies.
13 The fund manager location data are collected from funds' Form ADV filings. See Chang (2019) for detailed data description.

   We are grateful for Suzanne Chang for sharing this dataset. Fund manager characteristics are obtained from Morningstar and
   public records. See Chung (2018) for detailed data description. We are grateful for Kiseo Chung for providing this dataset.
   We require having a mutual fund manager's characteristics for a fund to be considered in our analysis. Our sample consists
   of 367 unique mutual funds, of which 341 have fund manager age information. The median age of young management
   teams is 47 years, and of old management teams is 56 years. Among the 367 funds, 302 have only male managers and 65
   have at least one female manager. Additionally, 144 funds are managed by a team with less than 50% managers with an
   MBA degree, while 223 funds have more than 50% managers with MBA degrees.


                                                              10
We report this set of analyses in Table 5. The regression specifications correspond to regression 3. Col-
umn 1 reports the baseline regression. We find that, similar to our analysis of institutional holdings,
there is a positive and significant relationship between Log Social Connectedness and % PF, even after
including fixed effects for distance (500-tile), same county, same state, firm, and fund × industry. Col-
umn 2 reports the results when splitting fund managers into equal-sized age groups. The investments
of funds managed by relatively young managers do not seem to be influenced by social connectedness
to firms' headquarter locations. Instead, it is the older managers who invest significantly more in firms
connected to the funds' location. Column 3 explores if the relationship between social connectedness
and investment decisions differs for funds managed only by male managers versus funds with at least
one female manager. We find that both types of funds exhibit similar tendencies to hold socially con-
nected stocks. Column 4 analyzes how fund managers' education affects their tendency to hold stocks
in counties they are socially connected to. Specifically, we split funds based on whether the investment
team consists primarily of managers with an MBA degree. We find that both types of funds are inclined
to hold socially connected stocks. This result suggests that formal business education does not affect
fund managers' reliance on social connectedness in their investment decisions.

                                               [Insert Table 5 near here]


2.3    Within-Firm Identification Using Panel Data
Our previous results show that institutional investors tend to disproportionately invest in firms located
in counties that the investors are socially connected to. Despite the tight controls in our cross-sectional
analysis, one might worry about possible omitted variables at the firm-investor-pair level that correlate
with social connectedness between firm and investor locations, but that also independently affect in-
vestors' propensities to hold stocks of a particular firm. We next address such concerns by exploiting
within-firm-investor-pair variation in our measure of social connectedness generated by firms moving
headquarters across locations. For this analysis, we use quarterly panel data of institutional holdings
between June 2007 and December 2016. The first three columns of Table 6 reproduce the specifications
in columns 2, 5, and 6 in Table 2, respectively (since we introduce the time dimension, we now control
for institution × quarter and firm × quarter fixed effects). These specifications confirm that the baseline
results from the June 2016 cross section are replicated in the panel, both qualitatively and quantitatively.
      We then focus on the subsample of 556 firms that changed their headquarter locations during the
sample period. For this sample, we can include firm × investor fixed effects while retaining time-series
variation in social connectedness.14 These fixed effects allow us to capture any time-invariant determi-
nant of an investor's preference for holding a particular stock. The within-firm-investor-pair variation
in social connectedness continues to affect investment patterns: when a firm moves its headquarter from
a location that is weakly connected to a particular investor to a location that is more strongly connected
to that investor, the investor increases its investment in that firm. Column 4 establishes this result in the
full panel; the effect of social connectedness on holdings is statistically significant but smaller than in
14 Whileinstitutions also change their headquarters from time to time, our data for investor locations is only based on a single
 cross section. As a result, we cannot rely on the time-varying institutional investor locations for identification purpose.



                                                              11
column 3. This is likely related to the fact that investor portfolios do not adjust immediately following
the headquarter change. Similarly, attention to firms does not adjust discretely around the headquarter
change, for example because individuals in the original headquarter county do not immediately 'forget'
about the firm the moment it moves to another county. To address this, in column 5 of Table 6, we in-
clude, for every firm-investor pair, only the holdings in the three years before and the three years after
the headquarter change; this allows sufficient time for an adjustment of both investments and awareness
around the headquarter move. The coefficient on Log Social Connectedness is 0.381, which is similar to
the magnitude in the full panel analysis in column 3 of Table 6.
       Overall, the findings in this section substantially reduce the scope for potential omitted variables to
explain the observed relationships between social connectedness and investment behavior.

3      Capital Market Implication for Firms
In the previous section, we established that institutional investors are more likely to invest in firms
located in counties that the investors are socially connected to. We next show that this effect is large
enough to generate better capital market outcomes for firms located in counties that are socially con-
nected to regions with many large institutional investors -- firms that we refer to as having higher
"social proximity to capital." We analyze three sets of capital market outcomes with quarterly panel data
for the 2007-2016 period. We first show that firms with higher social proximity to capital have more
total institutional ownership. We then document positive effects of higher social proximity to capital on
firm valuations and secondary market liquidity. We also show that the positive capital market effects of
social proximity to capital are larger for smaller and more informationally opaque firms, precisely those
firms for which we previously found the largest effects of social connectedness on investments.

3.1      Data and Measurement
Our main explanatory variable in this section, the Social Proximity to Capital of firms in county i at time
t, is constructed as:

                        Social Proximity to Capitali,t =         AUMj,t × Social Connectednessi,j ,                              (4)
                                                                 j


where AUM j,t is the total asset under management by fund families headquartered in county j in quarter
t, and Social Connectednessi, j is the social connectedness between counties i and j as defined in equation
1. Increases in this measure mean that county i (and therefore any firm headquartered in that county)
has closer social connections to counties that are home to institutional investors with high AUM.15 Fig-
ure 3 shows a heat map of this measure of Social Proximity to Capital across U.S. counties; a data set
with each county's social proximity to capital can be found on the authors' websites. Perhaps unsur-
prisingly, counties located on the East coast, especially those in the Northeast, have the highest levels
15 Since   we found that social connectedness had the largest effect on investments of 'dedicated' investors, we also explored
    separate measures of social proximity to 'dedicated' capital. However, funds from different groups are located in similar
    counties: counties with high AUM for 'dedicated' investors usually also have high AUM for other investors. As a result, it
    is not possible to obtain variation in social proximity to 'dedicated' capital that is independent of social proximity to overall
    capital.




                                                                  12
of Social Proximity to Capital, while counties in the middle of the country tend to have lower Social Prox-
imity to Capital. However, consistent with the evidence above that neighboring counties can have very
different structures of social networks, we find that Social Proximity to Capital can also vary substantially
between counties that are geographically close -- this fact allows us to include state fixed effects in our
regressions below, and thereby only exploit within-state variation in Social Proximity to Capital.

                                               [Insert Figure 3 near here]

Analogously, we construct a measure of a county's physical proximity to capital:

                        Physical Proximity to Capitali,t =           AUMj,t /(1 + Distancei,j ),                              (5)
                                                                     j


where Distancei, j is the physical distance between counties i and j measured in miles. Consistent with
the strong relationship between social connectedness and physical distance discussed above, we find
that Social Proximity to Capital and Physical Proximity to Capital have a correlation of 0.86.

3.2      Social Proximity to Capital and Firms' Institutional Ownership
Our first test explores whether institutions' overweighting of firms they are socially connected to has an
aggregate effect on firms' total institutional ownership. To do this, we estimate the following regression:

           %TIOi,t = Log Social Proximity to Capitali,t-1 +  Xi,t-1 + t +  ind(i) + state(i) +                     i ,t ,     (6)

where %TIOi,t represents the total institutional ownership share of firm i in quarter t, and Xi,t-1 includes
firm-level control variables that have been shown to affect a firm's institutional ownership share (Baik
et al., 2010; Green and Jame, 2013) as well as controls for county characteristics.16 Our baseline specifica-
tion, reported in column 1 of Table 7, also includes quarter, state, and industry fixed effects. We find that
Social Proximity to Capital is significantly related to firms' institutional ownership shares: a 10% increase
in Social Proximity to Capital is associated with a 18.7 bps increase in the overall institutional owner-
ship share, relative to a baseline mean of 60%. In column 2, we control for quarter × industry fixed
effects, which ensures that our results are not driven by time-varying industry dynamics in institutional
ownership. The point estimate of  is essentially unchanged.

                                                [Insert Table 7 near here]

We next investigate whether the relationship between Social Proximity to Capital and institutional in-
vestor share differs across firm characteristics. We documented above that social connectedness is par-
ticularly important for attracting institutional investments to small firms and firms with low analyst
16 Ourfirm controls include log total assets (Log Assets), log market-to-book ratio (Log M/B), return volatility (Volatility), 12-
 month momentum (Momentum), share turnover (Turnover), lag stock price (Price), R&D expenses over total assets (R&D),
 dividend yield (Yield), an S&P 500 index dummy (S&P), firm age (Age), advertising expenditures over total assets (Advertis-
 ing), and exchange dummies (Exchange). Our county controls include log physical proximity to capital (Physical Proximity),
 educational attainment (Education), income per capita (Income), and unemployment rate (Unemployment). The detailed de-
 scription of these variables can be found in Appendix A.1. We use the latest available information to calculate these variables
 at the end of the prior quarter.


                                                               13
coverage. Consistent with those results, columns 3 and 4 of Table 7 show that Social Proximity to Capital
has the largest effect on the institutional ownership share of smaller firms. Quantitatively, a 10% increase
in Social Proximity to Capital leads to a 21 bps increase in the institutional ownership share among small
firms. This relationship is much smaller and statistically insignificant for mid-size and large firms. Sim-
ilarly, in columns 5 and 6, we find that the effect of Social Proximity to Capital on institutional investment
share is most pronounced for firms with the lowest analyst coverage.

3.3      Social Proximity to Capital and Firm Valuation
We next investigate how firms' social proximity to capital affects their valuations. There are a number
of channels through which social proximity to capital might raise a firm's valuation. The first channel
is a direct implication from Merton (1987), who presents a model in which each investor knows only a
subset of stocks. In equilibrium, those firms with limited investor recognition (i.e., a smaller investor
base) tend to have lower valuations. The intuition is that a narrower investor base facilitates less risk
sharing, which leads to lower valuations and a higher cost of capital. This theory has found strong sup-
port in subsequent empirical work (e.g., Fang and Peress, 2009; Lehavy and Sloan, 2008). We therefore
hypothesize that as a result of higher investor recognition, firms with larger social proximity to capital
that are more widely held by institutional investors might have higher valuations.
      A second mechanism through which social proximity to capital might raise valuations is through
investor disagreement. In this story, investors are more likely to consider investing in firms they are
aware of. While they might find firms to be both overvalued or undervalued, short-sale constraints
mean that prices disproportionately reflect the views of the most optimistic investors (see Scheinkman
and Xiong, 2003). Valuations might therefore increase in the number of investors that consider a firm,
since this likely leads to higher valuations of the most optimistic investors. The resulting overvaluation
could persist when the investors' beliefs oscillate with the future arrival of new information. To explore
whether social proximity to capital indeed affects firm valuations, we run the following regression:

      Log Valuationi,t = Log Social Proximity to Capitali,t-1 +  Xi,t-1 + t +  ind(i) + state(i) +                  i ,t ,   (7)

where Valuationi,t represents the market valuation of firm i in quarter t. We consider two measures of
valuation, Tobin's Q and the market-to-book to ratio.17 The dependent variables are in log form fol-
lowing Green and Jame (2013). Xi,t-1 includes control variables that have been shown to affect firm
valuation, as well as county-level demographic and economic information.18 The fixed effects and stan-
dard errors correspond to those in the specifications in Table 7.
      The results form regression 7 are reported in Table 8. The dependent variable in Panel A is the log
of the market-to-book ratio. In columns 1 and 2, we find a strong positive relation between a firm's
social proximity to capital and its market-to-book ratio: a 10% increase in Social Proximity to Capital is
17 The  market-to-book ratio is defined as market capitalization divided by book equity. Market capitalization is obtained from
   CRSP and book equity is obtained from Compustat. Tobin's Q is defined as market value of the firm over the replacement
   cost of its assets, and is obtained from Compustat.
18 We include the following firm-level control variables: Log Assets, Profitability, Sales Growth, Asset Turnover, R&D, Ad-

   vertising, book leverage (Leverage), dividend payout (Payout), an S&P, firm age, Exchange, Physical Proximity. We also
   control for county-level measures of education, income, and unemployment. The detailed description of these variables can
   be found in Appendix A.1.


                                                              14
associated with a statistically significant 1.1% increase in the market-to-book ratio. The rest of Table 8
highlights that the effects of Social Proximity to Capital on market-to-book ratios are strongest among
small and mid size firms and among firms with limited analyst coverage.

                                                [Insert Table 8 near here]

Our second measure of firm valuation is Tobin's Q. Columns 1 and 2 of Panel B of Table 8 report the
full sample results. We find that a 10% increase in Social Proximity to Capital is associated with a 0.6%
increase in Tobin's Q. To get a better sense of the economic magnitude implied by our estimates, we com-
pare our coefficient to the estimated effect of another explanatory variable, R&D expenditures scaled by
sales. In our sample, a one-standard-deviation increase in firm R&D expenditures is associated with a
7.7% increase in Tobin's Q, consistent with the findings in Habib and Ljungqvist (2005). Similarly, our
estimates imply that a one-standard-deviation increase in Log Social Proximity to Capital (which corre-
sponds to a 1.13 log point increase) is associated with a 6.4% increase in Tobin's Q.
      In columns 3 and 4, we report the differential effects of Social Proximity to Capital on Tobin's Q for
firms of different sizes. We do not find a significant difference for firms in the top and bottom terciles
of the size distribution. Columns 5 and 6 report the results separately for firms with differential analyst
coverage. We find that the effect of social proximity to capital on Tobin's Q is generally stronger among
firms with lower analyst coverage.

3.4      Social Proximity to Capital and Secondary Market Liquidity
We next examine the impact of social proximity to capital on firms' secondary market liquidity. Since
institutional investors are important providers of liquidity (e.g., Rubin, 2007; Blume and Keim, 2012), we
postulate that firms with high social proximity to institutional capital will have higher liquidity. This
prediction builds on prior work that shows that stocks of firms with higher investor recognition (e.g.,
due to more fluent names) and firms with more competition among liquidity providers are more liquid
(see Green and Jame, 2013; Liu and Wang, 2016). We conduct the following regression analysis:

      Log Liquidityi,t = Log Social Proximity to Capitali,t-1 +  Xi,t-1 + t +  ind(i) + state(i) +                   i ,t ,   (8)

where Liquidityi,t represents two measures of secondary market liquidity of firm i in quarter t: the
effective percentage spread and the Amihud (2002) illiquidity measure.19 The dependent variables are
in log form following Green and Jame (2013). As before, we include control variables that have been
shown to affect firm liquidity, in addition to the same fixed effects as in the previous specifications.20

                                                [Insert Table 9 near here]
19 The  effective percentage spread is obtained from the Intraday Indicator database in WRDS. It is defined as two times the
   dollar-trading-volume-weighted absolute difference between trading price and midpoint price (scaled up by 103 ). We ag-
   gregate this daily measure into a quarterly measure by taking the quarterly average. The Amihud (2002) measure is defined
   as quarterly average of | RETi,t |/Dollar Volumei,t for stock i in day t. We scale this measure up by 106 when reporting sum-
   mary statistics. The intuition is that a liquid stock can allow a high trade volume passing through in any given day without
   significant change in price.
20 We include the following firm-level controls: Log Assets, Log M/B, Volatility, Momentum, Turnover, Price, R&D, Yield, S&P,

   Age, Yield, Advertising, Exchange, Physical Proximity. We also control for county-level measures of education, income, and
   unemployment. The detailed description of these variables can be found in Appendix A.1.


                                                              15
The regression results are reported in Panel A of Table 9. Column 1 shows that a 10% increase in Social
Proximity to Capital -- equivalent to a 0.08 standard deviation increase in that number -- is associated
with a 0.86% reduction in the effective spread. To put these magnitudes in perspective, we compare
them to the effect of profitability on liquidity. Consistent with prior literature, we find that a one-
standard-deviation increase in profitability is associated with a 6% decrease in the effective spread, while
a one-standard-deviation increase in Log Social Proximity to Capital is associated with a 9.7% decrease in
the effective spread. The coefficient remains significant at the 10% level when we include Quarter ×
Industry fixed effect in column 2.
    Next, we estimate the effect of social proximity to capital separately for firms of different sizes and
with different analyst coverage. Columns 3 and 4 show that the relationship between Social Proximity
to Capital and effective spreads is concentrated among small firms. Columns 5 and 6 highlight that the
effective spread of firms with high analyst coverage is not affected by social proximity to capital, while
these effects are highly significant for firms with low and intermediate levels of analyst coverage.
    In Panel B of Table 9, we report the same set of tests with the Amihud (2002) illiquidity measure as
the dependent variable. In the full sample analysis reported in column 1, we find that a 10% increase in
Social Proximity to Capital is related to a 2.7% decrease in illiquidity. This effect is robust to including
Quarter × Industry fixed effects, as reported in column 2. The magnitude of the effect is economically
meaningful: a one-standard-deviation increase in profitability is associated with a 13.9% reduction in the
Amihud illiquidity measure, while a one-standard-deviation increase in Log Social Proximity to Capital is
associated with a 30.5% decrease in the Amihud measure. As before, the rest of Table 9 shows that the
effect of social proximity to capital on reducing illiquidity is most significant for small firms as well as
for firms with lower analyst coverage.
    In summary, we find that firms' social proximity to capital is negatively associated with both effec-
tive spread and illiquidity. Additionally, these effects are strongest for small firms and firms with low
analyst coverage. These results suggest that institutional attention to firms with high social proximity
to capital may lead to higher liquidity, with the strongest effects for firms that have relatively opaque
information environments. While our study cannot exploit quasi-random variation in Social Proximity to
Capital across counties to obtain causal estimates, our analyses are able to control for a large number of
observables at the firm level that have been shown to influence our liquidity measures. We also include
county-level controls that might be correlated with both Social Proximity to Capital and the characteris-
tics of local firms. More generally, we are not aware of any omitted variables that can jointly explain
our findings, and in particular the heterogeneity of the effect across firm characteristics. For example,
if firms in counties that were socially more proximate to capital were of higher quality on average, this
would not explain the disproportionate investment in those firms by institutional investors in socially
close counties relative to investments by institutional investors in socially distant counties that we doc-
umented in Section 2.1. It is also unclear why only small firms in counties with high Social Proximity to
Capital would have a higher fundamental quality. Nevertheless, we next provide additional evidence
for our proposed explanation.




                                                    16
Hurricane Sandy and Market Liquidity. One concern with the prior specifications is that, despite our
rich set of controls, there might be omitted variables that affect firms' social proximity to capital as well
as their liquidity (and that do so more for informationally opaque firms). For example, one might argue
that places with high social proximity to capital have more well-known firms in general, and thus will
have higher liquidity provision from all institutional investors, independent of where those investors are
located. To provide further evidence against such alternative interpretations, we explore the response
of firms' liquidity to a temporary shock to investors in socially connected counties.
        Specifically, we explore the temporary shock to East Coast-based investors during Hurricane Sandy
in late October 2012, which caused damages of nearly US$ 70 billion. Hurricane Sandy presents a unique
opportunity to explore the causal effects of social proximity to capital, due to the concentration of capital
in the affected areas, and the fact that those investors' ability to participate in financial markets was sub-
stantially reduced in the aftermath of the Hurricane. In the weeks after the storm, many employees were
unable to physically come into their offices due to the disruption in roads and public transportation. As
a result, the ability of liquidity provision by the institutions in the affected area is likely impaired. The
Wall Street Journal quoted a trader saying that "`The market isn't officially closed, but many of the venues that
supply liquidity are closed,' Redler said. `If people thought volume was thin recently, Monday could be the Wild
West for low liquidity...'" (Russolillo, 2014). As a result, the competition in liquidity provision in firms
with high connectedness to East Coast-based investors is reduced, which could lead to lower levels of
liquidity (Liu and Wang, 2016). We next analyze whether secondary market liquidity did indeed drop
more for firms with higher social connectedness to areas affected by Hurricane Sandy.
        In our baseline analysis, we define affected areas as the Mid-Atlantic states (NY, NJ, CT, DC, PA, DE,
MD, VA, and WV), though our results are robust to broader or narrower definitions. In our regression,
we exclude those firms that are geographically close to the affected area (i.e., all firms located in the
Eastern United States), to avoid any spurious results on liquidity driven by uncertainty related to firms'
fundamentals (e.g., Rehse et al., 2019). Our empirical specification is as follows:

                     Log Spreadi,t = Affected Ratioi × I (Sandy)t +  Xi,t + t +  i +                 i ,t .              (9)

The dependent variable, Spreadi,t , is firm i's percentage effective spread on day t. We choose spread as
the main dependent variable, as it allows us to track firm-level liquidity at a very high frequency.
        The key dependent variable, Affected Ratioi , is defined as the ratio of socially proximate capital in
the affected area (i.e., the Mid-Atlantic states) to the overall socially proximate capital, as measured in
the quarter before Hurricane Sandy:

                                           k Mid- Atlantic AUMk × Social Connectednessi,k
                      Affected Ratioi =                                                   ,                             (10)
                                                j AUM j × Social Connectednessi, j
In other words, Affected Ratio measures the cross-sectional exposure of firms to institutional capital in
affected areas. I (Sandy)t is an indicator variable that equals to one during the Sandy period, defined as
October 22, 2012, to November 7, 2012.21 In our baseline specification, we also include day fixed effects
21 Wechose this date range to capture the period when travel in the Tri-State region was substantially impacted by Sandy. See
 https://www.cnn.com/2013/07/13/world/americas/hurricane-sandy-fast-facts/index.html for details.


                                                            17
as well as firm fixed effects (the latter absorbing any direct effect of Affected Ratio on liquidity). Xi,t
captures control variables, which are discussed below.

                                               [Insert Table 10 near here]

Our results are reported in Table 10. Our coefficient of interest is , which captures how the cross-
sectional variation in exposure to institutional capital affected by Sandy leads to differential changes in
the effective spread during the Sandy period. The sample period covers January 2012 to July 2013. In
column 1, we include day and firm fixed effects. The coefficient is positive and significant at the 1% level.
This result shows that the effective spreads of firms with higher social proximity to institutional capital
affected by Sandy widened more during the Sandy period compared to the spreads of other firms. The
economic magnitude of the effect is large: firms with a one standard deviation higher Affected Ratio
experienced a 5% additional increase in their effective spreads.
        In column 2 of Table 10, we add industry and state fixed effects to the specification in column 1. This
ensures that our results are not affected by time-variation in the industry classification of a given firm or
the possibility of firms moving their headquarters. In column 3, we further control for day× industry
fixed effect. The addition of this control allows us to rule out that our results are affected by time-
varying liquidity differences across industries. In columns 4 and 5, we include the additional firm-level
and county-level control variables from Table 9, each interacted with I (Sandy)t , to the specifications in
columns 2 and 3, respectively.22 These controls rule out that our results are affected by any time-varying
effect on liquidity of other firm or county characteristics that might be correlated with social proximity
to capital in the areas affected by Sandy. Our baseline effects are highly robust across all specifications.
        The effects on liquidity of social proximity to capital in the areas affected during Hurricane Sandy
also vary with firm characteristics. In particular, in Section 3.4, we documented that the average effect
of social proximity to capital on firm liquidity is largest for small firms and those with low analyst
coverage. In columns 6 to 9 of Table 10, we show that it is generally the liquidity of those same small
firms with social proximity to capital in the affected areas that falls the most during Hurricane Sandy.
        In summary, we show that shocks to the liquidity provision by institutional investors lead to the
largest increases in the effective spreads of firms that are socially connected to the region affected by the
shock. This effect is largest for small firms with low analyst coverage. These findings provide strong ev-
idence that the positive cross-sectional relationship between Social Proximity to Capital and firm liquidity
is not driven by omitted firm-level or county-level variables that correlate with both firm liquidity and
Social Proximity to Capital. In particular, our findings rule out the possibility that our liquidity results are
driven by firm or county characteristics that affect liquidity provision by all investors.

4       Implications for Institutional Investors
We previously showed that institutional investors tend to overweight firms located in counties to which
they are socially connected. We now examine the implications of this behavior for investor performance.
22 We   include the following controls, each interacted with I (Sandy)t : Log Assets, Log M/B, Volatility, Momentum, Turnover,
    Price, R&D, Yield, S&P, Age, Yield, Advertising, Exchange, Physical Proximity, Education, Income, Unemployment, as well
    as Affected Ownership Ratio, which is the ratio of the ownership by institutions located in the Mid-Atlantic Area and the
    total institutional ownership.


                                                              18
This analysis will shed some light on the extent to which overweighting is the result of information ad-
vantages arising from the social connections. Specifically, if overweighting of connected firms is driven
by an informational advantage that investors obtain through their social networks, one would expect
that, all else equal, investors that hold more socially connected stocks are likely to outperform other
investors that hold fewer such stocks. Similarly, one would also expect that the same investor would be
able to obtain higher returns on stocks they hold from socially connected counties than on stocks they
hold from counties they are not connected to. If overweighting is instead driven by investor recognition
or familiarity biases, investors with larger holdings of socially connected stocks should not expect to
outperform, and may even underperform.23
      We examine measures of investor performance along two dimensions: across institutions and within
institutions. In the across-institution test, we sort investors by their propensity to hold connected
stocks and compare the overall performance across investors with different propensities. In the within-
institution test, we compare the performance of the connected and non-connected holdings of the same
institution.

4.1     Across-Institution Performance Comparison
For the across-institution test, we first obtain daily excess returns and the CAPM- and Fama and French
(2015) five-factor-model-adjusted returns for each institution.24 To measure risk, we compute the stan-
dard deviation of an institution's daily returns for a given quarter. We define an institution's Sharpe
Ratio for a quarter as its average (excess or risk-adjusted) return divided by the corresponding return's
standard deviation for the quarter.
      We next estimate each institution's propensity to hold connected stocks using the following regres-
sion:
                      %PFi, j = exp[  j Log Social Connectednessi, j +  Xi, j + i +  j×ind(i) ] ·                    i, j .              (11)

This cross-sectional regression corresponds to the specification of column 6 in Table 2, except that we
allow the propensity to disproportionately hold socially connected stocks to vary across institutions ­
in other words, we let the loading on Log Social Connectednessi, j vary by institution, giving us a  j
coefficient for each investor. We will refer to this beta as the social-connectedness beta or  SC . We then
sort institutions into deciles of  SC and form portfolios of institutions.
      For each decile portfolio, we then compute the equally-weighted averages of the institutions' per-
formance measures: returns, return standard deviation, and Sharpe Ratio. The results are presented in
Table 11. Columns 1 through 3 present the excess return, CAPM-adjusted returns, and FF5-adjusted
returns, respectively. We do not find evidence that investors that overweight stocks from areas they are
socially connected to outperform. We also investigate whether firms that invest more in socially con-
nected counties are under-diversified and therefore more risky. We report the average volatility of daily
returns for institutions in each decile portfolio. We do not find that those with a higher propensity to
23 Underperformance      may be due to: (i) institutional investors substituting a possible value-creating stock picking ability with
   relying on the non-value-creating activity of buying socially connected stocks and, (ii) the overweighting of connected stocks
   results in portfolio under-diversification and therefore a deviation from the efficient portfolio.
24 We compute institution i's daily holding period return as Return =
                                                                         i ,t  j wi, j,t-1 Return j,t , where wi, j,t-1 is i's holding of stock
   j at end of the prior quarter and Return j,t is stock j's daily return.



                                                                     19
hold socially connected stocks have higher volatilities. Finally, columns 7 through 9 report institutions'
Sharpe ratios. We do not find any significant difference in Sharpe ratios between institutions in the top
decile and the institutions in the bottom decile of  SC .25 Overall, there is no evidence that the propensity
to hold socially connected stocks lead to a differential performance among institutional investors.

                                              [Insert Table 11 near here]


4.2    Within-Institution Performance Comparison
Although we do not find any significant performance difference between institutions that have a high
propensity to invest in connected firms and those with a low propensity, it is possible that these institu-
tions are also very different on many other dimensions. Therefore, we conduct a second test to examine
whether, for the same institution, holdings with high connectedness to the investor perform better than
holdings with low connectedness. This test is motivated by Coval and Moskowitz (2001), who show
that investors are better at picking stocks among firms that are geographically close by.
      More specifically, for each county i, we sort all other counties j that have a firm headquarter into
terciles by their connectedness to i. Next, we focus on institutions in county i and classify their stock
holdings into `low', `medium' and `high' connectedness portfolios based on the headquarter location of
each stock (e.g., we group all stocks in counties in the lowest tercile of connectedness to i). For each
institution, we also construct an institution-neutral, hedged, portfolio by taking a long position in the
`high' social connectedness portfolio and a short position in the `low' social connectedness portfolio.
We report average daily excess returns for each institution's sub-portfolios, as well as the daily risk
adjusted returns using the CAPM and Fama and French (2015) five-factor models.26 In Table 12, we
report average returns for sub-portfolios across institutions. Panel A shows that there is no significant
return difference between the `low' and `high' connectedness portfolios, suggesting that an institution's
connected holdings do not significantly outperform its non-connected holdings.
      Additionally, we also compare the returns of high social connectedness stocks held by institutions
with the returns of stocks in high social connectedness counties that the investors do not hold. This
comparison helps us identify whether institutions are successful in avoiding low-quality stocks from
counties they are socially connected to. We do not find that `high' connectedness portfolios held by
institutions outperform stocks in high connectedness counties that are not held by the institution.
      We also explore whether there exist performance differences between high-connectedness and low-
connectedness portfolios among those institutions that are most susceptible to invest in stocks they are
connected to (i.e., institutions in the top  SC decile, institutions with small AUM, and dedicated institu-
tions). In Panel B of Table 12, we report the average performance difference between high connectedness
and low connectedness sub-portfolios for each of these institution types, as well as between connected
stocks held by institutions and connected stocks not held by institutions. Columns 1 through 3 show
that there is no significant difference in excess returns, CAPM alpha, or Fama-French 5-factor adjusted
25 Table IA.4 shows that while there is some heterogeneity across Bushee (2001) types, these differences are not economically
   meaningful.
26 Similar to Section 4.1, the sub-portfolio returns are based on the value-weighted daily returns, with weights determined by

   the value of a stock's holding as of the end of the prior quarter.


                                                             20
alpha, respectively. Columns 4 through 6 show that, with the exception of dedicated institutions, even
among institutions heavily invested in socially connected stocks, there is no consistent evidence that
they can avoid selecting poorly-performing socially connected stocks.

                                                  [Insert Table 12 near here]

In summary, we find that institutions do not systematically benefit from investing in socially connected
stocks. Unlike the home bias literature (e.g., Coval and Moskowitz, 2001), which shows that mutual
funds may have an information advantage for local stocks, we find no evidence that institutional in-
vestors have an information edge through social connections as measured by Facebook relationships.
As a result, our results are more consistent with a story in which institutional investors' investments in
socially connected firms is primarily driven by awareness of firms rather than by superior information.27

5      Conclusion
A growing literature explores a variety of explanations for geographic disparities of economic outcomes
across the United States. We contribute to this literature by investigating how the geographic structure
of social networks shapes the allocation of capital to firms, and thereby contributes to differences in firm
outcomes. We find that, all else equal, institutional investors invest more in firms located in regions
to which they have stronger social ties. As a result, firms in regions that are socially proximate to
institutional capital have higher liquidity and higher valuations. We thus conclude that differences
in the social proximity to capital can be an important channel through which regional characteristics
affect economic opportunities for firms.

References
Aghion, Philippe, John Van Reenen, and Luigi Zingales, 2013, Innovation and institutional ownership,
    American economic review 103, 277­304.

Amihud, Yakov, 2002, Illiquidity and stock returns: cross-section and time-series effects, Journal of finan-
    cial markets 5, 31­56.

Baik, Bok, Jun-Koo Kang, and Jin-Mo Kim, 2010, Local institutional investors, information asymmetries,
    and equity returns, Journal of financial economics 97, 81­106.

Bailey, Michael, Rachel Cao, Theresa Kuchler, Johannes Stroebel, and Arlene Wong, 2018a, Social con-
    nectedness: Measurements, determinants, and effects, Journal of Economic Perspectives 32, 259­80.
27 Importantly,   though, our evidence does not mean that investors are unable to obtain information advantages through other
    social networks (such an effect was documented in Cohen et al., 2008; Hong et al., 2005; Hong and Xu, 2019; Pool et al., 2015).
    Rather, our findings suggest that the social network as characterized by Facebook friendship links represents a broader
    type of network that is intrinsically different from the network formed based on factors such as shared neighbourhood or
    education institutions. The finding that this broader type of network has both economically large and statistically significant
    impacts on institutions' portfolio decisions and equilibrium asset prices complements the prior literature on the role of social
    networks on financial markets. Similarly, Da et al. (2020) show that air travel reduces the effects of geographical proximity
    as well as local investment bias.




                                                                 21
Bailey, Michael, Ruiqing Cao, Theresa Kuchler, and Johannes Stroebel, 2018b, The economic effects of
  social networks: Evidence from the housing market, Journal of Political Economy 126, 2224­2276.

Bailey, Michael, Eduardo Dávila, Theresa Kuchler, and Johannes Stroebel, 2019a, House price beliefs and
  mortgage leverage choice, The Review of Economic Studies 86, 2403­2452.

Bailey, Michael, Patrick Farrell, Theresa Kuchler, and Johannes Stroebel, 2019b, Social connectedness in
  urban areas, NBER Working Paper .

Bailey, Michael, Abhinav Gupta, Sebastian Hillenbrand, Theresa Kuchler, Robert Richmond, and Jo-
  hannes Stroebel, 2020a, International trade and social connectedness, Working Paper .

Bailey, Michael, Drew Johnston, Theresa Kuchler, Johannes Stroebel, and Arlene Wong, 2019c, Peer
  effects in product adoption, Working Paper .

Bailey, Michael, Theresa Kuchler, Dominic Russel, Bogdan State, and Johannes Stroebel, 2020b, Social
  connectedness in Europe, Working Paper .

Bali, Turan, David Hirshleifer, Lin Peng, and Yi Tang, 2019, Attention, social interaction, and investor
  attraction to lottery stocks, Technical report, Working Paper.

Baum-Snow, Nathaniel, and Ronni Pavan, 2011, Understanding the city size wage gap, The Review of
  economic studies 79, 88­127.

Bernile, Gennaro, Alok Kumar, and Johan Sulaeman, 2015, Home away from home: Geography of in-
  formation and local investors, The Review of Financial Studies 28, 2009­2049.

Bernile, Gennaro, Alok Kumar, Johan Sulaeman, and Qin Wang, 2019, Has local informational advantage
  disappeared?, Review of Financial Economics 37, 38­60.

Blume, Marshall E, and Donald B Keim, 2012, Institutional investors and stock market liquidity: trends
  and relationships, Available at SSRN 2147757 .

Bushee, Brian J, 1998, The influence of institutional investors on myopic r&d investment behavior, Ac-
  counting review 305­333.

Bushee, Brian J, 2001, Do institutional investors prefer near-term earnings over long-run value?, Con-
  temporary Accounting Research 18, 207­246.

Chang, Suzanne, 2019, Local industry bias in investor behavior: Evidence from mutual funds, Working
  Paper .

Chung, Kiseo, 2018, Changing career incentives and risk-taking in the mutual fund industry, Working
  Paper .

Cohen, Lauren, Andrea Frazzini, and Christopher Malloy, 2008, The small world of investing: Board
  connections and mutual fund returns, Journal of Political Economy 116, 951­979.


                                                   22
Correia, Sergio, Paulo Guimarães, and Thomas Zylkin, 2019, Ppmlhdfe: Fast poisson estimation with
  high-dimensional fixed effects, arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.01690 .

Coval, Joshua D, and Tobias J Moskowitz, 1999, Home bias at home: Local equity preference in domestic
  portfolios, The Journal of Finance 54, 2045­2073.

Coval, Joshua D, and Tobias J Moskowitz, 2001, The geography of investment: Informed trading and
  asset prices, Journal of political Economy 109, 811­841.

Da, Zhi, Umit G. Gurun, Bin Li, and Mitch Warachka, 2020, Investment in a smaller world: The implica-
  tions of air travel for investors and firms, Management Science forthcoming.

Dougal, Casey, Christopher A Parsons, and Sheridan Titman, 2018, Urban vibrancy and firm value
  creation, Working Paper .

Duggan, Maeve, Shannon Greenwood, and Andrew Perrin, 2016, Social media update 2016. Pew Re-
  search Center.

Fama, Eugene F, and Kenneth R French, 2015, A five-factor asset pricing model, Journal of financial eco-
  nomics 116, 1­22.

Fang, Lily, and Joel Peress, 2009, Media coverage and the cross-section of stock returns, The Journal of
  Finance 64, 2023­2052.

Gompers, Paul A, and Andrew Metrick, 2001, Institutional investors and equity prices, The quarterly
  journal of Economics 116, 229­259.

Green, T Clifton, and Russell Jame, 2013, Company name fluency, investor recognition, and firm value,
  Journal of Financial Economics 109, 813­834.

Habib, Michel A, and Alexander Ljungqvist, 2005, Firm value and managerial incentives: a stochastic
  frontier approach, The Journal of Business 78, 2053­2094.

Hirshleifer, David, Lin Peng, and Wang Qiguang, 2019, Social interaction and market reaction to earn-
  ings news, Technical report, Working Paper.

Hong, Harrison, Jeffrey D Kubik, and Jeremy C Stein, 2004, Social interaction and stock-market partici-
  pation, The journal of finance 59, 137­163.

Hong, Harrison, Jeffrey D Kubik, and Jeremy C Stein, 2005, Thy neighbor's portfolio: Word-of-mouth
  effects in the holdings and trades of money managers, The Journal of Finance 60, 2801­2824.

Hong, Harrison, Terence Lim, and Jeremy C Stein, 2000, Bad news travels slowly: Size, analyst coverage,
  and the profitability of momentum strategies, The Journal of Finance 55, 265­295.

Hong, Harrison, and Jiangmin Xu, 2019, Inferring latent social networks from stock holdings, Journal of
  Financial Economics 131, 323­344.


                                                      23
Kuchler, Theresa, Dominic Russel, and Johannes Stroebel, 2020, The geographic spread of covid-19 cor-
  relates with structure of social networks as measured by facebook, Technical report, National Bureau
  of Economic Research.

Lehavy, Reuven, and Richard G Sloan, 2008, Investor recognition and stock returns, Review of Accounting
  Studies 13, 327­361.

Liu, Hong, and Yajun Wang, 2016, Market making with asymmetric information and inventory risk,
  Journal of Economic Theory 163, 73­109.

Merton, Robert C, 1987, A simple model of capital market equilibrium with incomplete information, The
  journal of finance 42, 483­510.

Moretti, Enrico, 2012, The new geography of jobs (Houghton Mifflin Harcourt).

Newey, Whitney K, and Kenneth D West, 1994, Automatic lag selection in covariance matrix estimation,
  The Review of Economic Studies 61, 631­653.

Pool, Veronika K, Noah Stoffman, and Scott E Yonker, 2012, No place like home: Familiarity in mutual
  fund manager portfolio choice, The Review of Financial Studies 25, 2563­2599.

Pool, Veronika K, Noah Stoffman, and Scott E Yonker, 2015, The people in your neighborhood: Social
  interactions and mutual fund portfolios, The Journal of Finance 70, 2679­2732.

Rehbein, Oliver, Simon Rother, et al., 2020, Distance in bank lending: The role of social networks, Tech-
  nical report, University of Bonn and University of Mannheim, Germany.

Rehse, Dominik, Ryan Riordan, Nico Rottke, and Joachim Zietz, 2019, The effects of uncertainty on
  market liquidity: Evidence from hurricane sandy, Journal of Financial Economics .

Rubin, Amir, 2007, Ownership level, ownership concentration and liquidity, Journal of financial Markets
  10, 219­248.

Russolillo, Steven, 2014, Traders brace for `frankenstorm', Wall Street Journal .

Scheinkman, Jose A, and Wei Xiong, 2003, Overconfidence and speculative bubbles, Journal of political
  Economy 111, 1183­1220.

Silva, JMC Santos, and Silvana Tenreyro, 2006, The log of gravity, The Review of Economics and statistics
  88, 641­658.




                                                     24
            Figure 1: Examples of Social Connectedness
4/25/2019                                                                            Social Connectedness Index
            This figure shows county-level heat maps of the social connectedness to San Francisco County, CA in Panel
                                                Social colors
            A, and Cook County, IL in Panel B. Darker    Connectedness    Index
                                                              indicate higher         World     US Counties
                                                                              social connectedness              US Counties & Worl
                                                                                                   with the indicated
            county.




                                                                                                                         50 miles: 2
                                                                                                                                  10




4/25/2019                                                                            Social Connectedness Index


                                               Social Connectedness Index         World     US Counties       US Counties & Worl
                                              Panel A: San Francisco County, CA

                                                                                                                    Top Connec
                                                                                                                    (with popu

                                                                                                                    1     San Fran

                                                                                                                    2     San Mate

                                                                                                                    3     Marin CA
                                                                                                                    4     Alameda

                                                                                                                    5     Contra C
                                                                                                                    6     New York

                                                                                                                    7     Santa Cl
                                                                                                                    8     Yolo CA

                                                                                                                    9     Santa Cr

                                                                                                                    10    Sonoma C
                                                                                                                    11    Solano C
                                             Panel B: Cook County, IL (Chicago)
                                                             25
https://home.fburl.com/~tanykim/sci-test/
                                                                                                                    Top Connec
                                                                                                                    (with popu

                                                                                                                    1     Cook IL
Figure 2: Binscatter Plot

To produce these binned scatter plots, Log Social Connectedness as of June 2016 is sorted into 50 bins.
For each bin, the conditional mean of Log Social Connectedness and conditional mean of the dependent
variable, Log % PF, is plotted as a scatter point. Each panel also includes the line of best fit from an OLS
regression. In the left panel, we include firm fixed effects, institution × industry fixed effects, same state
fixed effects, and same county fixed effects. We further include 500-tile distance dummies as our distance
control in the right panel.




                                                     26
Figure 3: Heat Map of Social Proximity to Capital

This figure plots the heat map of Social Proximity to Capital across U.S. counties as of June 2016. Social
Proximity to Capital of county j is defined as i County AUMi × Social Connectednessi, j . Regions in red
have higher levels of Social Proximity to Capital and regions in blue indicate lower levels of Social Proxim-
ity to Capital.




                                                     27
Table 1: Summary Statistics
This table reports summary statistics for our key variables. Summary statistics for the firm-institution
level variables as of June 2016 are presented in Panel A. Social Connectedness is defined as the number
of Facebook links between a firm's headquarters' county and an institution's headquarters' county, scaled
by the product of the populations in these two counties (multiplied by 1012 ). Log Social Connectedness
is defined as log(Social Connectedness). Distance is the distance in miles between a firm's headquarters'
county and an institution's headquarters' county. Log Distance is defined as log(1+Distance). % PF is
the percentage of AUM allocated to a stock, where AUM is measured by the value of the institution's
equity holdings. If an institution does not report holding in a given firm, % PF is assigned 0. Summary
statistics for the firm-level variables are presented in Panel B. Our firm-level sample spans from June 2007
to December 2016. % TIO measures the percentage ownership by all institutions, defined as the number
of shares owned by all institutions, divided by the firm's shares outstanding. Social Proximity to Capital is
log((County AUM × Social Connectedness)), where County AUM is measured in millions of US dollars
                                                                                                 County AUM
and the summation is taken across all U.S. counties. Physical Proximity to Capital is log(( 1+Distance ))
summed across all U.S. counties. ILLIQ is the Amihud (2002) illiquidity measure at the quarterly horizon
(scaled up by 106 ). Effective Spread is the dollar-weighted percentage effective spread (scaled up by 103 ).
Tobin's Q is the ratio of market value and replacement cost of assets. M/B is defined as the ratio of market
value of equity and book value of equity. Summary statistics for institutional investors based on their
institution type are presented in Panel C. Institution type is based on Bushee (2001). The statistics reported
in this panel are based on the cross section of June 2016. We report the number of institutions in each
institution type, as well as the distribution institutional investors' AUM. Refer to Appendix A.1 for detailed
variable definitions. Our sample includes institutions and firms located in the contiguous states of the U.S.
(i.e., excluding those located in PR, VI, AK, and HI). We also require an institution to hold at least five
different stocks. We study common stocks listed on NYSE, NASDAQ, and NYSE MKT (formerly AMEX).
We exclude penny stocks (Price< $5).


                       Panel A: Institution-Firm Pair Observations (as of Jun 2016)
               Variables                 MEAN      ST. DEV       P5      P10     MEDIAN        P90     P95
  Log Social Connectedness                6.06        1.29      4.45     4.71       5.84       7.53    8.40
  Log Distance                            6.52        1.37      3.96     5.09       6.82       7.80    7.84
  % PF                                    0.04        0.50        0        0          0          0     0.01


                             Panel B: Firm-level Variables (from 2007 to 2016)
               Variables                 MEAN      ST. DEV       P5      P10     MEDIAN        P90     P95
  % TIO                                   58.63      27.62       4.09   14.10      65.18      90.09    95.54
  Log ILLIQ                               -5.38       3.16      -9.75   -9.06      -5.79      -1.07    1.06
  Log Effective Spread                     1.02       1.19      -0.67   -0.39       0.88       2.75     3.24
  Log M/B                                  0.70       0.89      -0.49   -0.25       0.57       1.79     2.25
  Log Tobin's Q                            0.44       0.56      -0.15   -0.06       0.30       1.22     1.55
  Log Social Proximity to Capital         23.08       1.13      21.49   21.82      22.94      24.51    25.65
  Log Physical Proximity to Capital       10.93       1.47       9.08    9.35      10.65      13.01    14.37




                                                     28
Table 1: (Continued)

              Panel C: Institution Characteristics, by Institution Type
                                                      AUM (Million USD)
 Institution Type      N   Mean      ST. DEV          P5   P10     Median       P90        P95
 Dedicated           75    4215.57   16124.16        52.61    85.05   565.09   6982.40    8345.77
 Quasi-Indexer      1741   5624.85   44621.73        28.98   58.00    292.18   4626.11   14066.13
 Transient           724   4182.23   47348.04        15.28   31.97    344.69   4308.45    9305.58
 Not Identified      543   272.289    1107.78         7.47   15.315    88.42    373.35     721.91




                                                29
     Table 2: Social Connectedness and Institutional Investment
     This table shows the results on how social connectedness affects institutional investors' portfolio decisions. They are obtained using Poisson
     Pseudo Maximum Likelihood (PPML) estimators. Our sample includes all firm-institution pairs in June 2016. The dependent variable is
     % PF defined as the percentage of AUM allocated to a stock. If an institution does not report holdings in a given firm, % PF is assigned
     0. Log Social Connectedness is defined as log(Social Connectedness), where Social Connectedness the number of Facebook links between a
     firm's headquarters' county and an institution's headquarters' county, scaled by the product of the populations in these two counties. We
     also consider Social Connectedness Quintile indicators as independent variables. Log Distance is log(1+Distance), where Distance mea-
     sures the distance in miles between a firm's headquarters' county and an institution's headquarters' county. We consider Firm, Institution,
     Institution×Industry, Distance 500-tile, Same County, and Same State fixed effects. Same County (Same State) is a dummy variable equal
     to one if the institution and the firm are located in the same county (state) and zero otherwise. Distance 500-tile indicators are 500 dummy
     variables indicating the quantile of the distance between the firm and the institution based on all firm-institution pairs as of June 2016. Refer
     to Appendix A.1 for detailed variable definitions. Industry classification is based on Fama-French 48 industries. Standard errors are double
     clustered by institution and firm, and t-statistics are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate significance levels of 10%, 5%, and 1%,
     respectively.


                                                                (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)



                 Log Social Connectedness                     0.189***   0.189***                0.253***    0.321***    0.314***
30




                                                               (13.21)    (14.97)                 (10.65)     (12.89)     (11.78)

                 Log Distance                                                        -0.107***   0.054***
                                                                                      (-9.93)     (2.94)

                 Social Connectedness Quintile = 2 (Low)                                                                              0.041*
                                                                                                                                      (1.79)

                 Social Connectedness Quintile = 3                                                                                   0.152***
                                                                                                                                      (5.07)

                 Social Connectedness Quintile = 4                                                                                   0.270***
                                                                                                                                      (6.46)

                 Social Connectedness Quintile = 5 (High)                                                                            0.466***
                                                                                                                                      (8.02)

                 Firm FE                                       YES         YES         YES         YES         YES         YES         YES
                 Institution FE                                YES         NO          NO          NO          NO          NO          NO
                 Institution × Industry FE                     NO          YES         YES         YES         YES         YES         YES
                 Distance 500-tile FE                          NO          NO          NO          NO          YES         YES         YES
                 Same State FE                                 NO          NO          NO          NO          NO          YES         YES
                 Same County FE                                NO          NO          NO          NO          NO          YES         YES

                 N                                           8,694,060   8,694,060   8,694,060   8,694,060   8,694,060   8,694,060   8,694,060
                 Pseudo R2                                     0.320       0.506       0.504       0.506       0.508       0.508       0.507
Table 3: Social Connectedness and Institutional Investment: by Institution Characteristics
This table shows the result on how the effect of social connectedness varies by institutional investors' char-
acteristics. The dependent variables is % PF, defined as the percentage of institutional AUM allocated to a
stock. In Panel A, we report results on the heterogeneity across Bushee (2001) institution type. We interact
Log Social Connectedness with Bushee-type dummies (Dedicated, Quasi-Indexer, and Transient). Institu-
tions without a Bushee type are dropped from this sample. In Panel B, we report results on the heterogene-
ity across institution size terciles. We interact Log Social Connectedness with dummy variables based on
institution AUM terciles. Log Social Connectedness is defined as log(Social Connectedness), where Social
Connectedness is the number of Facebook links between a firm's headquarters' county and an institution's
headquarters county, scaled by the product of the populations in these two counties. We consider Log Dis-
tance, defined as log(1+Distance), as a control. We consider Firm, Institution×Industry, Distance 500-tile,
Same County, and Same State fixed effects, interacted with the respective institutional characteristics dum-
mies. Same County (Same State) is a dummy variable equal to one if the institution and the firm are located
in the same county (same state) and zero otherwise. Distance 500-tile indicators indicate the quantile of the
distance between the firm and the institution based on all firm-institution pairs as of June 2016. Refer to Ap-
pendix A.1 for detailed variable definitions. Industry classification is based on Fama-French 48 industries.
Standard errors are double clustered by institution and firm, and t-statistics are reported in parentheses.
***, **, and * indicate significance levels of 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.



  Panel A: Heterogeneity across Bushee Institution Types
                                                              (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)



  Transient × Log Social Connectedness                     0.116***     0.128***     0.177***      0.175***
                                                            (6.78)       (4.19)       (5.11)        (4.77)

  Quasi-Indexer × Log Social Connectedness                 0.206***     0.286***     0.334***      0.331***
                                                            (15.46)      (11.64)      (12.34)       (11.50)

  Dedicated × Log Social Connectedness                     0.332***     0.345**      0.634***      0.714***
                                                            (4.86)       (2.45)       (4.43)        (4.82)
  Institution Type × Firm FE                                 YES          YES           YES          YES
  Institution × Industry FE                                  YES          YES           YES          YES
  Institution Type × Log Distance                            NO           YES           NO           NO
  Institution Type × Distance 500-tile FE                    NO           NO            YES          YES
  Institution Type × Same County FE                          NO           NO            NO           YES
  Institution Type × Same State FE                           NO           NO            NO           YES

  F Test (No Heterogeneity)                                 27.9***     20.23***      19.89***     21.09***
  N                                                        7,162,800   7,162,800     7,162,800    7,162,800
  Pseudo R2                                                  0.536       0.537         0.544        0.544




                                                      31
Table 3: (Continued)
  Panel B: Heterogeneity across Institution AUM Groups
                                                 (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)



  Small AUM × Log Social Connectedness       0.253***    0.300***    0.357***    0.344***
                                              (14.05)     (8.35)      (9.20)      (8.22)

  Mid AUM × Log Social Connectedness         0.183***    0.256***    0.322***    0.309***
                                              (10.64)     (7.71)      (8.75)      (7.86)

  Large AUM × Log Social Connectedness       0.120***    0.195***    0.263***    0.267***
                                              (7.09)      (6.34)      (7.20)      (6.93)


  Institution Type × Firm FE                     YES       YES         YES         YES
  Institution × Industry FE                      YES       YES         YES         YES
  Institution Type × Log Distance                NO        YES         NO          NO
  Institution Type × Distance 500-tile FE        NO        NO          YES         YES
  Institution Type × Same County FE              NO        NO          NO          YES
  Institution Type × Same State FE               NO        NO          NO          YES

  F Test (Small = Large)                      38.18***    6.71***      3.50**       2.14
  N                                          8,694,060   8,694,060   8,694,060   8,694,060
  Pseudo R2                                    0.522       0.522       0.527       0.527




                                            32
Table 4: Social Connectedness and Institutional Investment: by Firm Characteristics
This table shows the result on how the effect of social connectedness varies with firm characteristics. The
dependent variables is % PF, defined as the percentage of institutional AUM allocated to a stock. In Panel A,
we report results on the heterogeneity across firms size. We interact Log Social Connectedness with dummy
variables based on firm size terciles. In Panel B, we report results on the heterogeneity across firms' analyst
coverage. We interact Log Social Connectedness with dummy variables based on firm analyst coverage
terciles. Log Social Connectedness is defined as log(Social Connectedness), where Social Connectedness is
defined as the number of Facebook links between a firm's headquarters' county and an institution's head-
quarters county, scaled by the product of the populations in these two counties. We consider Log Distance,
defined as log(1+Distance), as a control. We consider Firm, Institution×Industry, Distance 500-tile, Same
County, and Same State fixed effects, interacted with the respective firm characteristics dummies. Same
County (Same State) is a dummy variable equal to one if the institution and the firm are located in the same
county (same state) and zero otherwise. Distance 500-tile indicators indicate the quantile of the distance be-
tween the firm and the institution based on all firm-institution pairs as of June 2016. Refer to Appendix A.1
for detailed variable definitions. Industry classification is based on Fama-French 48 industries. Standard
errors are double clustered by institution and firm, and t-statistics are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and *
indicate significance levels of 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.



  Panel A: Heterogeneity across Firm Size Groups
                                                            (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)



  Small Cap × Log Social Connectedness                   0.351***      0.421***       0.536***      0.553***
                                                          (7.08)        (4.34)         (6.24)        (6.13)

  Mid Cap × Log Social Connectedness                     0.327***      0.483***       0.539***      0.548***
                                                          (13.11)       (10.43)        (10.45)       (10.22)

  Large Cap × Log Social Connectedness                   0.174***      0.224***       0.276***      0.268***
                                                          (13.10)       (8.99)         (10.65)       (9.71)

  Firm FE                                                   YES          YES            YES            YES
  Firm Type × Institution × Industry FE                     YES          YES            YES            YES
  Firm Type × Log Distance                                  NO           YES            NO             NO
  Firm Type × Distance 500-tile FE                          NO           NO             YES            YES
  Firm Type × Same County FE                                NO           NO             NO             YES
  Firm Type × Same State FE                                 NO           NO             NO             YES

  F Test (Small = Large)                                 37.61***      26.05***       25.48***       26.84***
  N                                                     8,694,060     8,694,060      8,694,060      8,694,030
  Pseudo R2                                               0.565         0.565          0.570          0.570




                                                       33
Table 4: (Continued)
 Panel B: Heterogeneity by Analyst Coverage Groups
                                                    (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)



 Low Coverage × Log Social Connectedness         0.393***    0.532***    0.681***    0.737***
                                                  (9.61)      (7.94)      (9.47)      (9.37)

 Mid Coverage × Log Social Connectedness         0.290***    0.429***    0.447***    0.442***
                                                  (13.84)     (11.32)     (9.79)      (9.20)

 High Coverage × Log Social Connectedness        0.162***    0.214***    0.265***    0.253***
                                                  (12.13)     (8.60)      (10.40)     (9.37)


 Firm FE                                           YES         YES         YES         YES
 Firm Size Tercile × Institution× Industry FE      YES         YES         YES         YES
 Firm Type × Log Distance                          NO          YES         NO          NO
 Firm Type × Distance 500-tile FE                  NO          NO          YES         YES
 Firm Type × Same County FE                        NO          NO          NO          YES
 Firm Type × Same State FE                         NO          NO          NO          YES

 F Test (Low=High)                                47.01***    34.98***    35.93***    39.97***
 N                                               8,694,060   8,694,060   8,694,060   8,694,060
 Pseudo R2                                         0.577       0.577       0.583       0.583




                                            34
     Table 5: Social Connectedness and Individual Mutual Fund Investment, with Fund Manager Characteristics
     This table shows the results on how the effect of social connectedness on fund investments varies by mutual fund managers' characteristics.
     Our sample includes fund-firm pairs as of June 2016, including 367 actively managed U.S. domestic equity mutual funds and 2,701 unique
     firms. The dependent variable is % PF defined as the percentage of fund AUM allocated to a stock. Social Connectedness is defined
     as the number of Facebook links between a firm's headquarters' county and a fund's headquarters' county, scaled by the product of the
     populations in these two counties. Log Social Connectedness is defined as log(Social Connectedness). Column 1 shows the result from the
     baseline regression. In columns 2 to 4, we interact Log Social Connectedness with various fund manager characteristics. Column 2 reports
     results on the heterogeneity across fund managers' age, where we split the 341 funds with age information into two groups by median age
     of the management team. In column 3, we split the 367 funds into two groups by whether the fund is (co-)managed by a female manager.
     In column 4, we split the 367 funds into two groups by whether more than 50% of the management team has an MBA degree. We consider
     Firm, Fund×Industry, Distance 500-tile, Same County, and Same State fixed effects. Same County (Same State) is a dummy variable equal
     to one if the fund and the firm are located in the same county (same state) and zero otherwise. Distance 500-tile fixed effects indicate the
     quantile of the distance between the firm and the fund based on all fund-firm pairs as of June 2016. Refer to Appendix A.1 for detailed
     variable definitions. Industry classification is based on Fama-French 48 industries. In columns 2 to 4, we also interact fixed effects and
     controls with the indicators for the split (denoted as "SPLIT"). Standard errors are double clustered by fund and firm, and t-statistics are
     reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate significance levels of 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.



                                    (1)                      (2)                                    (3)                                 (4)
                                  Whole                     Age                                   Gender                             Education
35




      Log Social Connectedness    0.126***
                                   (2.96)

                                             × Young        0.052        × Male only              0.106**        × MBA Minority       0.100**
                                                            (1.23)                                 (2.27)                              (2.15)

      Log Social Connectedness               × Old         0.132**       × Female on Team         0.170**        × MBA Majority       0.100**
                                                            (2.45)                                 (2.34)                              (2.38)

      Fund × Industry FE           YES                       YES                                    YES                                 YES
      Firm FE                      YES                 YES × AGE SPLIT                      YES × GENDER SPLIT                    YES × MBA SPLIT
      Distance 500-TILE FE         YES                 YES × AGE SPLIT                      YES × GENDER SPLIT                    YES × MBA SPLIT
      Same County FE               YES                 YES × AGE SPLIT                      YES × GENDER SPLIT                    YES × MBA SPLIT
      Same State FE                YES                 YES × AGE SPLIT                      YES × GENDER SPLIT                    YES × MBA SPLIT

      F Test (No Heterogeneity)                              1.38                                   0.55                               0.38
      N                           991,267                  921,041                                991,267                             991,267
      Pseudo R2                    0.409                    0.430                                  0.425                               0.429
Table 6: Identification Using Panel Data
This table shows the results on how social connectedness affects institutional investors' portfolio decisions
using a panel data. The sample used in columns 1 to 3 represents institutional holdings from June 2007
to December 2016. We eliminate firms that have not changed headquarters during the sample period in
column 4. We further restrict the sample to holdings at three year (i.e., 12 quarters) before and after a
change in headquarters in column 5. The dependent variable is % PF, which is defined as the percentage
of AUM allocated to a stock. Social Connectedness is defined as the number of Facebook links between a
firm's headquarters' county and an institution's headquarters' county, scaled by the product of the popu-
lations in these two counties. Log Social Connectedness is defined as log(Social Connectedness). We con-
sider Firm×Quarter, Institution×Quarter, Institution×Industry, Firm×Institution, Distance 500-tile, Same
County, and Same State fixed effects. Same County (Same State) is a dummy variable equal to one if the in-
stitution and the firm are located in the same county (state) and zero otherwise. Distance 500-tile indicators
that indicate the quantile of the distance between the firm and the institution based on all firm-institution
pairs as of June 2016. Refer to Appendix A.1 for detailed variable definitions. Industry classification is
based on the Fama-French 48 industries. Standard errors are clustered by institution, firm and quarter,
and t-statistics are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate significance levels of 10%, 5%, and 1%,
respectively.



                                        (1)               (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)

  Log Social Connectedness           0.180***        0.286***        0.276***        0.069**      0.381***
                                      (15.86)         (12.48)         (11.21)         (2.11)       (3.51)

  Firm × Quarter FE                     YES            YES             YES            NO            NO
  Institution × Quarter FE              YES            YES             YES            YES           YES
  Firm × Institution FE                 NO             NO              NO             YES           YES
  Institution × Industry FE             YES            YES             YES            NO            NO
  Distance 500-tile FE                  NO             YES             YES            YES           YES
  Same State FE                         NO             NO              YES            YES           YES
  Same County FE                        NO             NO              YES            YES           YES

  N                                 2.881 × 108    2.881 × 108     2.881 × 108     34,867,427     1,162,997
  Pseudo R2                            0.441          0.442           0.442           0.857         0.997




                                                     36
     Table 7: Firms' Social Proximity to Capital and Institutional Ownership
     This table presents the panel regression results on how firms' social proximity to institutional capital affects their institutional ownership.
     Our sample consists of firms' quarterly institutional holding data from 2007 to 2016. The dependent variable is total intentional ownership
     (% TIO ), which is the percentage of shares outstanding held by institutional investors. The main independent variable is Log Social Prox-
     imity to Capital, where Social Proximity to Capital is defined as  County AUM × Social Connectedness. County AUM is measured in
     millions of US dollars and the summation is taken across all U.S. counties. Additional firm controls include Log Assets, Log M/B, Volatility,
     Momentum, Turnover, Lag Price, R&D, Yield, S&P, Age, Advertising, and Exchange dummies. Additional county controls include Log
     Physical Proximity to Capital, Education, Income, and Unemployment. Refer to Appendix A.1 for detailed variable definitions. The re-
     gressions also include Quarter, State, Industry, and Quarter × Industry fixed effects. Industry fixed effects are based on the Fama-French
     48 industry classification. Columns 3 and 4 exhibit the results on the heterogeneity across firm size terciles. Firm size terciles are based on
     firms' market capitalization at the end of the prior quarter. Columns 5 and 6 exhibit the results on the heterogeneity across analyst coverage
     terciles, where we rank firms into terciles based on the number of analysts covering a firm at the end of the prior quarter end. Standard errors
     are double clustered by quarter and firm, and t-statistics are reported in parentheses below each estimate. ***, **, and * indicate significance
     level of 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.



                                                     (1)       (2)            (3)                   (4)              (5)                 (6)

                                                    Whole Sample                    Split by Size                  Split by Analyst Coverage
37




      Log Social Proximity to Capital              1.872**   1.870**
                                                    (2.13)    (2.14)

      Low × Log Social Proximity to Capital                                 2.121**             2.145**            2.203**             2.134**
                                                                             (2.28)              (2.32)             (2.33)              (2.28)

      Mid × Log Social Proximity to Capital                                 -0.041              -0.114              0.763               0.718
                                                                            (-0.04)             (-0.11)             (0.83)              (0.78)

      High × Log Social Proximity to Capital                                -0.488              -0.418              0.411               0.525
                                                                            (-0.50)             (-0.44)             (0.42)              (0.55)

      Firm Controls                                 YES       YES           YES                 YES                YES                 YES
      County Controls                               YES       YES           YES                 YES                YES                 YES
      Quarter FE                                    YES       NO       YES × TERCILE            NO            YES × TERCILE            NO
      Industry FE                                   YES       NO       YES × TERCILE            NO            YES × TERCILE            NO
      State FE                                      YES       YES      YES × TERCILE       YES × TERCILE      YES × TERCILE       YES × TERCILE
      Quarter × Industry FE                         NO        YES           NO             YES × TERCILE           NO             YES × TERCILE

      F Test (Null: Low=High)                                              7.438***             7.256**             3.279*             2.698
      N                                            97,976    97,967         97,976              97,622              97,975             97,603
      R2                                            0.357     0.371          0.431               0.454               0.438              0.461
     Table 8: Social Proximity to Capital and Firm Value
     This table presents the panel regression result on how firms' social proximity to institutional capital affects their valuation. Our sample
     includes quarterly observations of firm valuation from 2007 to 2016. The dependent variables are Log M/B in Panel A and Log Tobin's Q in
     Panel B. The main independent variable is Log Social Proximity to Capital, where Social Proximity to Capital is defined as  County AUM
     × Social Connectedness, where County AUM is measured in millions of US dollars and the summation is taken across all U.S. counties.
     Additional firm controls include Log Assets, Profitability, Asset Growth, Asset Turnover, R&D, Advertising, Leverage, Payout, S&P, Age,
     and Exchange dummies. Additional county controls include Log Physical Proximity to Capital, Education, Income, and Unemployment.
     Refer to Appendix A.1 for detailed variable definitions. The regressions also include Quarter, State, Industry, and Quarter × Industry fixed
     effects. Industry fixed effects are based on the Fama-French 48 industry classification. Columns 3 and 4 exhibit the results on heterogeneity
     across firm size terciles. Firm size terciles are based on firms' market capitalization at the end of the prior quarter. Columns 5 and 6 exhibit
     the results on heterogeneity across analyst coverage terciles, where we rank firms into terciles based on the number of analysts covering a
     firm at the end of the prior quarter. Standard errors are double clustered by quarter and firm, and t-statistics are reported in parentheses
     below each estimate. ***, **, and * indicate significance level of 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.



      Panel A: Social Proximity to Capital and Market-to-Book
                                                     (1)        (2)            (3)                   (4)              (5)                (6)

                                                    Whole Sample                     Split by Size                 Split by Analyst Coverage
38




      Log Social Proximity to Capital             0.111***   0.108***
                                                   (4.11)     (4.03)

      Low × Log Social Proximity to Capital                                 0.078***             0.078***          0.088***            0.086***
                                                                             (3.10)               (3.12)            (3.19)              (3.18)

      Mid × Log Social Proximity to Capital                                  0.054**             0.055**           0.095***            0.093***
                                                                              (2.28)              (2.34)            (3.48)              (3.49)

      High × Log Social Proximity to Capital                                 0.062**             0.058**            0.048               0.039
                                                                              (2.20)              (2.09)            (1.62)              (1.34)

      Firm Controls                                 YES        YES           YES                 YES                YES                YES
      County Controls                               YES        YES           YES                 YES                YES                YES
      Quarter FE                                    YES        NO       YES × TERCILE            NO            YES × TERCILE           NO
      Industry FE                                   YES        NO       YES × TERCILE            NO            YES × TERCILE           NO
      State FE                                      YES        YES      YES × TERCILE       YES × TERCILE      YES × TERCILE      YES × TERCILE
      Quarter × Industry FE                         NO         YES           NO             YES × TERCILE           NO            YES × TERCILE

      F Test (Null: Low=High)                                                 0.283               0.485              1.665               2.346
      N                                            95,183     95,172         95,183              94,827             95,183              94,800
      R2                                           0.294      0.315          0.496               0.522              0.394               0.428
     Table 8: (Continued)

      Panel B: Social Proximity to Capital and Tobin's Q
                                                  (1)        (2)           (3)                      (4)          (5)               (6)

                                                 Whole Sample                      Split by Size               Split by Analyst Coverage


      Log Social Proximity to Capital           0.057***   0.056***
                                                 (3.48)     (3.41)

      Low × Log Social Proximity to Capital                              0.036**               0.036**         0.047***         0.045***
                                                                          (2.49)                (2.50)          (2.96)           (2.94)

      Mid × Log Social Proximity to Capital                              0.034**               0.035**         0.044***          0.043**
                                                                          (2.29)                (2.34)          (2.74)            (2.71)

      High × Log Social Proximity to Capital                             0.037**                   0.033*       0.029            0.023
                                                                          (2.08)                   (1.91)       (1.57)           (1.28)
39




      Firm Controls                              YES        YES            YES                 YES               YES             YES
      County Controls                            YES        YES            YES                 YES               YES             YES
      Quarter FE                                 YES        NO        YES × TERCILE            NO           YES × TERCILE        NO
      Industry FE                                YES        NO        YES × TERCILE            NO           YES × TERCILE        NO
      State FE                                   YES        YES       YES × TERCILE       YES × TERCILE     YES × TERCILE   YES × TERCILE
      Quarter × Industry FE                      NO         YES            NO             YES × TERCILE          NO         YES × TERCILE

      F Test (Null: Low=High)                                              0.006                   0.017        0.931            1.494
      N                                         95,182     95,171         95,182                   94,826       95,182           94,799
      R2                                        0.333      0.354          0.552                    0.576        0.437            0.469
     Table 9: Social Proximity to Capital and Stock Liquidity
     We study how firms' social proximity to institutional capital affects their stock liquidity using panel regressions. Our sample covers quarterly
     stock liquidity variables from 2007 to 2016. The dependent variable is Log Effective Spread in Panel A, where Effective Spread is the
     quarterly average of daily percentage effective spread. The dependent variable is Log ILLIQ in Panel B, where ILLIQ is the quarterly average
     of Amihud (2002) illiquidity measure defined as daily absolute return, divided by dollar volume (scaled up by 106 ). The main independent
     variable is Log Social Proximity to Capital, where Social Proximity to Capital is defined as  County AUM × Social Connectedness. County
     AUM is measured in millions of US dollars and the summation is taken across all U.S. counties. Additional firm controls include Log
     Assets, Log M/B, Volatility, Momentum, Turnover, Lag Price, R&D, Yield, S&P, Age, Advertising, and Exchange dummies. Additional
     county controls include Log Physical Proximity to Capital, Education, Income, and Unemployment. Refer to Appendix A.1 for detailed
     variable definitions. The regressions also include Quarter, State, Industry, and Quarter × Industry fixed effects. Industry fixed effects are
     based on the Fama-French 48 industry classification. Columns 3 and 4 exhibit the results on the heterogeneity across firm size terciles.
     Firm size terciles are based on firms' market capitalization at the end of the previous quarter. Columns 5 and 6 exhibit the results on the
     heterogeneity across analyst coverage terciles, where we rank firms into terciles based on the number of analysts covering the firm at the
     end of the prior quarter. Standard errors are double clustered by quarter and firm, and t-statistics are reported in parentheses below each
     estimate. ***, **, and * indicate significance level of 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.


      Panel A: Social Proximity to Capital and Effective Spread
                                                     (1)         (2)            (3)                     (4)           (5)                 (6)
40




                                                    Whole Sample                       Split by Size                Split by Analyst Coverage

      Log Social Proximity to Capital             -0.086***   -0.083***
                                                   (-4.17)     (-4.02)

      Low × Log Social Proximity to Capital                                  -0.075***            -0.072***        -0.093***           -0.088***
                                                                              (-3.47)              (-3.39)          (-4.28)             (-4.09)

      Mid × Log Social Proximity to Capital                                  -0.046**              -0.044**        -0.072***           -0.069***
                                                                              (-2.57)               (-2.42)         (-4.01)             (-3.84)

      High × Log Social Proximity to Capital                                  0.025                    0.025        -0.000              0.002
                                                                              (1.36)                   (1.39)       (-0.02)             (0.10)

      Firm Controls                                 YES         YES            YES                 YES               YES                YES
      County Controls                               YES         YES            YES                 YES               YES                YES
      Quarter FE                                    YES         NO        YES × TERCILE            NO           YES × TERCILE           NO
      Industry FE                                   YES         NO        YES × TERCILE            NO           YES × TERCILE           NO
      State FE                                      YES         YES       YES × TERCILE       YES × TERCILE     YES × TERCILE      YES × TERCILE
      Quarter × Industry FE                         NO          YES            NO             YES × TERCILE          NO            YES × TERCILE

      F Test (Null: Low=High)                                                20.280***            19.893***        15.068***          14.326****
      N                                            98,908      98,899         98,908               98,559           98,907              98,537
      R2                                           0.771       0.780           0.832                0.843            0.825              0.836
     Table 9: (Continued)

      Panel B: Social Proximity to Capital and Illiquidity
                                                    (1)         (2)            (3)                       (4)           (5)              (6)

                                                   Whole Sample                        Split by Size                Split by Analyst Coverage


      Log Social Proximity to Capital            -0.271***   -0.265***
                                                  (-4.68)     (-4.62)

      Low × Log Social Proximity to Capital                                 -0.243***             -0.241***         -0.276***        -0.266***
                                                                             (-3.52)               (-3.51)           (-4.09)          (-3.95)

      Mid × Log Social Proximity to Capital                                 -0.098**               -0.097**         -0.177***        -0.171***
                                                                             (-2.14)                (-2.13)          (-3.88)          (-3.77)

      High × Log Social Proximity to Capital                                 -0.010                    -0.007       -0.083*           -0.077*
                                                                             (-0.22)                   (-0.16)      (-1.92)           (-1.80)
41




      Firm Controls                                YES         YES            YES                  YES                YES             YES
      County Controls                              YES         YES            YES                  YES                YES             YES
      Quarter FE                                   YES         NO        YES × TERCILE             NO            YES × TERCILE        NO
      Industry FE                                  YES         NO        YES × TERCILE             NO            YES × TERCILE        NO
      State FE                                     YES         YES       YES × TERCILE        YES × TERCILE      YES × TERCILE   YES × TERCILE
      Quarter × Industry FE                        NO          YES            NO              YES × TERCILE           NO         YES × TERCILE

      F Test (Null: Low=High)                                                12.691                    12.939         7.902            7.590
      N                                           99,406      99,397         99,406                    99,058        99,405           99,037
      R2                                           0.794       0.800          0.850                     0.856         0.846            0.853
     Table 10: The Effect of Social Proximity to Capital during Hurricane Sandy
     We analyze cross-sectional differences in the impact of Hurricane Sandy on the liquidity of firms with various levels of social proximity to
     institutional capital in the Mid-Atlantic area. The sample ranges from Jan, 2012 to Jul, 2013. The dependent variable is daily Log Effective
     Spread. The key variable of interest is the interaction between the Sandy indicator and Affected Capital Ratio. I(Sandy) is an indicator
     variable equal to one during the affected period defined as Oct 22, 2012 to Nov 07, 2012. Affected Capital Ratio is defined as the Social
     Proximity to the Mid Atlantic Capital, divided by Social Proximity to Capital. We fix this ratio as of the quarter prior to Sandy (i.e. the third
     quarter of 2012). We consider the control variables included in Table 9 and the Affected Ownership Ratio and their interaction with the
     Sandy indicator. Refer to Appendix A.1 for detailed variable definitions. We also control for firm fixed effects. In addition, we consider Day,
     Industry, State, Day × Industry fixed effects. Columns 6 and 7 exhibit the result on heterogeneity across firm size terciles. Firm size terciles
     are based on firms' market capitalization at the end of the prior quarter. Columns 8 and 9 exhibit the results on the heterogeneity across
     analyst coverage terciles, where we rank firms into terciles based on the number of analysts covering the firm at the end of the prior quarter.
     Firms in Eastern states are excluded. We report t-statistics based on robust standard errors clustered by firm and week in the parentheses
     below. ***, **, and * indicate significance level of 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.



                                                   (1)        (2)        (3)       (4)       (5)          (6)                      (7)          (8)               (9)

                                                                    Whole Sample                                  Split by Size               Split by Analyst Coverage
      I(Sandy) × Affected Capital Ratio          0.240***   0.240**    0.220**   0.203**   0.200**
                                                  (2.64)     (2.63)     (2.64)    (2.30)    (2.56)
42




      Low × I(Sandy) × Affected Capital Ratio                                                            0.353                    0.343*      0.472**          0.495***
                                                                                                         (1.58)                   (1.82)       (2.21)           (2.81)

      Med × I(Sandy) × Affected Capital Ratio                                                            0.190                    0.054        0.034            -0.042
                                                                                                         (1.17)                   (0.34)       (0.38)           (-0.36)

      High × I(Sandy) × Affected Capital Ratio                                                           0.041                    0.088        0.092            0.178**
                                                                                                         (0.36)                   (0.81)       (1.24)            (2.26)

      Control × Sandy FE                          NO         NO         NO         YES      YES           YES                 YES               YES             YES
      Firm FE                                     YES        YES        YES        YES      YES           YES                 YES               YES             YES
      Day FE                                      YES        YES        NO         YES      NO       YES × TERCILE            NO           YES × TERCILE        NO
      Industry FE                                 NO         YES        NO         YES      NO       YES × TERCILE            NO           YES × TERCILE        NO
      State FE                                    NO         YES        YES        YES      YES      YES × TERCILE       YES × TERCILE     YES × TERCILE   YES × TERCILE
      Day × Industry FE                           NO         NO         YES        NO       YES           NO             YES × TERCILE          NO         YES × TERCILE

      F Test (Low=High)                                                                                  1.426                 1.223           2.559            2.300
      N                                          545,295    545,295    544,803   545,295   544,803      545,295               540,707         545,295          541,108
      R2                                          0.754      0.754      0.765     0.756     0.766        0.761                 0.783           0.760            0.782
Table 11: Portfolio Social Connectedness and Performance
This table reports daily portfolio returns, volatilities and Sharpe Ratios of institutional investors with dif-
ferent propensities to hold socially connected stocks. The propensity to hold socially connected stocks for
each institutional investor is estimated using the following equation:

           %PFi, j = exp[  SC,i Log Social Connectednessi, j +  2 Same Countyi, j +  3 Same Statei, j +
                                    Firm FE + Institution × Industry FE + Distance 500-tile FE] ·           i, j .

We sort institutional investors into deciles based on their propensity to hold socially connected stocks
(  SC,i ). Portfolios are rebalanced at the end of each quarter using institutions' previous quarter-end hold-
ings. In the first three columns, we report average daily portfolio returns (in %) of the institutions in each
decile, where the returns are excess returns over risk-free rate, CAPM and Fama-French 5-Factor adjusted
returns. Columns 4 to 6 report the portfolio returns' standard deviation of excess returns or residual re-
turns. To calculate the standard deviation, We first calculate return volatility for each institution in each
quarter using daily returns. We then report the average standard deviation in a given decile. Columns
4 to 6 report portfolio Sharpe Ratios. For each institution-quarter, we compute a Sharpe ratio, defined as
the average portfolio return divided by return standard deviation. We report the average Sharpe ratio for
each decile. For average portfolio returns, we report t-statistics based on Newey and West (1994) standard
errors. For standard deviations and Sharpe Ratios, we compute t-statistics based on quarter and institution
clustered standard errors. T-statistics are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate significance level of
10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.



                          Return                             (Return)                           Sharpe Ratio
                  (1)      (2)          (3)        (4)           (5)         (6)        (7)        (8)                 (9)
                Excess    CAPM          FF5      Excess         CAPM         FF5      Excess      CAPM                 FF5

  Low           0.044      0.006      0.007**    1.330***       0.645***   0.533***   0.061***     0.011*            0.026***
                (1.56)     (1.39)      (2.47)     (13.91)        (18.73)    (19.36)    (4.23)      (1.81)             (7.33)
  2             0.040      0.003       0.004*    1.224***       0.451***   0.367***   0.064***     0.010*            0.021***
                (1.48)     (1.20)      (1.83)     (12.48)        (16.79)    (17.64)    (4.20)      (1.82)             (3.96)
  3             0.040     0.004*      0.005**    1.197***       0.393***   0.315***   0.065***    0.014***           0.025***
                (1.51)     (1.78)      (2.54)     (12.10)        (15.77)    (16.05)    (4.20)      (2.92)             (4.44)
  4             0.039      0.003       0.003*    1.180***       0.336***   0.267***   0.066***    0.013**            0.028***
                (1.46)     (1.19)      (1.70)     (11.48)        (14.50)    (15.22)    (4.15)      (2.34)             (4.14)
  5             0.039      0.003       0.003*    1.178***       0.331***   0.263***   0.066***    0.016***           0.025***
                (1.48)     (1.62)      (1.80)     (11.50)        (14.95)    (15.40)    (4.20)      (2.91)             (3.70)
  6             0.038      0.003       0.002     1.134***       0.318***   0.258***   0.067***    0.015**            0.022***
                (1.47)     (1.52)      (1.17)     (11.80)        (15.68)    (16.07)    (4.29)      (2.53)             (3.38)
  7             0.038     0.003*       0.003     1.145***       0.342***   0.274***   0.066***    0.014**            0.017**
                (1.49)     (1.88)      (1.57)     (11.52)        (14.74)    (15.15)    (4.27)      (2.19)             (2.54)
  8             0.039      0.003       0.003*    1.153***       0.380***   0.315***   0.066***    0.013**            0.016***
                (1.48)     (1.65)      (1.65)     (12.06)        (16.71)    (17.42)    (4.33)      (2.31)             (2.82)
  9             0.040     0.004**     0.004**    1.171***       0.416***   0.346***   0.066***    0.011**            0.015***
                (1.52)     (2.24)      (2.46)     (12.20)        (15.76)    (16.29)    (4.35)      (2.03)             (2.77)
  High          0.042     0.005*      0.006***   1.287***       0.593***   0.507***   0.061***    0.011**            0.017***
                (1.54)     (1.75)      (2.69)     (13.16)        (15.99)    (16.30)    (4.43)      (2.07)             (3.76)

  High-Low      -0.003    -0.001       -0.001    -0.042         -0.052     -0.026     -0.001       0.000             -0.009
                (-0.75)   (-0.40)      (-0.45)   (-1.34)        (-1.45)    (-0.82)    (-0.22)      (0.03)            (-1.67)


                                                           43
Table 12: Performance of Socially Connected Holdings
This table reports the daily returns (in %) of socially connected holdings within institutions' portfolio from
2007 to 2016. To assign holdings into different portions of social connectedness for an institution, we use all
the counties that have at least one institution (or firm) located in that county and construct institution-firm
county pairs. For each institution county, we first sort all firm counties into terciles based on social con-
nectedness between counties and then assign the firm counties into low, median, and high connectedness
counties. Based on firms' headquarters' counties, institutional holdings are assigned into three connected-
ness groups and we report the average daily returns of the three groups in panel A. We report the excess
returns, and CAPM, and Fama-French 5-factor alpha of the high and low social connectedness portfolios
and the return difference in these two portfolios. The portfolios are rebalanced at the end of each quarter
using the value of institutional holdings. We also report the value weighted returns for stocks with high
social connectedness to institutions but are not part of the institutional holding and the return difference
between the high social connectedness stocks held and not held by institutions. In panel B, we report the
return difference between the high connectedness and low connectedness holding returns for each insti-
tution subgroup, including those with high social connectedness beta (top  SC decile), low AUM (bottom
decile), and dedicated institutions. Newey and West (1994) adjusted t-statistics are reported in parentheses.
***, **, and * indicate significance level of 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.

Panel A: Social Connectedness and Holding Performance
                                                 (1)                      (2)                   (3)
  Social Connectedness                         Excess                    CAPM                   FF5

                                                               Stocks Held by Institutions
  Low (Held)                                   0.040*                    0.005                 0.002
                                               (1.68)                    (1.22)                (0.61)

  High (Held)                                  0.039*                    0.002                 0.003
                                               (1.69)                    (0.90)                (1.64)

  High (Held) - Low (Held)                     -0.001                    -0.002                0.001
                                               (-0.27)                   (-0.57)               (0.32)

                                                             Stocks Not Held by Institutions
  High (Not Held)                              0.038                     -0.000                0.003
                                               (1.57)                    (-0.00)               (1.14)

  High (Held) - High (Not Held)                0.001                     0.002                 0.000
                                               (0.33)                    (1.33)                (0.33)

  N                                             2,456                     2,456                 2,456




                                                        44
     Table 12: (Continued)
     Panel B: Performance of Socially Connected Holdings in Subgroups

                                           (1)              (2)            (3)        (4)          (5)            (6)
      Subgroup                           Excess            CAPM            FF5      Excess        CAPM            FF5

                                               High (Held) - Low (Held)                High (Held) - High (Not Held)
      High  SC                           0.003             -0.000         0.004     0.004         0.006          0.004
                                         (0.53)            (-0.04)        (0.82)    (0.99)        (1.64)         (1.34)

      Low AUM                            -0.002            -0.005         -0.000    -0.003        0.000          -0.000
                                         (-0.34)           (-0.77)        (-0.01)   (-0.53)       (0.08)         (-0.02)

      Dedicated                          0.015              0.009         0.013     0.015*        0.011         0.013**
                                         (1.61)             (1.02)        (1.38)    (1.78)        (1.46)         (2.39)

      N                                  2,456              2,456         2,456     2,456          2,456         2,456
45
Appendix A.1             Variable List

  Variable                                  Definition
  Panel A: Institution (Mutual Fund)-Firm Pairwise Variables

  Social Connectedness Index (SCI)          Number of Facebook friends linked between two counties.
  Social Connectedness (SC)                 SCI divided by the product of two counties' population. We scale up
                                            this variable by a factor of 1012 .
  Log Social Connectedness (log(SC))        The logarithm of Social Connectedness.
  Distance                                  Distance measures the physical distance between two counties in
                                            miles. Log Distance is defined as log(1+Distance).
  % PF                                      (Shares held×Price/Institution AUM)×100
  Panel B: Firm-Level Variables

  % TIO                                     Common shares owned by institutional investors over total shares
                                            outstanding.
  Illiquidity (ILLIQ)                       The Amihud (2002) illiquidity measure, defined as quarterly average
                                            of | R|i,t /Vi,t , where R is the daily return (in decimals) and $V is the
                                            dollar trading volume (scaled up by 106 ).
  Effective Spread (Spread)                 The quarterly average of daily dollar-weighted percentage effective
                                            spread (scaled up by 103 ). We obtain the daily dollar-weighted per-
                                            centage effective spread from WRDS Intraday Indicator database.
  Tobin's Q                                 The ratio of market value and replacement cost of firm assets. Market
                                            value of a firm is defined as total assets minus book value of equity
                                            plus book value of debt. Book equity is shareholders' equity, plus de-
                                            ferred taxes and investment tax credit, minus book value of preferred
                                            stock. The relevant variables are obtained from Compustat Quarterly
                                            database.
  Market-to-Book (M/B)                      The ratio of market value of equity and book value of equity. Book eq-
                                            uity is defined as shareholders' equity, plus deferred taxes and invest-
                                            ment tax credit, minus book value of preferred stock. The relevant
                                            variables are obtained from Compustat Quarterly database. Market
                                            value of equity is obtained from CRSP and is measured at the quarter
                                            end.
  Social Proximity to Capital               County j's social proximity to capital is defined as
                                            log((County AUMi × Social Connectednessi, j )), where county
                                            AUM is the sum of AUM of all the institutions located in a given
                                            county.
  Physical Proximity to Capital             County j's physical proximity to capital is defined as
                                                      County AUM
                                            log(( 1+Distancei,ji )), where county AUM is the sum of AUM of
                                            all the institutions located in a given county.
  Total Assets                              Book value of total assets from COMPUSTAT. We obtain the most
                                            recent data from Compustat Annual database and require at least a
                                            four-month lag. We denote log total assets as Log Assets.
  Return Volatility (Volatility)            Standard deviation of monthly returns over the past 6 months.
  Share Turnover (Turnover)                 Average trading volume scaled by total shares outstanding over the
                                            past 6 months.
  Share Price (Price)                       Historical price at the quarter end.
  S&P 500 Dummy (S&P)                       Dummy variable equal to one if the firm is included in S&P500 Index
                                            and zero otherwise.
  Momentum                                  Cumulative monthly return from month t-2 to t-12 before the end of
                                            the quarter.




                                                       46
Appendix A.1: (Continued)


  Firm Age (Age)                               Number of months since a firm's first appearance in CRSP.
  Dividend Yield (Yield)                       Annual dividends distributed over the market price. We obtain the most
                                               recent data from Compustat Annual database and require at least a four-
                                               month lag from the fiscal year end.
  R&D Expense (R&D)                            Total research and development expenditures scaled by net sales. We set
                                               missing values of R&D to zero. We obtain the most recent data from Com-
                                               pustat Annual database and require at least a four-month lag from the
                                               fiscal year end.
  Advertising Expense (Advertising)            Total advertising expenditures scaled by net sales. We set missing values
                                               to zero. We obtain the most recent data from Compustat Annual database
                                               and require at least a four-month lag from the fiscal year end.
  Profitability                                EBITDA scaled by book value of assets. We obtain the most recent data
                                               from Compustat Annual database and require at least a four-month lag
                                               from the fiscal year end.
  Sales Growth                                 Sales growth is measured over the past three years. If less than three years
                                               of sales data is available, sales growth is estimated using all available data.
                                               Missing values are set to zero. We obtain the most recent data from Com-
                                               pustat Annual database and require at least a four-month lag from the
                                               fiscal year end.
  Asset Turnover                               Net sales over book value of total assets. We obtain the most recent data
                                               from Compustat Annual database and require at least a four-month lag
                                               from the fiscal year end.
  Book Leverage (Leverage)                     Book value of debt scaled by the book value of total assets. We obtain the
                                               most recent data from Compustat Annual database and require at least a
                                               four-month lag from the fiscal year end.
  Dividend Payout (Payout)                     Sum of dividends and repurchases divided by net income. We obtain the
                                               most recent data from Compustat Annual database and require at least a
                                               four-month lag from the fiscal year end.
  Size                                         Market capitalization (in millions) at the quarter end.
  # Analyst                                    Number of one year-ahead analyst estimates at the end of the quarter.
  Affected Capital Ratio                       Social proximity to the institutional capital located in the Mid-Atlantic
                                               Area, divided by overall social proximity to capital.
  Affected Ownership Ratio                     Ownership by institutions located in the Mid-Atlantic Area, divided by
                                               total institutional ownership.
  Panel C: Institution (Mutual Fund)-Level Variables

  AUM                                          Asset under management in millions of dollars, based on the total market
                                               capitalization of their equity holdings.
  Propensity Beta                              Coefficient of Log Social Connectedness in our baseline specification for
                                               each institution as a proxy for the propensity to hold socially connected
                                               stocks.
  Panel D: County-Level Variables

  Education Attainment (Education)             Percent of adults in a county that obtain a high school education. Ob-
                                               tained from American Community Survey.
  Income Per Capita (Income)                   County-level income per capita. Obtained from American Community
                                               Survey.
  Unemployment Rate (Unemployment)             County-level unemployment rate. Obtained from American Community
                                               Survey.




                                                          47
    Social Proximity to Capital: Implications for Investors and Firms


                                    Internet Appendix


We present the following information in this internet appendix:

   · Table IA.1: Additional summary statistics

   · Table IA.2: Robustness Tests for Baseline Regressions

   · Table IA.3: Two-Dimensional Heterogeneity Based on Firm Size and Analyst Coverage

   · Table IA.4: Portfolio Social Connectedness and Performance by Institution Types

   · Figure IA.1: Coefficients of 500-Tile Distance Indicators




                                                 1
Table IA.1: Additional Summary Statistics
This table reports additional summary statistics for our key variables. Summary statistics for the firm-
institution level variables are presented in Panel A. Summary statistics for firm-level panels from 2007 to
2016 are presented in Panel B. Summary statistic of Affected Ratio used in Hurricane Sandy analysis is pre-
sented in Panel C. Summary statistics for mutual fund analyses are presented in Panel D. Refer to Appendix
A.1 for detailed variable definitions.


                Panel A: Summary Statistics for Institution-Firm Pairs as of Jun 2016
         Variables           MEAN       ST. DEV         P5       P10     MEDIAN         P90        P95
  Same State                   0.06        0.24         0         0           0           0         1
  Same County                  0.02        0.13         0         0           0           0         0


              Panel B: Summary Statistics for Firm-level Variables from 2007 to 2016
         Variables           MEAN       ST. DEV         P5       P10     MEDIAN         P90        P95
  Log Total Assets             7.07         1.89       4.15      4.78       6.96        9.55      10.37
  Return Volatility           10.56         8.42       3.03      3.90       8.76       18.82      23.52
  Share Turnover               0.19         0.22       0.02      0.03       0.14        0.39       0.51
  Share Price                 43.61      1,129.11      6.11      7.32      20.89       63.22      83.77
  Sales Growth                 0.14         1.82      -0.15     -0.08       0.05        0.31       0.45
  Asset Turnover               0.86         0.94       0.05      0.06       0.69        1.82       2.35
  Book Leverage                0.57         0.29       0.14      0.20       0.56        0.91       0.93
  Payout                       0.73        24.28      -0.23      0.00       0.28        1.63       2.59
  S&P 500 Dummy                0.16         0.36         0         0          0           1          1
  Momentum                    14.20        64.87     -46.81    -34.21       7.14       61.02      91.37
  Firm Age                    240.33      212.38        13        27        188         511        633
  Dividend Yield               0.02         0.05       0.00      0.00       0.00        0.04       0.05
  R&D Expense                  1.26        80.20       0.00      0.00       0.00        0.15       0.25
  Advertising Expense          0.01         0.08       0.00      0.00       0.00        0.03       0.05
  Profitability                0.09         0.17      -0.09      0.01       0.10        0.22       0.28
  Education Attainment        85.36         5.90      74.60     77.60      86.40       92.30      93.10
  Income Per Capital          55,121      22,902     33,306    36,081      48,791      78,955    110,487
  Unemployment                 6.54         2.26       3.60      3.90       6.20        9.70      10.60




                                                    2
Table 1: (Continued)


             Panel C: Daily Panel around Hurricane Sandy from Jan 2012 to Jul 2013
 Variables                     MEAN     ST. DEV      P5     P10     MEDIAN      P90     P95
 Affected Capital Ratio        0.444      0.237     0.132   0.183    0.397     0.859    0.908


       Panel D: Summary Statistics for Mutual Fund-Firm Pair Variables as of Jun 2016
 Variables                     MEAN     ST. DEV      P5     P10     MEDIAN      P90     P95
 Log Social Connectedness      6.151      1.253     4.595   4.853    5.939     7.612    8.487
 Log Distance                  6.501      1.357      3.96   5.096    6.815     7.784    7.841
 % PF                          0.037      0.319        0      0        0         0        0




                                              3
Table IA.2: Robustness Tests for Baseline Regressions
This table exhibits the robustness tests for our baseline results in Table 2. Our sample is based on the cross
section of institutional holdings as of June 2016. In column 1, we exclude firms and institutions head-
quartered in New York and California. The dependent variable is % PF in columns 1 to 3, defined as the
percentage of AUM allocated to a stock. The dependent variable in column 2 is % PF winsorizing the top
1%. In column 4, we replace the continuous dependent variable with a dummy equal to one if % PF >
0 and zero otherwise. Social Connectedness is defined as the number of Facebook links between a firm's
headquarters' county and an institution's headquarters' county, scaled by the product of the populations
in these two counties. Log Social Connectedness is defined as log(Social Connectedness). The first regres-
sions are estimated using Poisson Pseudo Maximum Likelihood (PPML) and the results in columns 3 and
4 are estimated using OLS. We consider Firm, Institution × Industry, Distance 500-tile, Same County, and
Same State fixed effects. Same County (Same State) is a dummy equal to one if the institution and the firm
are located in the same county (same state) and zero otherwise. Distance 500-tile fixed effects indicate the
quantile of the distance between the firm and the institution based on all firm-institution pairs. Refer to Ap-
pendix A.1 for detailed variable definitions. Industry classification is based on Fama-French 48 industries.
Standard errors are double clustered by institution and firm, and t-statistics are reported in parentheses.
***, **, and * indicate significance levels of 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.



                                                (1)                 (2)             (3)              (4)

                                               %PF               % PF              % PF         I(% PF > 0)
                                                               Winsorized

  Log Social Connectedness                   0.308***            0.161***        11.624***        0.554***
                                              (9.02)              (12.03)          (8.92)          (11.10)

  Model                                      PPML                PPML               OLS             OLS
  Firm FE                                      YES                 YES              YES             YES
  Institution × Industry FE                    YES                 YES              YES             YES
  Distance 500-tile FE                         YES                 YES              YES             YES
  Same State FE                                YES                 YES              YES             YES
  Same County FE                               YES                 YES              YES             YES
  Institution FE                               NO                  NO               NO              NO
  N                                         4,180,932           8,694,060        8,694,060       8,694,060
  R2                                          0.555               0.526            0.073           0.403




                                                        4
Table IA.3: Two-Dimensional Heterogeneity Based on Firm Size and Analyst Coverage
This table examines if the heterogneity in firm size reported in Panel A of Table 4 and analyst coverage
reported in Panel B of Table 4 subsume each other. We alter the specification in the column 3 in Panel B of
Table 2 by interacting Log Social Connectedness with 3×3 double-sorted indicator variables. All institution-
firm pairs are assigned into one of the 3×3 independently sorted groups on firm size and analyst coverage.
We report the coefficients of the interacted coefficients of these indicators with Log Social Connectedness.
Standard errors are double clustered by institution and firm, and t-statistics are reported in parentheses.
Number of observations in each cell are reported below standard errors. F statistics for whether the coeffi-
cients of the high coverage and low coverage are statistically different for each market capitalization tercile.
We also report the F statistics of the joint test on whether the coefficients in of high coverage and low cover-
age firms are different in all three market capitalization categories. ***, **, and * indicate significance levels
of 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.


                                                            Small Cap   Mid Cap      Large Cap
                                                             0.527***    0.603***     0.666***
                            Low Coverage                      (5.12)      (6.13)       (3.42)
                                                            1,304,109    746,086      101,739

                                                              0.380*     0.485***     0.441***
                            Mid Coverage                      (1.82)      (8.32)       (7.83)
                                                             437,786    1,865,215     727,588

                                                             -1.748      0.381***      0.216***
                           High Coverage                     (-1.17)      (4.01)        (8.06)
                                                             43,162      779,999      2,688,376

                 F Test (Low=High)                            2.30        2.63         5.26**
                 F Test (Joint Low=High)                                 10.04**




                                                        5
    Table IA.4: Portfolio Social Connectedness and Performance by Institution Type

    This table reports portfolio returns, volatility and Sharpe ratios of institutional investors with different propensities to hold socially connected stocks
    by their Bushee (1998) classification. The propensity to hold socially connected stocks for each institutional investor is estimated using the following
    equation: using the following equation:

                                    %PFi, j = exp[  SC,i Log Social Connectednessi, j +  2 Same Countyi, j +  3 Same Statei, j +
                                                            Firm FE + Institution × Industry FE + Distance 500-tile FE] ·      i, j .

    We sort institutional investors into deciles based on their propensity to hold socially connected stocks (  SC,i ). The portfolio is rebalanced at the end
    of each quarter using institutions' previous quarter end holdings. We report results based on portfolios' percentage excess returns over risk-free
    rate, CAPM, and Fama-French 5-factor adjusted returns in the first three columns. In columns 4 to 6, we report standard deviation of the excess or
    residual returns from factor models. We first calculate return volatility for each institution in each quarter using daily return data. Then, we report
    the average returns in a given decile. Columns 7 to 9 report Sharpe ratios (or information ratios) of institutions. We compute average returns or
    risk-adjusted returns using daily data in each quarter. Then we divide the returns by standard deviations of the excess of residual returns. For these
    analyses, we compute t-statistics using quarter and firm clustered standard errors. T-statistics are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate
    significance level of 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.
6




                                                             Return                          (Return)                         Sharpe Ratio
                                                   (1)       (2)         (3)       (4)         (5)         (6)        (7)                (8)        (9)
                 Bushee Type         SC,i         Excess    CAPM         FF5      Excess      CAPM         FF5       Excess             CAPM        FF5
                                    Low           0.061*      0.022    0.026**    1.723***   1.260***    1.101***   0.056***             0.018    0.040***
                                                  (1.91)      (1.64)     (2.47)   (13.16)    (15.25)     (15.37)     (3.87)              (1.27)    (3.47)
                 Dedicated          High           0.043     -0.000      0.005    1.947***   1.321***    1.151***   0.040***             -0.005     0.009
                                                  (1.26)     (-0.00)     (0.51)    (9.37)     (7.26)      (7.22)     (3.09)             (-0.65)    (1.38)
                                    High-Low      -0.018     -0.022     -0.021      0.224      0.062       0.050    -0.016*             -0.023*   -0.031**
                                                  (-1.33)    (-1.64)    (-1.57)     (1.27)     (0.34)      (0.31)    (-1.73)            (-1.81)    (-2.41)
                                    Low            0.042      0.006    0.005**    1.243***   0.516***    0.418***   0.061***             0.010    0.022***
                                                  (1.57)      (1.61)     (2.50)   (12.43)    (15.50)     (15.62)     (4.22)              (1.68)    (5.18)
                 Quasi-Indexer      High           0.039      0.003      0.003    1.200***   0.467***    0.400***   0.062***             0.012    0.016***
                                                  (1.49)      (1.29)     (1.31)   (11.94)    (13.55)     (13.80)     (4.35)              (1.65)    (2.84)
                                    High-Low      -0.003     -0.003     -0.002     -0.044     -0.049      -0.018      0.001              0.002     -0.005
                                                  (-1.00)    (-0.82)    (-1.00)    (-1.31)    (-1.34)     (-0.57)     (0.63)             (0.36)    (-1.02)
                                    Low            0.044      0.003      0.006    1.421***   0.703***    0.576***   0.059***             0.009    0.030***
                                                  (1.42)      (0.52)     (1.12)   (13.03)    (15.05)     (15.42)     (3.80)              (0.93)    (4.21)
                 Transient          High          0.050*     0.012*    0.016***   1.506***   0.814***    0.687***   0.056***             0.009    0.022***
                                                  (1.70)      (1.74)     (3.34)   (13.90)    (11.45)     (10.79)     (3.98)              (1.36)    (3.69)
                                    High-Low       0.006      0.008     0.010*      0.085      0.110       0.110     -0.003              0.000     -0.007
                                                  (1.04)      (1.49)     (1.83)    (1.30)     (1.46)      (1.62)     (-1.14)             (0.02)    (-1.04)
Figure IA.1: Coefficients of 500-Tile Distance Indicators
We display the coefficient estimates for the 500-tile distance indicators in our baseline regressions. The
left panel shows the plot after including Log Social Connectedness and the right panel shows the result
excluding Log Social Connectedness as a regressor.




                                                    7
