                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  CONSUMPTION INSURANCE IN NETWORKS WITH ASYMMETRIC INFORMATION

                                         Orazio Attanasio
                                         Sonya Krutikova

                                       Working Paper 27290
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27290


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2020




This paper was the BBVA lecture, which was presented at the ASSA meetings in January 2019 in
Atlanta and at the BBVA Foundation in May 2019 in Madrid. We received very valuable
feedback and suggestions from Pau Milan, Aureo de Paula and Nicola Pavoni and useful
comments in various presentations. Attanasio's research was partially funded by ERC Advanced
Grant AdG - 695300. Krutikova gratefully acknowledges the support of the Economic and Social
Research Council's Centre for the Microeconomic Analysis of Public Policy at the IFS (grant
reference ES/M010147/1). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Orazio Attanasio and Sonya Krutikova. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Consumption Insurance in Networks with Asymmetric Information
Orazio Attanasio and Sonya Krutikova
NBER Working Paper No. 27290
May 2020, Revised July 2020
JEL No. O10,O15

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper uses a dataset from Tanzania with information on consumption, income and income
shocks within and across family networks. Crucially and uniquely, it also contains data on the
degree of information existing between each pair of households within family networks
gCrucially and uniquely, it also contains data on the level of information each pair of households
has about each other within family networks. We use these data to construct a novel measure of
the quality of information both at the level of household pairs and at the level of the network. We
also note that the individual level measures can be interpreted as measures of network centrality.
We study risk sharing within these networks and explore whether the rejection of perfect risk
sharing that we observe can be related to our measures of information quality. We show that
households within family networks with better information are less vulnerable to idiosyncratic
shocks. Furthermore, we show that more central households within networks are less vulnerable
to idiosyncratic shocks. These results have important implications for the characterisation of the
empirical failure of the perfect risk sharing hypothesis and point to the importance of information
frictions.


Orazio Attanasio
Department of Economics
Yale University
37 Hillhouse Avenue
New Haven, CT 06511
and Institute for Fiscal Studies, FAIR, BREAD and CEPR
and also NBER
orazio.attanasio@yale.edu

Sonya Krutikova
Institute for Fiscal Studies
7 Ridgmount Street
London
UK
sonya_k@ifs.org.uk
1       Introduction

In many developing countries, risk is very pervasive. The lack of economic development
implies not only that individuals have access to a much lower level of resources but also
that life is much riskier. Substantial shocks to resources, when one's living standards
are close to subsistence levels, can have important and dramatic consequences. The
presence of risk is particularly salient in rural contexts, where individuals are exposed to
large and frequent shocks to their livelihoods. Many of these shocks are idiosyncratic,
implying that insurance can be very valuable and very important. Formal insurance
markets, however, rarely exist. Informal insurance arrangements are common and,
according to the available evidence, do provide some level of insurance (see, for instance
Townsend (1994) and, more recently, Kinnan and Townsend (2012)). The observed
allocations, however, are very different from those that would prevail under perfect
risk sharing and complete markets.
    Informal insurance in village economies has received considerable attention, both
because it can enable individuals to smooth out idiosyncratic shocks and because
its presence interacts with (and sometimes limits) formal insurance and its develop-
ment (see, for instance, Attanasio and Rios-Rull (2000) and Munshi and Rosenzweig
(2016)).The presence of perfect risk-sharing arrangements has been rejected in many
contexts (see, for instance, Rosenzweig (1988), Udry (1994) and the recent paper by
Kinnan (2020) and the reference therein). An important and interesting research ques-
tion is, therefore, the identification of the imperfections and frictions that prevent
perfect risk sharing. A better understanding of these imperfections and identification
of specific frictions as being particularly salient is important not only from a research
point of view, but also for informing policy reforms and different policy interventions.
   The literature has looked at different types of frictions and imperfections, including
the lack of enforceability of informal insurance contracts and imperfect information.1
Information frictions are the focus of this paper. Studies that have looked at them
include Udry (1994), Ligon (1998), Cole and Kocherlakota (2001) and Attanasio and
Pavoni (2011). Information frictions could prevent full risk sharing because of the
difficulty in contracting on specific income shocks and/or to moral hazard behaviour.
In what follows we relate measures of risk sharing in family networks to measures
    1
     Studies that focus on the lack of contract enforceability include Foster and Rosenzweig (2001),
Kocherlakota (1996), Ligon et al. (2002), Attanasio and Rios-Rull (2000), Albarran and Attanasio
(2003), and, more recently, Ambrus et al. (2014) and Bold and Broer (2018). A few papers have
considered models with both asymmetric information and limited commitment: Atkinson (1991), and
more recently, Broer et al. (2017), and Denderski and Stoltenberg (2019).

                                                 1
of the quality of information in these networks. The type of informational frictions
we consider most closely resemble the local information constraints in Ambrus et al.
(2019). Although we do not map explicitly the imperfections they consider on specific
transfers and consumption data, our paper is among the first to consider an empirical
measure of imperfect information and relate it to risk sharing in a way that is consistent
with the model considered by Ambrus et al. (2019).
   Informal insurance arrangements are based on individual transactions and transfers.
Data on these transfers are difficult to collect and in most of the available data sets,
the information on them is very limited and imprecise. The approach proposed by
Townsend (1994) to test for perfect risk sharing is particularly attractive because it only
requires information about consumption allocations (the object that is being insured)
and income or income shocks. While the approch is silent about the specific mechanisms
that are used in practice to implement the observed resource allocations, it can be useful
to characterise the extent to which such allocations differ from perfect insurance. If
such a benchmark arrangement is rejected, one can model deviations from perfect risk
sharing allocations and gain insights on the nature of the imperfections and frictions
that generate the available evidence.
   In this paper, we use a unique data set which contains longitudinal data, following
family networks in Tanzania for nearly 20 years. Within each family network, all
idividual households are asked about their own wealth (including about ownership of a
variety of different assets) and about the wealth of all other households in their family
network. These rich data provide a unique opportunity to construct measures of the
quality of the information within each family.
   The paper makes two original contributions. First, we propose a new methodology
to convert the data on the wealth of each household as perceived by all the other
households in the family network into a measure about the quality of information in
the family network. As we discuss in section 4, we construct both measures about
the quality of information about each household in the network and about the overall
quality of information in a network. As for the former we obtain measures both of the
quality of the information that the rest of the network has about the wealth of every
household and of the quality of information that each household has about the wealth
of the rest of the network. These concepts are related, as we discuss, to measures of
network centrality.
   Second, we use the measures of the quality of information we derive to check whether
they are related to deviations from perfect risk sharing. Starting from a regression


                                            2
similar to those estimated by Townsend (1994), which relates changes in consumption
to idiosycratic shocks after controlling for network level shocks, we check whether this
relationship is affected by the quality of information.
    We find that our measures of the quality of information exhibit a substantial amount
of variation across the network and, when considering dyads of households, the mea-
sures covaries with a number of observables (such as the geodesic distance or the
frequency of contact between two households in the famliy network) in the expected
fashion. Given the novelty of the type of measures we use, this result is important and
reassuring.
   As for the level of risk sharing, we first document that, as in other contexts, perfect
risk sharing within a network is rejected by our data. When we then look at the way
in which information quality interacts with risk sharing, by and large, we find that the
better the quality of information in a family network (whether measured at the network
or at the individual household level), the closer the allocations in that network are to
those that would occur under perfect risk sharing. The results are more precise and
more convincing when we consider the quality of information at the household rather
than family network level and, in particular, when we consider the quality of the
information that the network has about a household's wealth. We find that households
whose wealth seems to be better known to the other members of households in the
network are less sensitive to idiosyncratic shocks.
   To the best of our knowledge, this is the first result relating so directly risk sharing
to the quality of information. 2 We do not directly map the association we find
between the sensitivity of individual consumption changes to idiosyncratic shocks and
information asymmetries to a theoretical model of constrained efficient allocations.
This evidence, however, represents an important step in that direction.
   The rest of the paper is organised as follows. In Section 2, we present a conceptual
framework to analyse risk sharing and relate it to information frictions. In Section
3, we present our data set and in Section 4, we describe our measures of information
quality and report some descriptive statistics on them. We report the results of our
empirical analysis in section 5. Section 6 concludes the paper.

   2
      De Weerdt et al. (2019) use these same data on information within family networks, but apply a
different methodology for constructing a measure of misperceptions in order to study a different set
of questions. They quantify misperceptions by constructing a weighted sum of differences between
believed and actual asset holdings, setting weights according to the correlation of each of the assets
with household consumption. Their focus is on testing alternative motives for transfers within family
networks, which do not include risk-sharing. Indeed as their measure of information imperfections is
constructed using consumption data, it cannot be related to risk sharing.

                                                  3
2      Risk Sharing with Imperfect Information:
       a conceptual framework

In this section, we provide a conceptual framework to inform the empirical analysis that
we perform. We take the risk sharing group as a given and characterise risk sharing
within that group. Our definition of risk sharing within a pre-defined group does not
preclude the existence of other risk sharing arrangements or alternative mechanisms to
absorb individual (or group level) shocks. However, the focus is on risk sharing within
the pre-defined group.
   The groups we consider in the empirical exercise are family networks. The members
of an original family in 1991 were followed until 2010 as they move out of the initial
nucleus. The survey team was able to achieve a remarkably high response rate: as
discussed in Section 3, attrition was below 10%. It is, therefore, plausible to assume
that membership of a `risk sharing group' as we define it, can be considered as a given
for the period we consider.
      We study the ability of a pre-defined risk sharing group members to absorb in-
diosyncratic shocks, given the group level shocks. That is, we consider the ability to
share risk within a given group and relate that ability to the quality of information
within that group and, additionally, to some of the properties of the network. While it
is likely (as we show) that the quality of information within a group is partly a function
of choices made by individual members, this consideration does not affect the nature of
our exercise. We take the quality of information (or the nature of the network) within
a risk sharing group as a given at a point in time and document the extent to which
such a variable affects the ability of individuals to smooth out income shocks. Our
exercise is silent, in the a first instance, about the mechanisms that lead to a specific
relationship between information quality and risk sharing.

2.1     Perfect risk sharing

We start by considering risk sharing within a group of agents. Group membership is
given exogenously and therefore risk sharing groups are defined exogenously. They
could be villages, family networks or other groups.
      The approach we take to characterise full risk sharing within a group goes back to
Wilson (1968) and Townsend (1994). We assume that individual j belonging to group
                                   j,g
g receives a stochastic endowment yt   .

                                       j,g  ¯g t + j
                                      yt   =y      t.


                                            4
We assume that y is perishable. For expositional simplicity we do not consider saving
here, but it would be straightforward to add that or any other mechanism to absorb
shocks, including risk sharing arrangements with different groups and/or institutions.
   Individual j in group g receives utility from consumption cj,g
                                                              t , which is given by
their endowment plus a transfer tj,g . The implications for allocations of perfect risk
sharing can be derived considering a social planner problem, as in Townsend (1994),
where the planner maximises a weighted sum of of the expected utility of the risk
sharing group.
                               Kg            
                                                              j,g
                max
              i,g
                                      j,g          t       u(yt   + tj,g )dµt (yt
                                                                                j,g
                                                                                    )    s.t.   (1)
                   i=1,..Kg
            {t }               j =1          t=0       Y

            Kg                 Kg
                    j,g
                   yt   =             cj,g
                                       t                                                  t     (2)
            j =1              j =1

           cj,g
            t      =    j,g
                       yt     + tj,g                                                    t, j    (3)
                                                                  j,g
where µt () is a probability measure of the stochastic endowment yt   , which reflects
                                         j,g
the available (and public) information. yt   is completely observable (ex-post) and
can be contracted upon. j,g is the Pareto weight given to individual j in group g ,
which allows for inequality and asymmetries within the group and is assumed to be
constant. Different 's might reflect different status within the risk sharing group, or
access to different amount of resources by different individuals. Again, by modifying
the aggregate resource constraints (2) and/or the individual budget constraint (3), it
is possible to take into account additional insurance mechanisms either through saving
or through risk sharing arrangements outside the group.
   Considering the Lagrangian for this problem, in the absence of frictions (informa-
tion, enforceability), the first order condition w.r.t. ci
                                                         t is given by:


                                             i,g  t u (ci,g g   g
                                                        t )µt = t         i, t.                 (4)

where µg                                                             g
        t is the probability of the state of the world at time t and t is the multiplier
associated with group g aggregate resource constraint. From equation (4) we note that
the right hand side, tg , does not depend on the individual household index i. Second,
the Pareto weight i,g is a constant that does not depend on t. Finally, the f.o.c. is not
averaged across different states of the world, but holds, appropriately weighted by µg
                                                                                     t (),
the probability distribution of the income shocks, for every possible state. This last
fact is key to the perfect risk sharing structure. As income shocks are fully observable
and contractable upon, insurance contracts can diversity idiosyncratic income shocks,

                                                               5
regardless of the properties of the stochastic process that generates them. Considering
the ratio of these conditions for agents i and 1 we get :

                                     u (ci,g
                                         t )   1,g
                                         1,g =     ;      i, t                          (5)
                                     u (ct )   i,g
   Taking logs of equation (4) one gets :

                           ln(i,g ) + ln(u (ci,g                g
                                             t )) + tln( ) = ln(t )                     (6)

   This equation can be taken to data in several ways. One can introduce and estimate
individual fixed effects to capture the unobservable Pareto weights, or one can can take
time differences to difference them out. Having many risk sharing groups, one has to
consider timeXgroup fixed effects.
   Taking differences across time periods:


                             s ln(u (ci,g                  g
                                      t )) + sln( ) = s ln(t )                          (7)

   Equations (6) and (7) capture the essence of perfect risk sharing. We notice the
absence from the right hand side of any time varying idiosyncratic variable, once one
controls for a group aggregate. In equation (6), which is expressed in levels, one has
to control for individual fixed effects that capture the Pareto weights of the planner
problem. These effects drop out once one considers the expression in different time
periods and takes the difference between them. We notice that expresson in equation(7)
is not necessarily in first differences, that is the changes in (log) consumption considered
are not over a specific period. One consider changes to difference out the Pareto weights
fixed effects.
   The restrictions in equations (6) and (7) are the key implications of perfect risk
sharing. To test them, Townsend (1994) and others have augmented it with idiosyn-
cratic variables, such as levels or changes of individual income.


                         ln(u (ci,g
                                t )) = ~ i,g + ln(tg ) +       i,g
                                                         ~ ln(yt   ) + ~i,g
                                                                        t               (8)


                      s ln(u (ci,g    g       g            i,g
                               t )) =  + s ln(t ) +  s ln(yt ) +
                                                                              i,g
                                                                              t         (9)

where ~i,g
       t and
                i,g
                t     reflect measurement error and other unobservables. The coefficients
~ and  , which measure the vulnerability of a single individual to idiosyncratic shocks,
should be 0 under perfect risk sharing.


                                                 6
    An attractive feature of this approach is that it is based exclusively on on consump-
tion and idiosyncratic resource information. It does not require information about
the decentralization mechanisms (such as transfers) that a given realisation of income
shocks would require to achieve first best.

2.2   Deviations from perfect risk sharing: imperfect information

Empirically, perfect risk sharing is often rejected. Researchers have found that, while
some smoothing of idiosyncratic shocks is observed, observed allocations are different
from first best ones, in that consumption is affected by idiosyncratic shocks. While
individuals in a variety of contexts can achieve some insurance, the empirical evidence
seems to reject perfect risk sharing (see Rosenzweig (1988), Udry (1994) and Kinnan
(2020)). De Weerdt and Hirvonen (2016) find similar evidence in the same data we use
below, which were collected in Tanzania.
   As discussed in the introduction, in light of the rejection of perfect risk sharing, a
profitable approach is to look at the relevance of specific frictions. In this paper, we
analyse a very simple and specific information problem.In particular, we relate the level
of risk sharing (or deviations from perfect risk sharing) to the quality of information
in a given network. We start by assuming that individual household i in risk sharing
group g (a family network), receives an exogenous income y i,g . Each member of the
risk sharing group receives some signals about the income received by everybody else.

                                   xij,g
                                    t
                                            i,g
                                         = yt   + eij,g                             (10)

where xij,g
       t    is the signal received by household j about household i's income, where both
households belong to group g . eij,g is a zero-mean random variable, which represents
the noise that somewhat masks household i's income from household j . The variance of
this noise represents the quality of information that household j has about household
i. We will allow the precision of the signal to be different across different members
of the network and, as we discuss below, construct estimates of the quality of the
information each individual household in any given pair in a network has about the
other. The quality of the information that different network members have about the
economic status of any given individual household effectively defines the position of
that household in the network.
   In our empirical application, we follow two different approaches, which we discuss
in the next sub-section. First, we assume that the extent of risk sharing within a pre-
defined group (in our case a family network) is determined by the quality of information

                                              7
available in a network. Family networks where the information is of high quality, will be
closer to the first best allocations that would be observed under perfect risk sharing.
Individuals living in households that are part of family networks where information
flows are of inferior quality, on the other hand, will be more vulnerable to idiosyncratic
shocks that could be diversified.
   Second, we relate household vulnerability to the position of the household in a fam-
ily network, which in turn is determined by the quality of information in the network.
This approach can be interpreted in the light of a model of bilateral transfers among
all the households in the networks. In such a model, discussed by Attanasio et al.
(2020, in progress), the net transfers between households i and j are determined by
contracts based on the information common to these households, which is xij,g
                                                                         t    and
xji,g
 t . An attractive feature of this approach is that one can avoid consideration of ex-
plicit incentive compatibility constraints induced by truth telling contraints or moral
hazard problems. Instead, it uses a static framework where transfers between pairs of
households can only be conditional on the information available to both members. We
now turn to the discussion of these two approaches.

2.3    Empirical strategy to measure the effect of asymmetric information

One of the advantages of the perfect risk sharing model is that one can be agnostic
about the specific decentralization of the efficient allocation. One, therefore, does not
need to keep track of all bilateral transfers and can consider only net transfers, and
therefore consumption allocations, of each individual. This is not necessarily the case
in the asymmetric information case with several sources of asymmetries. It is possible,
however, to implement tests that identify violation of perfect risk sharing by looking at
the vulnerability of individual consumption to idiosyncratic shocks and relating such
vulnerability to the quality of information in a given risk sharing group.
   To capture deviations from perfect risk sharing due to imperfect information em-
pirically we extend equation (9) in several ways. First, we estimate the following
equation:3


              s ln(u (cj,g        g       g           g       j,g
                       t )) =  + µt + 1 Iq + (0 + 1 Iq )s ln(yt ) +
                                                                                      j,g
                                                                                      t           (11)

where Iq g is a measure of the quality of information in family network g and µg
                                                                               t =


   3
     We also estimate similar versions of equation (8), which is in levels. These equations have a very
large number of parameters, as we need individual fixed effect and we have a small number of periods.
The results are similar and are available upon request.

                                                  8
s ln(tg ). Since Iq g varies only across networks, the parameter 1 cannot be identified
as the variation in Iq g would be absorbed by the group dummies µg  t.
   The coefficient  in equation (9) should equal to zero under perfect risk sharing, as
idiosyncratic shocks and changes to household income should not be related to changes
in household consumption, after controlling for group level shocks, which is what the
group-time dummies µg     4
                     t do. Such a coefficient can therefore be intepreted as the `ex-
cess' sensitivity of individual consumption changes to idiosyncratic shocks. In equation
(11), we let this coefficient be a function of the quality of information in a risk shar-
ing group. If 1 has the opposite sign of 0 , vulnerability in high quality information
networks is lower. Allocations in such networks are closer to those that would prevail
under perfect risk sharing. While such evidence would stress the importance of infor-
mation frictions in shaping risk sharing arrangements, it does not follow directly from
a theoretical model that maps these friction on onto consumption allocations.
    The estimation of equation (11) requires a measure of the quality of information
within a network. We discuss such a measure in Section 4 below. The main idea
here is that, family networks where information is very good are close to achieving
perfect risk sharing, while family networks where information is very imperfect, deviate
considerably from perfect risk sharing, so that individual households are vulnerable to
idiosyncratic shocks.
   In equation (11), the quality of information varies across family networks but it
is constant for the households within a family network. In the model presented by
Ambrus et al. (2019) and developed by Attanasio et al. (2020, in progress), under a
certain set of assumptions, vulnerability of an individual does not depend exclusively
on the average quality of the information flows in that network, but could depend on
the position of a given individual in the network and an appropriate weighted average
of the shocks received in the network. To bring this intuition to the data, in addition
to equation (11), we also estimate the following equation:


          s ln(u (cj,g    g   g
                   t )) =  + µt + 2 N P
                                        i,g                         j,g
                                            + (0 + 2 N P i,g )s ln(yt   )+             j,g
                                                                                       t       (12)

where N P i,g is a measure of household centrality within the family network, reflect-
ing either average quality of the information about household i's income held by the
other members of the family network, or quality of information that household i has
   4
     In our data, where we have 2 periods, and therefore, 1 period over which changes in consumption
are observed, we only have group dummies. It is important, however, to remember that if additional
time periods were available we would have fully interacted time and group dummies, to reflect the
resource constraints multipliers of each group.

                                                 9
about incomes of the other households in the network. We discuss the definition and
interpretation of these alternative variables in Section 4, where we discuss the con-
struction of information quality measures. As before, in addition to interacting N P i,g
with individual shocks, we also enter that variable on its own.
    Implementing the estimation of equations (11) and (12) requires the availability
of variables that can capture the quality of information and the position in the risk
sharing network of an individual. We discuss these issues below. Before moving to
the description of the data and to the methods we use to obtain these measures, it
is worth mentioning a few additional issues. First, we notice that both the Iq g and
N P i,g variables do not have a time subscript as we assume they are constant over
time. This assumption is forced on us in part by the fact that we have measurements
on the quality of information only in the last wave of the survey. We can justify this
assumption, however, by pointing to the fact that we only consider two time periods.
We can therefore argue that our measure of information quality captures the household
vulnerability to idiosyncratic shocks that occur between those two periods.
   A more worrying possible criticism is that the quality of information and the struc-
ture of the networks does not change randomly, but might be linked to individual
incentives and economic opportunities. As we will see below, much of the variation
in household information quality is driven by distance between geographic locations,
which is in turn driven by migration decisions. While migration decisions are very
likely to be driven by economic opportunities, we stress that our characterization of
risk sharing, based on measuring how household vulnerability is affected by the quality
of information (or the position in the network) takes these variables as predetermined.
   Considering, for instance, equation (11), we notice that the left-hand side represents
changes in the log of the marginal utility for household i belonging to group g . The
residual term of that equation, i,g
                                t represents measurement error and other unobserv-
able shifts to the marginal utility of consumption. One possible source of bias in the
results we obtain would be a correlation between the unobserved determinants of log
marginal utility across networks and differences in the quality of information. Reas-
suringly, however, our results do not change when we add variables, such as changes in
                                                                     i,g
family composition, that might capture part of the variability of    t ,   suggesting that
they are unlikely to be affected by this type of omitted variable bias. Of course, it
could be that idiosyncratic changes in the marginal utility of consumption could in-
duce migration of some network members and, as a consequence, be correlated with
the quality of information. We take the information structure in an extended family


                                           10
network (and its drivers) as given and predetermined at the start of the period over
which we consider consumption changes.


3       The data from Tanzania

The Kagera Health and Development Survey (KHDS) in Tanzania is one of the longest
running African panel surveys designed to study long-run and inter-generational trends
in and mechanisms of poverty persistence and economic growth in rural households.
Kagera region lies at the shores of Lake Victoria and shares a border with Uganda,
Rwanda and Burundi. The 2012 census estimated a population of just under 2.5
million. More than 80% of the households rely on agricultural production as their
main source of income (NBS, 2013). The first round of KHDS interviews was held
in 1991-1994 with 915 households originating from 51 villages and urban areas across
Kagera interviewed up to four times. The first follow-up survey was organized in 2004
with the aim of re-interviewing all individuals ever interviewed at the baseline (1991-
94). This involved tracking individuals who had migrated away from the village to
other parts of the region, elsewhere in Tanzania or to neighboring Uganda. More than
93% of the baseline households were re-contacted after a 10-year period (see Beegle
et al. (2006))5 . The second follow-up survey was organized in 2010. This time the
tracking success rate was 92%; that is at least one original household member was
interviewed for 92% of baseline households (see DeWeerdt et al. (2012)).Relative to
comparable panel surveys, these household level attrition rates are exceptionally low
(Alderman et al., 2001).
    At the individual level, the re-interview rates among survivors were 82% in 2004
and 85% in 2010. The aim in the 2004 and 2010 survey rounds was to re-interview
all of the surviving individuals who were on at least one of the 1991-1994 household
rosters. In total, there were 6,353 individuals on these; by 2010, 1,275 of these had
died while 85% of the surviving 4,996 individuals were re-interviewed.
    At each round of the survey a complete multi-topic household questionnaire was
administered to all split-off households containing individuals who had resided in the
original baseline sample of households. Topics covered ranged from education, health,
employment and migration of individual household members, to household asset own-
ership, consumption expenditure, formal and informal networks, remittances, history
of economic shocks, and more (see DeWeerdt et al. (2012) for a detailed description).

    5
        This excludes 17 households in which all previous household members were deceased.

                                                  11
   We now present some basic sample descriptive statistics and discuss the key features
which make these data uniquely suitable for our analysis.

3.1   Sample Characteristics

Table 1 some descriptive statistics for the sample. We focus here on the sample we will
use in the main analysis which excludes some households (we discuss which ones below).
In total we focus on 2,780 households formed from 709 original baseline households.
By 2010 these were still predominantly located in rural areas with nearly 70% in well
connected or remore villages. About half relied on agriculture as the main source of
household income. The great majority of households (79%) have a male head who,
on average has around 6 years of schooling (equivalent to completing primary school).
Even focusing on individuals with the highest level of education in the household, we
see that this is equivalent to incomplete lower secondary schooling.
   The main outcome in our analysis is consumption growth between 2004 and 2010;
which seems quite substantial over that period. On average, in 2010, per-capita con-
sumption is measured to be nearly 60% higher than that in 2004. Growth in non-food
consumption has significantly exceeded that in food consumption, at 97% and 39%
respectively. This increase is likely to be driven by several factors, including ageing
and family changes, as well as aggregate growth. It is clear from the data that migra-
tion plays an important role; while per-capita consumption grew at half of the average
rate (by 32%) among those who stayed in the original baseline villages, it more than
doubled among those who moved outside the region. This difference is highlighted in
other studies using these data (see Beegle et al. (2006) and De Weerdt and Hirvonen
(2016)).

3.2   Household Consumption Expenditure and Shocks

We now turn to the key variables in the analysis set out in Section 2.3, including con-
sumption expenditure and household income. Detailed consumption expenditure data
were collected in each round of the survey. We utilise consumption expenditure data
collected in the 2004 and 2010 rounds. The questionnaires included modules captur-
ing food and non-food consumption, with differing recall periods to reflect seasonality
of consumption of certain items and several checks built in to accurately capture con-
sumption from home-production. The surveys also included price questionnaires which
were used to generate temporal and spatial deflators for the consumption expenditure
aggregates (DeWeerdt et al., 2012).

                                          12
                                                                         13




                 Table 1: Sample Characteristics

                                                         .
                                              Mean              SD
Location of household
Regional capital/city                          0.19            0.39
District capital/peri-urban town               0.12            0.33
Well-connected village                         0.54            0.50
Remote village                                 0.15            0.36
Main source of hh income
Non-agricultural wage employment               0.16            0.37
Non-agricultural self-employment               0.10            0.30
Agriculture                                    0.53            0.50
Other                                          0.21            0.41
Household consumption expenditure
2004 consumption per capita (in 2010 TZS)   444,680.83       390770.05
2010 consumption per capita (in 2010 TZS)   702,459.58       745049.09
Household composition
Head is male                                   0.79             0.41
Head age                                      41.56            15.48
Head education                                 6.18             3.22
Highest level of education in hh               7.42             2.72
Household size                                 4.64             2.39
Male age 0 to 15                               0.45             0.50
Female age 0 to 15                             0.48             0.50
Male age 6 to 60                               1.06             0.74
Female age 6 to 60                             1.12             0.75
Male age 61+                                   0.08             0.27
Female age 61+                                 0.12             0.34
Observations                                  2,780
    Unfortunately, our data do not include detailed information on household income
for the last (2010) survey wave. It is, therefore, not possible to run equations (11) to
(12) as specified. Instead of income, however, we have information about the shocks,
positive and negative, these households recall experiencing in each year between 2004
and 2010, collected in 2010. Specifically, for each year between 2004 and 2010 all
individuals who had been members of the original households in 1991-94 were asked
to report whether it was a very good, good, average, bad, or very bad year. For very
good and very bad years they were further asked to give reasons and for very bad years
ways in which they coped.
   The top panel of Table 2 shows that only a fifth of households did not report
experiening a bad or very bad shock in any of the years between 2004 and 2010.
Households reported experiencing a bad shock in an average of 2.5 years over this
period. Good shocks and very good shocks are less prevalent, though still nearly two-
thirds of the households report experiencing at least one during the recall period.
   To give some idea of what the key risks for families in this context are, the middle
panel shows the reasons given by the 1,627 individuals in the sample who report having
had a very bad year at least once during the recall period. Most commonly cited reasons
include family illness and death, as well as poor harvest. The bottom panel of the table
suggests that family and friends are an important source of support during these hard
times; two out of five individuals who report experiencing a very bad shock during the
recall period said that they relied on family and friends as the main coping strategy.
Other most commonly cited strategies include reducing consumption and taking on
more work. In this paper we focus on shocks reported for 2010, the year immediately
preceding the survey. The table shows that 35% of households reported experiencing
a bad or very bad shock in that period, and nearly the same proportion (33%) a good
or very good one.
   In the third panel of Table 2, we report information on the main coping strategies
individual households use to deal with the negative shocks they received. We notice
that the most common coping mechanisms, used by nearly 40% of the households, is
support from family and friends. The second most common coping mechanism is a
reduction in consumption, which is relevant for nearly 30% of the households, followed
by an increase in labor supply (25%) and dis-saving (18%).




                                          14
                                                                      15




                Table 2: Shocks, their causes and consequences

                                                            Mean    SD
Shock prevalence
Any bad or very bad shock btw 2004 and 2010                  0.80   0.40
Any good or very good shock btw 2004 and 2010                0.65   0.48
Years with bad/very bad shocks btw 2004 and 2010             2.57   2.11
Years with good/very good shocks btw 2004 and 2010           2.27   2.30
Any bad or very bad shock in 2010                            0.35   0.48
Any good or very good shock in 2010                          0.33   0.47
N                                                           3,313
Shock cause (2004-2010)
Failed harvest                                               0.32   0.47
Loss of employment                                           0.12   0.32
Family illness/death                                         0.38   0.49
Loss of assets                                               0.08   0.27
Other                                                        0.11   0.31
N                                                           1,627
Coping strategies (2004-2010)
Reduced consumption                                         0.29    0.46
Sold Assets                                                  0.18   0.39
Took on more work                                            0.25   0.43
Diversified (business/crops)                                 0.11   0.31
Support from formal/informal orgs                            0.03   0.16
Relied on family and friends                                 0.39   0.49
Migrated for work                                            0.03   0.17
Other                                                        0.16   0.36
N                                                           1,627
3.3     Family Networks

A key feature of the data that makes our analysis possible is availability of information
on a relatively large number of "family networks". We define a family network as the
group of households formed by individuals who were living in a single household at
the beginning of the data collection and that have subsequently split-off into different
households, for a variety of reasons, including marriage and migration. Some of these
split-off households are located in the same village as the original nucleus, others are
in near-by villages and others still live in relatively far away places. Our data include
a large sample of such networks; while the original 1991-94 sample consisted of 915
households, the 2010 sample contains members from 816 of these residing across 3,313
households. That is, on average each ot the original households had split into just over
4 households. Consistently with this Table 3 shows that by 2010 only about half of
the original members of the 1991-94 households were still living in the original village;
about a third moved out of the villages but remained in the region and 15% had left
the region either relocationg to another part of Tanzania or leaving the country.
      Column 2 in Table 3 shows proportions of original households (or family networks)
that had at least one member residing in each of the listed locations. This presents
a somewhat different picture. Although about half of the original 4,287 household
members who were re-surveyd in 2010 had moved to a different location, the great
majority (86%) of the networks still had at least one member residing in the original
village in 2010. Similarly, while only 15% of the individuals had moved out of the
region by 2010, they came from 40% of the family networks. Maps in Appendix A
show changes in the spatial distribution of the households between 1991-94 and 2010.

                          Table 3: KHDS 2010 sample location

                                                               .
                                    Location of original          Family networks in 2010
                                 household members in 2010     with at least one individual in:
 Same village as in baseline                0.52                             0.86
 Nearby village                             0.09                             0.31
 Same region as in baseline                 0.23                             0.60
 Another region in Tanzania                 0.14                             0.36
 Another country                            0.01                             0.04
 Observations                              4,287                             816




                                           16
4      Information Quality

In the 2010 (last) data-collection round of the KHDS a big effort was made to cap-
ture interactions within the family networks and quality of information that members
possess about each other's standard of living. This is the information that makes this
data-set uniquely suited for our purposes.

4.1     Measuring information quality

Specifically, in the 2010 round each household within a family network was asked a
series of questions about each of the other households in the family network. The
information collected includes how often each pair interact and in what way, history
of recent monetary and in-kind transfers and, critically for us, their beliefs about asset
ownership among the other households in the network. The asset list includes house,
land, livestock, phone, TV, and motorized vehicle. Each household was asked about
whether they themselves owned these assets and whether they believed that each of
the other households did. For each dyad within the network, then, these data provide
information on the"truth" (self-reported asset ownership for each household in the
network) and the "beliefs" regarding all other households in the network. In this set-
up, the quality of information that household i has about household j can differ from
the information that household j has about household i. A limitation of the data is
that original household members who were still living in the original baseline village in
2010 were not asked about eachother even if they were living in diffierent households
so we have to assume that they have perfect information about each other.
      In the exercise we perform, we need to construct statistics that represent the qual-
ity of information between the nodes of the family network. In total once we exclude
households with no split offs and households for which we have no 2004 data, or are
missing data for key variables we have a sample of 709 family networks, 2,780 house-
holds and 12,693 dyads (descriptive statistics for these households are presented in
Table 1 above).
   In order to use these data to construct a measure of information quality within a
family network (and the quality of the information about a generic individual wealth),
                                          j
we assume that there is a latent variable i,g , which represents the wealth or well being
of household i as perceived by household j ; where both households i and j belong to
                      i
family g . Note that i,g represents the `true' latent variable for household i. While we
do not have direct information about either the `true' wealth of household i or how this


                                             17
wealth is perceived by household j , we have answers to questions about households i
owning a number of assets given by all the households in the family to which i belongs,
including i themself. We denote with Ak,j
                                      i,g a variable that indicates whether household
j thinks that household i of family g owns asset k . Ak,i
                                                      i,g indicates whether household i
actually owns asset k .
   Before delving into the description of the methodology we use to synthetise the
information different households have of the wealth held by other member of the family
network, we present some evidence about the correctness of the information about
individual assets. In Table 4, we notice that a relative high proportion of answers
about individual assets are `correct', in the sense that they coincide with the answer
given by the individual owner. For all individual assets, the proportion of correct
answers is close to 80%. However, less than half the dyads report correct answer for
all assets. Therefore, we conclude that the information in the family networks in our
sample is far from perfect.

                         Table 4: Quality of information: descriptive

                                                                      Mean                   SD
 Proportion of assets reported correctly
 by other households
 House                                                                0.80                  0.40
 Land                                                                 0.79                  0.41
 Animals                                                              0.79                  0.40
 Phone                                                                0.77                  0.42
 TV                                                                   0.79                  0.41
 Car                                                                  0.74                  0.44
 Proportion of all assets reported correctly                          0.78                  0.29
 All assets reported correctly                                        0.46                  0.50
 N                                                                   12,693


   To summarize the answers that individual dyads of households give about each
other asset ownerships into a single index reflecting the quality of information about
                                                  j
that dyad, we assume that, while the latent index i,g is unobservable by the researcher,
the information about asset ownership is related to such a latent variable by an Item
Response Theory model. In particular, we assume that the standard of living latent
         j
variable i,g determines the probability that household i owns asset k according to a
1-parameter Rasch model:6

   6
       We tried to estimate a 2-parameter Rasch model but encountered some convergence issues.

                                                 18
                Figure 1: Kdensity of "true" & "perceived" living standard 


                                                     k + i
                                                 e      i,g
                     P rob{Ak,i
                            i,g   = 1} =                  i
                                                       k +i,g
                                                                i
                                                                i,g  N (0,  2 )(13)
                                  1+e
When information is available about at least two assets, it is possible to estimate
the parameters of the measurement system in equation (13). Given estimates of the
relevant paramters, it is possible to obtain, from a set of measures Ak,i
                                                                      i,g , an estimate of
the unobservable household wealth i , which we denote by     ^i . The parameters of this
                                           i,g                         i,g
model and the answers provided by household j about household i's assets can be also
used to get an estimate of j , ^j . The model in equation(13) effectively summarizes
                               i,g   i,g
the information about asset ownership in a single index. Analogously, the same model
can be used to summarize the answers provided by household j on household i so to
obtain ^j . The implicit assumption is that the latent factor representing j 's perception
          i,g
about i's wealth can be represented by a model like the one in equation (13). Or, in
other words, that household j 's answers to questions about various items owned by
household i are driven by the sample factor that drives the answers by their own
wealth.
   Figure 1 shows the distribution of the true and the perceived living standard es-
timates from the IRT model. The fact that the two are not perfectly overlapping
suggests that households in the network are not perfectly informed about each-other's
living standards.


                                                      19
4.2      Constructing measures of information quality

We then take assume the difference between ^j and ^i as reflecting the quality of
                                            i,g    i,g
information about income flows and shocks of the network members. We note that the
                                                      i
model in equation (13) assumes that the latent factor i,g is normally distributed. This
might not be the best representation of the variability of economic well-being witin a
network. We therefore consider three alternative measures that capture the different
between i's `true well-being' and the perception of the same factor as held by household
j . In particular, we define three different measures to capture such difference, which
          g,
we label qi,j , = 1, 2, 3.

                                          g,1
                                         qi,j = |^i - ^j |                               (14)
                                                  i,g  i,g
                                          g,2        ^i
                                                             ^j
                                                             
                                         qi,j    = |e i,g   -ei,g   |
                                          g,3       |^i - ^j |
                                         qi,j = e     i,g  i,g




The first measure takes the estimates of the latent factor i,g straight from the Rasch
model in equation (13). The second measure considers the exponents of the latent factor
estimated with the Rasch model, implicitly assuming that the factor being modeled in
equation (13) is the log of the factor of interest. In this case, therefore, we express the
distance between the actual and perceived status in term of the levels of this variable,
as specified in the second line of equation 14. The third measure is somewhat in the
middle of the first two. Given these definitions of the distance between the true and
perceived well-being status, we construct an index that varies between 0 and 1. In
particular, for each of the measures in (14) we define:7

                         g,          1                           g,3        2
                         ij =          g,
                                             ,    = 1, 2;        ij  =        g,3 .      (15)
                                 1+   qi,j                               1 + qi,j
            g,                                                                        g,
      When qi,j is zero, that is the information j has about i is perfectly accurate, i,j = 1.
                                                          g,
Vice-versa, when the same information is very inaccurate, i,j tends to zero.
                                             g,1
      Taking the simplest of these measures (ij  ), we now analyse how our measure of the
quality of information between two households are related to a series of characteristics
that we would expect it to be related to. Most obviously, households that are located
closer together and those that interact more should have better information about
eachother. Table 5 shows that this is indeed the case - the degree of misperception is
highly positively correlated with physical distance as well as with frequency of contact.

   7
       We multiply the third measure by 2 so that it varies between zero and 1.

                                                   20
For households living close to each other (bottom quintile of geodesic distance from
each other in which households are on average 400 meters apart), our measure is closed
                      8
to perfect at 0.97.       However, already for households at the median distance from each
other (17.2kms), the average index is 0.75. The same index declines to 0.67 for the
households living in top quintile of distance from each other.
   A similar pattern is observed if we consider how our index varies with the frequency
of contact. For households that have spoken to each other less than a month before
the interview, the average index is 0.86. This declines with frequency: for households
that have not spoken for more than 5 years the index is 0.64.
                      Table 5: Quality of information and observables

                                                                               Mean           SD
 Quality of information by distance btw households
 Q1 (0.4km)                                                                     0.97         0.11
 Q2 (4.2km)                                                                     0.81         0.23
 Q3 (17.2km)                                                                    0.75         0.24
 Q4 (81.6km)                                                                    0.70         0.25
 Q5 (613.5km)                                                                   0.67         0.24
 Quality of information by last time households spoke
 Less Than A Month Ago                                                          0.86         0.21
 Less Than A Year Ago                                                           0.74         0.23
 Less Than 2 Years Ago                                                          0.71         0.25
 Less Than 5 Years Ago                                                          0.66         0.25
 More Than 5 Years Ago                                                          0.64         0.26
 Don't Remember                                                                 0.59         0.26
 N                                                                             12,693

                                   g,
   Having constructed the indexes {i,j , = 1, 2, 3} for each dyad in the network, we
                                       g,
can organise them into a matrix Ag, = [i,j ], for each family network in our data, where
       g,
we set i,i = 0, i. The matrices Ag, so constructed are weighted adjacency matrices.
We note that, unlike many of these matrices used in the literature, their elements are
not binary, as they can take continuous values between 0 and 1. Furthermore, these
matrices can be asymmetric, as the quality of information that household i has about
household j might be different from the quality of information that j has about i.
   Given an adjacency matrix Ag, , for each household in family g , we can now con-
struct measures of their position in the network. In our empirical application, we will
   8
     This is mostly mechanical as we assume perfect information for all households within a family
network still located in the baseline village, since data on how much they know about eachother were
not collected for these.

                                                21
      (a) Indegree Centrality (InQh,
                                  i )                (b) Outdegree Centrality (OutQh,
                                                                                   i )

                     Figure 2: Kdensity of InQh,
                                              i  and OutQh,
                                                         i



use measures of degree centrality, which can be obtained summing or averaging, for
each household, the elements of the row or the columns of the adjacency matrix corre-
sponding to that household. As the matrices we are considering is not symmetric, the
measures obtained averaging the rows or the columns are different. Averaging over the
rows of the adjaciency matrices we get:

                                            1
                                 InQg,
                                    i =
                                                             g,
                                                             ik                          (16)
                                          Kg - 1      k=i

where Kg is the number of households in family g . The expression in equation (16)
is the in-degree centrality derived from the adjacency matrix Ag, and represents the
average quality of the information the network has about the wealth of household
i. Analogously, we can construct the out-degree centrality measure for household i
averaging the elements of the matrix Ag, corresponding to column i. This measure
represents the average quality of the information household i has about the other
network members.
                                            1
                             OutQg,
                                 i =
                                                             g,
                                                             ki                          (17)
                                          Kg - 1       k=i

   Finally, we can also define the quality of information in family g averaging the
individual measures as:
                                                Kg
                                          1
                                 IQg,
                                        =             InQg,
                                                         j                               (18)
                                          Kg    j

   We notice that the expression in equation (18) can be constructed either from
equation 16) or equation (17).


                                           22
   In Figures 2, for each of our information quality measures, we plot the density distri-
bution of the in-degree and out-degree centrality in our sample of individual households.
The three measures, with the possible exception of the third one, are distributed in a
reasonably similar fashion, which spans a large set of values. The mode of the three
distributions is above 0.80. The three distributions seem to be left-skewed.
    Table 6 shows the means and standard deviations of the various degree centrality
measures considered, both at the family network and the household levels; for the
household level measures we also include the matrix of correlation coefficients. At the
family network level, mean degree centrality across the three measures is around 0.8;
it is lowest for the second measure at 0.7. A similar picture emerges, not surprisingly,
from the household level measures of degree centrallity. For each of the three measures,
in-degree and out-degree centrality vary similarly in our sample with a correlation
coefficient which is above 0.9. We notice, however, that, for each of the three measures,
the correlation between in- and out- degree centrality is much lower, at around 0.3. In
our sample there seems to a considerable level of asymmetry in the adjacency matrices
we construct with our measures of information quality.

  Table 6: Summary statistics and correlation matrix: network centrality measures

                      Mean     SD       InQh,
                                           i
                                              1
                                                  InQh,
                                                     i
                                                        2
                                                            InQh,
                                                               i
                                                                  3
                                                                      OutQh,
                                                                          i
                                                                             1
                                                                                 OutQh,
                                                                                     i
                                                                                        2
                                                                                             OutQh,
                                                                                                 i
                                                                                                    3

 Household level
 InQh,
     i
       1
                       0.79   0.17      1.000
 InQh,
     i
       2
                       0.77   0.20      0.944     1.000
 InQh,
     i
       3
                       0.81   0.18      0.983     0.929     1.000
 OutQh,i
         1
                       0.78   0.16      0.318     0.313     0.303      1.000
 OutQh,i
         2
                       0.77   0.18      0.316     0.322     0.303      0.956      1.000
 OutQh,i
         3
                       0.80   0.16      0.305     0.301     0.294      0.983      0.943       1.000
 N                    2,780
 Family network
 IQh,1                 0.79   0.13
 IQh,2                 0.77   0.15
 IQh,3                 0.80   0.13
 N                     709




                                           23
5    Risk sharing and the quality of information
     within family networks.

Following the empirical strategy set out in Section 2.3, to measure the extent of risk
sharing and deviations from first best allocations, similarly to Townsend (1994), we
relate changes in individual consumption to idiosyncratic shocks; under perfect risk
sharing, after controlling for risk-sharing group x time effects, these shocks should be
diversified. In particular, we estimate the following regression:

                     s ln(u (cjg     g       jg      jg
                              t )) = t + 1 BSt + 2 GSt + +
                                                                    jg
                                                                    t                 (19)

where s ln(u (cjg
               t )) is the change in consumption for individual household j in family
network g , GStjg and BStjg are indicators for good and bad shocks received by that
household and tg reflect family network level resources and shocks at time t. These
shocks might be in part attenuated by risk sharing mechanisms (such as saving or in-
teractions with other groups) that we do not consider explicitly. The tg 's are estimated
as coefficients on group x time dummy variables. As discussed above, the definition
of the group g is taken as given in our framework. g can represent villages or family
networks or another predetermined group. In our exercise we consider risk sharing
within family networks.
   Unlike Townsend (1994), given the available information in our data, we do not use
individual income to test for perfect risk sharing. Instead, we use the information on
individual shocks of various nature, which we have discussed in Section 3.2. We also
note that the changes in (log) consumption are not across adjacent time periods since
data on these are not available: we use the difference across availale time-periods in
the analysis nevertheless to eliminate from the equation taken to the data the Pareto
weights from the social planner problem. In the presence of perfect risk-sharing we
would expect the coefficients 1 and 2 in equation(19), after controlling for group
level shocks, represented by the group x time th dummies, to be zero.
    This is not what we find: the results in the first column of Table 7 show that the
coefficients on the bad shock indicators (1 ) is statistically significant and negative, so
that experiencing a bad or very bad shock in 2010 is related to a decrease in individual
household consumption between 2004 and 2010. On the other hand, the coefficient on
the `good shock' is very small and, while positive, not significantly different from zero.
    This evidence represents a rejection of perfect risk sharing in that idiosyncratic
shocks are not fully diversified within the family network and is consistent with findings
in other work (including work on this specific study context). The main purpose of this

                                            24
 Table 7: Sensitivity of risk-sharing to quality of information within family network

                                                   (1)       (2)         (3)             (4)
 Inf. quality measure                             none      IQh,1       IQh,2           IQh,3
 Bad shock in 2010                            -0.134        -0.420       -0.324         -0.324
                                               (0.035)     (0.256)      (0.223)        (0.223)
 Good shock in 2010                            0.00289    0.679         0.561          0.561
                                               (0.036)     (0.262)      (0.227)        (0.227)
 Good shock X mean degree cent IQh,                       -0.863       -0.729         -0.729
                                                           (0.332)      (0.293)        (0.293)
 Bad shock X mean degree cent IQh,                          0.365         0.248          0.248
                                                           (0.324)      (0.287)        (0.287)
 Constant                                     0.434       0.434        0.434          0.434
                                              (0.0125)    (0.0240)     (0.0241)       (0.0241)
 Observations                                     2,780     2,780       2,780           2,780
 Standard errors in parentheses
 Dep var = change in lnpcconsumption btw 2004-2010 (2010 prices); Family network FE
 Shock = 1 if reported by anyone in household
 
   p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01


paper is to relate these deviations from perfect risk sharing to imperfect information.
As a first step in that direction, we interact the income shock variables with measures
that reflect the quality of information in the network. Following the approach suggested
in equation (11), we estimate the following regression:



     s ln(u (cj,g    g              g,  j,g            g,  j,g
              t )) = t + (01 + 11 IQ )BSt + (02 + 12 IQ )GSt +
                                                                                  j,g
                                                                                  t        (20)

where we interact good and bad idiosyncratic shocks with the information quality in
the family network g , using the three different versions of IQg, derived in equation
(18).As we discuss in Section 4, IQg, is close to zero in family network with information
of very poor quality and is 1 when informationn about asset ownership is perfect. We
report the results in columns (2) to (4) of Table 7.
   Given the specification in equation (20), the coefficients on the good and bad shocks
now represent how household consumption is affected by those idiosyncratic shocks in
networks with very low levels of information quality. On the other hand, the impact of
bad and good shocks in networks with perfect information quality is obtained summing
by summing the coefficients in rows (2) and (3) for the good shocks and in rows (1)
and (4) for the bad shocks.

                                             25
   Starting with the coefficient on the good shocks, which in column (1) is effectively
0, we notice that it becomes positive and strongly significant in columns (3) an (4)
for networks with very poor information quality. On the other hand, in networks with
very good information quality, the coefficient is close to be zero. These results hold for
all three definitions of information quality that we use.
    Moving now to the negative shocks, for which the coefficient in column (1) is -0.13
and significant, we notice that for networks with very poor quality of information, the
coefficient is larger in absolute value. Moreover, the coefficient on the interactions is
of the opposite sign (row (4)) so that the sum of these cofficients and those in the first
row is close to zero. These estimates, however, are not very precise, so that all these
coefficients are not significantly different from zero. These results are also very similar
across the three different measures of information quality.
   We conclude that the evidence in Table 7 constitutes suggestive evidence that the
quality of information affects the amount of risk sharing that we observe in family
networks. The evidence is particularly convincing for positive shocks, although the
point estimates for negative shocks offer a similar story, albeit with low precision.
    Having considered the quality of information in a network we now move to consider-
ing how the sensitivity of household consumption to idiosyncratic shocks is affected by
their position in the family network, as measured by the network centrality measures
we have considered. In particular, we estimate the following equation:



     s ln(u (cj,g    g               g,  j,g             g,  j,g
              t )) = t + (01 + 21 IPi )BSt + (02 + 22 IPi )GSt +
                                                                               j,g
                                                                               t        (21)

where IPig, is either the in-degree centrality InQh,
                                                  i as computed in equation (16) or the
out-degree centrality measure as constructed in equation (17). As above, we compute
these statistics for each of the adjaciency matrices we derived. The first set of results,
which we report in Table 8, measures how the quality of information about the situation
of household i among other households in the family network affects the sensitivity of
its consumption to shocks, while the second, reported in Table 9, measures how the
quality of information household i has about the situations of other households in the
network affects its sensitivity to its own shocks.
   The first column of Table 8 is reproduced from the same column in Table 7. When
in Columns 2 to 4 we add the measures of in-degree centrality, the results change
substantially, especially for the second measure (column(3)). First, we notice that the
in-degree centrality measures themselves are significant. Households that are more

                                            26
                                                                                               27




Table 8: Sensitivity of risk-sharing to quality of information other households in a
family network have about household

                                                  (1)         (2)         (3)           (4)
 In-degree cent. measure                         none       InQh,
                                                                i
                                                                  1
                                                                        InQh,i
                                                                               2
                                                                                      InQh,
                                                                                          i
                                                                                            3


 Bad shock in 2010                             -0.134      -0.457      -0.426         -0.419
                                               (0.0350)     (0.164)     (0.146)       (0.164)
 Good shock in 2010                             0.00289      0.428       0.279        0.417
                                               (0.0363)     (0.166)     (0.144)       (0.166)
 HH indegree cent InQh,
                     i                                      -0.337       -0.252       -0.327
                                                            (0.152)     (0.139)       (0.148)
 Good shock X HH indegree cent InQh,
                                  i                        -0.535       -0.360        -0.511
                                                            (0.206)     (0.182)       (0.202)
 Bad shock X HH indegree cent InQh,
                                 i                          0.413       0.379          0.357
                                                            (0.203)     (0.184)       (0.199)
 Constant                                      0.434       0.697       0.627          0.695
                                               (0.0241)     (0.121)     (0.109)       (0.121)
 Observations                                    2,780       2,780       2,780         2,780
 Standard errors in parentheses
 Dep var = change in lnpcconsumption btw 2004-2010 (2010 prices); Family network FE
 Shock = 1 if reported by anyone in the household
 
   p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01
central experience, on average, lower levels of consumption growth. More importantly,
the coefficients on both the negative and positive shocks increase in size and are both
statistically significantly different from zero. These coefficients are relevant for house-
holds that have very low levels of in-degree centrality, that is households for which
the information that other households in the network have is very poor. This result is
particularly evident for the second and third measures that we use. Households about
whom the network has better information experience consumption growth that is less
volatile than average while, at the same time, experiencing lower growth. It is as if
these household compensate for the reduced variability with lower cosumption growth.
   When we look at the interactions of the in-degree centrality with the shocks, we
notice that both interactions are significantly different from zero and attract a coeffi-
cient which is opposite in sign to the coefficients on the shocks. For instance, in column
(3), for a household which experiences a bad shock and whose economic situation is
well known to other households in the network so that it has an in-degree centrality of
1, the effect of a bad shock is given by -0.047=0.379-0.426), which is not statistically
different from zero. Analogously, for the same households a positive shock attracts a
coefficient of -0.081=0.279-0.36. Similar results hold for the third measure.
   After the in-degree centrality, we also look at whether out-degree centrality play a
role. That is we investigate whether the quality of information that each household i
has about the economic status of the rest of the family network affects the relationship
between consumption changes and idiosyncratic shocks. With this objective, we re-
estimate equation (21) using as the IPig, variable the out-degree centrality measures
constructed in equation (17). We report the results in Table 9.
   In this case, the information quality variable does not seem to play any role. None
of the terms involving such a variable are stastically significant and, as the results
become much nosier, no clear patterns emerge. We conclude that out-degree centrality
does not play any role in the amount of risk sharing we observe in our sample.
   Overall, these results suggest that the level of information within a network matters.
It also matters, however, what information we consider. The results in Table 7 pro-
vide suggestive evidence that in family networks with better information consumption
allocations are closer to what would be observed under perfect risk sharing.
   The results based on the quality of information about household income is even
stronger and more precise. It indicates that households with high in-degree centrality
are less sensitive to indiosyncratic shocks. It also indicates that they experience, on
avergage, slower consumption growth. On the other hand, the sensitivity of individual


                                            28
                                                                                            29




Table 9: Sensitivity of risk-sharing to quality of information household has about other
households in the family network

                                                     (1)       (2)         (3)          (4)
 Out-degree centr. measure                          none     OutQh,i
                                                                     1
                                                                         OutQh,i
                                                                                 2
                                                                                      OutQh,i
                                                                                              3


 Bad shock in 2010                                -0.134       -0.139     -0.126      -0.0997
                                                  (0.0350)    (0.185)    (0.160)      (0.186)
 Good shock in 2010                                0.00289      0.116     0.0852        0.162
                                                  (0.0363)    (0.191)    (0.165)      (0.195)
 HH outdegree cent OutQh,
                       i                                       0.124      0.0523       0.195
                                                              (0.183)    (0.161)      (0.180)
 Good shock X HH outdegree cent OutQh,
                                    i                          -0.144     -0.107       -0.200
                                                              (0.239)    (0.209)      (0.238)
 Bad shock X HH outdegree cent OutQh,
                                   i                          0.00741    -0.0104      -0.0424
                                                              (0.233)    (0.204)      (0.230)
 Constant                                         0.434       0.336      0.393         0.278
                                                  (0.0241)    (0.146)    (0.126)      (0.146)
 Observations                                      2,780       2,780      2,780        2,780
 Standard errors in parentheses
 Dep var = change in lnpcconsumption btw 2004-2010 (2010 prices); Family network FE
 Shock = 1 if reported by anyone in the household
 
   p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01
household to idiosyncratic shocks does not seem to be affected by out-degree centrality.
The next step to this analysis is to consider models that can justify these patterns.


6    Conclusions

In this paper, we have studied the relationship between risk sharing within family
networks and the quality of the information within these networks. To this end we
have used a unique data set from Tanzania that has followed more than 700 family
networks over a period of nearly 20 years, even when some of their members migrated
outside of the original villages that they we living when the data collection was started.
   A unique feature of these data is that they ask each individual household within
a network information about their own wealth and assets held by the other members.
We use this information to construct measures of the quality of the information flows
between any two member households of the family network. We show that our method
of constructing measures of information quality yields estimates that vary in a way that
is consistent with what one would expect: households that are geographically closer to
each other or that talk to each other often have better information about each other.
To the best of our knowledge, the construction of these measures is novel and has not
been used before. Moreover, we use the information quality measures we estimate to
construct weighted adjaciency matrices for each of our network which are asymmetric
and value each link between two individual households in terms of the quality of the
information flows mong them.
    We then relate the quality of information we derive to the degree of risk sharing, as
measured by some standard regressions of the type proposed by Townsend (1994) re-
lating household consumption changes to household shocks, after controlling for family
network level shocks. We show that in networks with better information quality, con-
sumption allocations are closer to what one would observe under perfect risk sharing.
More precisely, we show that households that more is known about in the network, are
less sensitive to idiosyncratic shocks.
   The quality of information between two households in a network is linked to specific
choices individual make and in particular to migration. Individual households that are
induced, by economic opportunities and other motives, to live far from other members
of the network, effectively affect the quality of information. We argue, however, that
as we consider the sensitivity of individual consumption to shocks experienced after
the structure of the network and therefore the quality of iinformation within it is
established, this issue does not bias our results about the extent ot risk sharing.

                                           30
   To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study that relates information quality
to risk sharing. While the results are very intuitive, the next step, that is being
taken in Attanasio et al. (2020, in progress), is to consider risk sharing arrangements
with information frictions and relate the consumption allocations that arise from such
arrangements to the properties of the network that can be derived from the informatin
data that we have.
   Finally, we conclude with a note of caution. Our study does not characterise risk
sharing fully. We only consider, partly because of the nature of the data we have, risk
sharing within a specific network and ignore possible other mechanisms that could in-
volve individuals outside the family network or other arrangements. Furthermore, our
focus is on ex-post risk-coping strategies. Quality of information within the network
may also affect ex-ante behaviour. We do not see evidence of systematic differences in
frequency with which good and bad shocks occur in households belonging to networks
with better and worse information. However, this question warrants further investi-
gation.   We also do not consider other frictions, such as the imperfect enforceability
of contracts. Neither do we consider the process of network formation and specific
processes (such as migration) that lead to better or worse information quality. These
are important areas of future research.




                                           31
References
Albarran, P. and Attanasio, O. P. (2003). Limited commitment and crowding out of
  private transfers: evidence from a randomised experiment. The Economic Journal
  113(486):C77­C85.

Alderman, H., Behrman, J., Kohler, H.-P., Maluccio, J. A., and Watkins, S. (2001).
  Attrition in Longitudinal Household Survey Data: Some Tests for Three Developing-
  Country Samples. Demographic Research 5(4):79­124.

Ambrus, A., Gao, W. Y., and Milan, P. (2019). Informal risk sharing with local
 information.

Ambrus, A., Mobius, M., and Szeidl, A. (2014). Consumption risk-sharing in social
 networks. American Economic Review 104:149­182.

Atkinson, A. (1991). International lending with moral hazard and risk of repudiation .

Attanasio, O., Krutikova, S., Milan, P., and de Paula, A. (2020, in progress). Con-
  strained optimal risk sharing in networks with imperfect information.

Attanasio, O. and Rios-Rull, J.-V. (2000). Consumption smoothing in island economies:
  Can public insurance reduce welfare? European economic review 44(7):1225­1258.

Attanasio, O. P. and Pavoni, N. (2011). Risk sharing in private information models with
  asset accumulation: Explaining the excess smoothness of consumption. Econometrica
  79(4):1027­1068.

Beegle, K., Weerdt, J. D., Dercon, S., Ksoll, C., Kessy, F., Koda, G., Lwihula, G.,
  Kwesigabo, G., Mujinja, P., and Semali, I. (2006). Kagera health and development
  survey 2004. World Bank Microdata library.

Bold, T. and Broer, T. (2018). Risk sharing in village economies revisited. Unpublished.

Broer, T., Kapicka, M., and Klein, P. (2017). Consumption risk sharing with private
  information and limited enforcement. Review of Economic Dynamics 23:170­190.

Cole, H. L. and Kocherlakota, N. R. (2001). Efficient allocations with hidden income
  and hidden storage. The Review of Economic Studies 68(3):523­542.

De Weerdt, J., Genicot, G., and Mesnard, A. (2019). Asymmetry of information within
  family networks. Journal of Human Resources 54(1):225­25.

De Weerdt, J. and Hirvonen, K. (2016). Risk sharing and internal migration. Economic
  Development and Cultural Change 65.

Denderski, P. and Stoltenberg, C. A. (2019). Risk sharing with private and public
  information.


                                          32
DeWeerdt, J., Beegle, K., Lilleor, H. B., Dercon, S., Hirvonen, K., Kirchberger, M.,
  and Krutikova, S. (2012). Kagera health and development survey 2010. Working
  Paper Research Immigration and Integration.

Foster, A. D. and Rosenzweig, M. R. (2001). Imperfect commitment, altruism, and
  the family: Evidence from transfer behavior in low-income rural areas. Review of
  Economics and Statistics 83(3):389­407.

Kinnan, C. (2020). Distinguishing barriers to insurance in thai villages. Journal of
  Human Resources Forthcoming.

Kinnan, C. and Townsend, R. (2012). Kinship and financial networks, formal financial
  access, and risk reduction. The American Economic Review 102(3):289­293.

Kocherlakota, N. (1996). Implications of Efficient Risk Sharing without Commitment.
 The Review of Economic Studies 63(4):595­609.

Ligon, E. (1998). Risk sharing and information in village economies. The Review of
  Economic Studies 65(4):847­864.

Ligon, E., Thomas, J., and Worrall, T. (2002). Informal Insurance Arrangements with
  Limited Commitment: Theory and Evidence from Village Economies. The Review
  of Economic Studies 69(1):209­244.

Munshi, K. and Rosenzweig, M. (2016). Networks and misallocation: Insurance, migra-
 tion, and the rural-urban wage gap. The American Economic Review 106(3):46­98.

NBS (2013). Population and housing census: Population distribution by administrative
 units; key findings. URT (United Republic of Tanzania).

Rosenzweig, M. (1988). Risk, implicit contracts and the family in rural areas of low-
  income countries. The Economic Journal 98:1148­1170.

Townsend, R. (1994). Risk and insurance in village india. Econometrica 62(3):539­591.

Udry, C. (1994). Risk and insurance in a rural credit market: An empirical investigation
 in northern nigeria. The Review of Economic Studies 61(3):495­526.

Wilson, R. (1968). The theory of syndicates. Econometrica 36:119­132.




                                          33
A   Location of the KHDS sample in 1991 and 2010




                        Figure 4: 1991




                        Figure 5: 2010




                             34
