                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   THE FOOD PROBLEM AND THE AGGREGATE PRODUCTIVITY CONSEQUENCES
                         OF CLIMATE CHANGE

                                          Ishan B. Nath

                                       Working Paper 27297
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27297


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2020




I thank my advisers, Michael Greenstone, Chang-Tai Hsieh, and Pete Klenow for their guidance,
mentorship, and patience, and for sharing access to data. I also appreciate helpful comments from
Martí Mestieri, Hannes Malmberg, Tamma Carleton, Michael Dinerstein, Alessandra Voena,
Manasi Deshpande, Lauren Bergquist, Steve Cicala, Ryan Kellogg, Eyal Frank, and seminar
participants at the University of Chicago and the NBER Agriculture and Trade Confererence. I
thank Henry Zhang, Nick Tsivanidis, and Cian Ruane for help processing and cleaning my
datasets, Steve Mohr and Theodor Kulczycki for guidance on coding and computing, and the
Chicago Booth Initiative on Global Markets (IGM), and Jennifer Williams and Peggy Eppink in
particular, for providing access to the Amadeus dataset from Bureau van Dijk. Any opinions and
conclusions expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily represent the views of
the U.S. Census Bureau. All results have been reviewed to ensure that no confidential information
is disclosed. All errors and omissions are my own. The views expressed herein are those of the
author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Ishan B. Nath. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
The Food Problem and the Aggregate Productivity Consequences of Climate Change
Ishan B. Nath
NBER Working Paper No. 27297
June 2020
JEL No. O14,Q17,Q54,R11

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper integrates local temperature treatment effects and a quantitative macroeconomic
model to evaluate the impact of climate change on sectoral reallocation and aggregate
productivity. First, I use firm-level data from a wide range of countries to estimate the effect of
temperature on productivity in manufacturing and services. Estimates suggest that extreme heat
reduces non-agricultural productivity, but less so than in agriculture, implying that hot countries
could adapt to climate change by importing food and shifting labor toward manufacturing.
Second, I embed my estimates in an open-economy model of structural transformation covering
158 countries to investigate this possibility. Simulations suggest that subsistence food
requirements drive agricultural specialization more than comparative advantage, however, such
that climate change perversely pulls labor into agriculture where its productivity suffers most and
reallocation exacerbates the global decline in GDP. The productivity effects of climate change
reduce welfare by 1.5-2.7% overall and 6-10% for the poorest quartile. Trade reduces the welfare
costs of climate change by only 7.4% under existing policy, but by 31% overall and 68% for the
global poor in a counterfactual scenario that assigns all countries the 90th percentile level of trade
openness.


Ishan B. Nath
University of Chicago
inath@uchicago.edu
                        CLIMATE CHANGE & AGGREGATE PRODUCTIVITY                                     1


1       Introduction
Existing evidence suggests that climate change will cause large and heterogeneous
changes in agricultural productivity across the world during the 21st century. Fig-
ure 1 shows estimates of the global impact of climate change on agricultural pro-
ductivity from Cline (2007), which synthesizes evidence from economics, agron-
omy, and climate science.1
            Figure 1: Cline (2007) Projected Impact of Climate Change on
                         Agricultural Productivity, 2080-2099




Notes: Figure shows the projected change in revenue per acre from producing grains, vegetables,
fruits, and livestock according to analysis by Cline (2007).

    The projections in Figure 1 show large declines in agricultural productivity of
30-60% in hot regions such as Sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia, with neutral or
positive effects in cold regions such as Canada and northern Europe. This pattern
suggests large potential gains from shifting the geography of agricultural produc-
tion. If productivity suffers greatly in some places and improves in others, perhaps
market forces will cushion the damage by pushing agriculture toward temperate
climates while tropical regions reallocate production to other sectors? This paper
investigates the conditions necessary for this hypothesis to hold true, and quanti-
fies the aggregate productivity consequences of climate change in the presence of
the changes in sectoral specialization likely to occur in practice.2

    1
      I explain the methods used in Cline (2007) more in Section 7.1. The findings are broadly
consistent with a large body of economics research on the impacts of climate change in agriculture,
which includes Mendelsohn, Nordhaus and Shaw (1994), Deschenes and Greenstone (2007),
Schlenker and Roberts (2009), and Schlenker and Lobell (2010), among many others. I use Cline
(2007) in this paper because it is the best available source for country-level impact estimates that
use globally representative data and account for adaptation.
    2
      I use the phrase climate change to refer to shifting distributions of temperature in this paper.
Other consequences of climate change, such as sea-level rise or intensified hurricanes, are beyond
the scope of the analysis.
2                                          NATH 2020



    Two key elements of sectoral allocation complicate the idea that the changes in
Figure 1 will push agriculture away from the equator. First, these estimates show
the change in the absolute advantage of agricultural production, whereas compar-
ative advantage across sectors drives international trade. Ricardian models of trade
will only predict that Canada will export more food and India will import more food
if the relative productivity of agriculture rises in Canada and falls in India.3 Given
existing evidence that temperature also affects non-agricultural productivity, the
change in comparative advantage is not immediately clear.4
    Second, comparative advantage does not exclusively, or even primarily, deter-
mine sectoral specialization. Figure 2 shows that poor countries have much higher
agricultural employment shares despite lower relative value-added per worker in
agriculture compared to non-agriculture. Lagakos and Waugh (2013) calculate that,
adjusting for prices, the gap in aggregate output per worker between the 90th to
10th percentile of the world's income distribution is 45 to 1 in agriculture, but just
4 to 1 in non-agriculture. Yet agriculture's share of employment averages 65% in
10th percentile countries and only 3% in 90th percentile countries.
    Trade in agriculture plays only a small role in developing countries. The aver-
age person in the poorest quartile of the world consumes 91% domestically pro-
duced food, compared with 45% in the richest quartile. In these relatively closed
economies, high agricultural production and labor shares follow from the high
consumption shares necessary for people with low incomes to meet subsistence
requirements for food. Projecting the effects of climate change on sectoral reallo-

         Figure 2: Comparative Advantage and Specialization in Agriculture




              Notes: Figure shows data from Tombe (2015) that adjusts for prices
              for the global cross-section in 2005. Poor countries specialize heavily
              in agriculture despite low productivity relative to other sectors.
    3
     I use the word food interchangeably with agricultural production in this paper because
subsistence requirements for food drive the key features of consumer preferences in my analysis.
   4
     This evidence includes work by Zhang, Deschenes, Meng and Zhang (2018) and Somanathan,
Somanathan, Sudarshan, Tewari et al. (2015).
                       CLIMATE CHANGE & AGGREGATE PRODUCTIVITY                                  3


cation requires accounting for the forces that drive poor countries to specialize in
agriculture despite low absolute and relative productivity, a fact which the litera-
ture on the general equilibrium effects of climate change has not yet confronted.
    This paper integrates local temperature treatment effect estimates and a quan-
titative macroeconomic model to address both these challenges. First, to project
changes in agricultural comparative advantage, I provide the first global micro es-
timates of the impact of climate change on productivity in manufacturing and ser-
vices using nationally representative firm-level panel data from 17 countries that
cover over half the world's population and represent nearly the full range of temper-
atures and income levels. Using methods developed by Carleton et al. (2018), I use
my data to estimate plausibly causal treatment effects of extreme temperatures on
output-per-worker, and account for firm-level adaptation by allowing these treat-
ment effects to vary with income and expectations of temperature.
    I find that extreme heat and extreme cold can both have important effects on
non-agricultural productivity, but with strong evidence of adaptation in rich coun-
tries and to temperatures with which agents are accustomed. In poor countries
with moderate climates, an extreme day with daily maximum temperature of 40 C
or -5 C reduces annual output-per-worker by up to 0.4%, approximately the equiv-
alent of one full working day.5 Effects are about half as large in middle-income
countries, and smaller still in those places that experience given extremes more
frequently. The effects of extreme days in rich countries are negligible, with some
evidence of mild effects from unexpected extremes caused by hot days in cold
places and cold days in hot places.6 I combine these estimates of predicted tem-
perature sensitivity with global climate model predictions of future temperatures
to project the country-level effects of climate change on manufacturing and ser-
vices productivity. The effects of climate change on non-agricultural productivity
are non-trivial in some poor countries, but generally small relative to productivity
losses in agriculture. Thus, the change in the global relative productivity of agricul-
ture is qualitatively similar to the change in absolute productivity.
    Second, I construct a global open economy model of structural transforma-
tion that explains the existing distribution of sectoral specialization as a function
of sector-level productivities. The model incorporates two key features of con-
sumer preferences - nonhomothetic preferences and low substitutability across
sectors - that explain the high agricultural share of consumption in poor coun-
tries with high relative prices for food. Gollin, Parente and Rogerson (2007) re-
fer to the macro-development effects of these subsistence requirements as "the
food problem," which drives developing countries to specialize in a relatively low-

   5
      I find similar effects for manufacturing and services firms, though I lack data coverage for
services firms in poor countries where the effects of temperature are most detectable.
    6
      I find evidence that firms in rich countries mitigate the effect of extreme temperatures on
labor productivity through costly adaptation investments such as higher energy expenditures. I
use a revealed preference method to infer the magnitude of these costs and account for them in
calculating the welfare cost of climate change.
4                                            NATH 2020



productivity sector because people need food to survive. My model also includes
Ricardian comparative advantage within and across sectors, which tends to force
countries with low relative productivity in agriculture toward specializing produc-
tion in other sectors, but only to the extent that they are open to trade.
    Thus, my model shows that two competing effects govern the response of sec-
toral specialization to climate change, and that their net effect could either tem-
per or exacerbate the aggregate consequences of the sector-level changes. If the
trade effect dominates, then countries can dampen the effect of falling agricultural
productivity by shifting production to other sectors; exporting more manufactured
goods and importing more food. To the extent that climate change exacerbates `the
food problem' by reducing agricultural productivity, however, the general equilib-
rium response could pull labor into the sector suffering large declines in produc-
tivity and worsen the aggregate impact.7
    To quantify the relative strengths of these mechanisms, I estimate my model to
match data on income levels, trade flows, and sectoral GDP shares for 158 countries
covering over 99.9% of global GDP     . I embed the empirically estimated projected im-
pacts of climate change on productivity in agriculture, manufacturing, and services
into the estimated model, and conduct counterfactual simulations that calculate
the effects of climate change on sectoral specialization, trade, prices, GDP, and wel-
fare.8 I disentangle the effects of `the food problem' and trade by running separate
counterfactuals with no reallocation, in autarky, with estimated trade costs, and in
an alternative policy scenario that brings all countries to the 90th percentile level
of trade openness.
    I find that the net effect of sectoral reallocation exacerbates the effects of cli-
mate change on aggregate productivity. Climate change raises the agriculture share
of GDP by 2.8 percentage points in the poorest quartile of the world, which suf-
fers large falls in relative agricultural productivity, as `the food problem' outweighs
the trade response on average. Comparative advantage predominantly shifts away
from the equator and net exports in agriculture increase in colder countries, such
as those in northern Europe. Net imports of food rise in most hot countries in
the developing world, but only some countries are sufficiently open to trade for
this effect to substantially alter sectoral specialization. Overall, climate change
reduces global GDP by 12% more, and by 52% more for the poorest quartile of the
world, when accounting for the full effects of sectoral reallocation than in the naive
counterfactual with fixed sectoral shares.

    7
      While rural-urban migration within countries plays a key implicit role in my analysis of sectoral
reallocation, I do not incorporate international migration in my model. My results imply that
climate change raises the income gap between the richest and poorest quartile of the world from a
factor of 38 to a factor of 41, implying an increase in the shadow value of migration but also fewer
resources with which to pay the costs of migration for people in poor countries. I leave it to future
work to estimate the response to these changes.
    8
      My simulations use Cline (2007) for the effects of climate change on agriculture, and my own
estimates for manufacturing and services.
                       CLIMATE CHANGE & AGGREGATE PRODUCTIVITY                                   5


     The equivalent variation willingness-to-pay (WTP) to avoid the productivity
impact of climate change is between 1.5% and 2.7% of global GDP       , depending on
assumptions about economic growth. The worst effects are concentrated in poor
countries that comprise a small share of global GDP, but a substantial portion of the
population. The average person in the poorest quartile of the global income distri-
bution suffers welfare losses of 6.2%-10% of income. Trade reduces the aggregate
global willingness-to-pay to avoid climate change by only 7.4% relative to autarky
under existing policy, but by 31% under the alternative low trade barrier counter-
factual. Reducing trade barriers has heterogeneous effects, increasing the costs
of climate change in some regions as greater interdependence makes countries
less vulnerable to local shocks but more vulnerable to global shocks.9 Increasing
openness is particularly valuable for climate change adaptation in poor countries.
Trade reduces WTP for the poorest quartile of the global population by only 4.5%
relative to autarky under existing policy, largely because many poor countries are
mostly closed to trade, but by 68% in the counterfactual that assigns them 90th
percentile levels of trade openness.
     This paper relates to several literatures on climate change and macroeconomic
development. The two most similar papers are Costinot, Donaldson and Smith
(2016), who examine reallocation across crops but do not consider income effects
or cross-sector reallocation, and Desmet and Rossi-Hansberg (2015), who primar-
ily focus on the important role for international migration in climate change adap-
tation. The latter paper includes changes in the global distribution of sectoral
specialization in the model, but does not attempt to incorporate realistic trade
costs or the importance of `the food problem' in the analysis. My paper is the first
to consider the effects of climate change on structural transformation.
     My empirical work on temperature and productivity builds on country-level
estimates produced by Somanathan, Somanathan, Sudarshan, Tewari et al. (2015)
and Zhang, Deschenes, Meng and Zhang (2018) in India and China. The model
builds on the central insight of Matsuyama (1992) about structural transformation
in an open-economy setting and incorporates features from several recent related
papers including Tombe (2015), Uy, Yi and Zhang (2013), and Teignier (2018). I also
use a nonhomothetic CES specification for consumer preferences from Comin,
Lashkari and Mestieri (2015). Finally, some of my counterfactual predictions about
the role of trade and the spatial correlation of shocks relate to the work of Dingel,
Meng and Hsiang (2019).
     More broadly, this paper advances the frontier of methods in climate change
economics by embedding credible empirical estimates into a general equilibrium
model. To date, the climate impacts literature has followed two primary tracks:
macroeconomic models in the spirit of Nordhaus (1992) and partial equilibrium
econometric estimates such as Deschenes and Greenstone (2007). The former group-

   9
    Note that this nets out the gains from trade unrelated to climate change adaptation. Thus,
these results do not imply that these countries are worse off overall from reducing trade barriers.
6                                           NATH 2020



ing facilitates conclusions about policy and welfare at a global scale, but generally
adopts a stylized calibration approach to quantification. In contrast, the latter
branch establishes precise causal relationships between weather and specific out-
come variables, but employs identification strategies that necessarily hold con-
stant cross-sector and cross-national interactions relevant to future projections.
This paper lays out a unifying approach that combines each of these strengths:
quantitative theory with empirical estimates that map directly into model param-
eters, allowing the researcher to evaluate climate damages, adaptation, and policy
counterfactuals in a framework that captures equilibrium behavior and welfare.
    The paper is structured as follows. Sections 2, 3, and 4 describe the data, em-
pirical strategy, and results for the estimation of the relationship between temper-
ature and non-agricultural productivity. Section 5 lays out the model. Section 6
explains the model estimation and describes the model's success in fitting the data.
Section 7 contains the counterfactual model simulations. Section 8 provides addi-
tional country-level panel regression evidence on the impact of agriculture-biased
productivity shocks on sectoral reallocation. Section 9 discusses implications for
policy and Section 10 concludes.

2        Data
Firm Data
I assemble a panel of firm-level microdata with broad global coverage to estimate
the relationship between temperature and productivity in manufacturing and ser-
vices. Table 1 lists the countries and years included in the dataset as well as the data
source for each country. The data combines surveys administered by national gov-
ernments with data acquired from the Amadeus database maintained by Bureau
van Dijk (BVD). BVD is a private company owned by Moody's Analytics that col-
lects and distributes firm-level financial information from around the world. They
collect data both by acquiring administrative data directly from national business
registers and by conducting their own surveys.
    I conduct analysis on countries for which I am able to obtain nationally rep-
resentative panels. This includes government surveys from India, Colombia, In-
donesia, China, and the United States, and Amadeus data from twelve European
countries with mandatory filing requirements according to BVD documentation.10
Bloom, Draca and Van Reenen (2016) report that the data in most of these Euro-
pean countries contains nearly the full population of public and private firms.11
                       ¨
Gopinath, Kalemli-Ozcan,     Karabarbounis and Villegas-Sanchez (2017) also use data

    10
      Importantly, the online version of the Amadeus database does not maintain accurate historical
records. Thus, I download the data directly from the 2005, 2010, and 2015 vintages (CDs). Each
Amadeus vintage contains 10 years of historical data for each firm. I match firms across years using
BVD's unique firm identification number, and drop a small subset of observations with inconsistent
data across vintages for the same firm-year.
   11
      Denmark, Ireland, and Portugal also have mandatory reporting requirements, but were
unavailable to me due to data licensing restrictions and missing or outdated geographic identifiers.
                         CLIMATE CHANGE & AGGREGATE PRODUCTIVITY                                         7


                         Table 1: Global Firm-Level Panel Microdata

           Country                 Data Source                        Dataset                  Years

            Austria              Bureau Van Dijk                      Amadeus                1995-2014
           Belgium               Bureau Van Dijk                      Amadeus                1995-2014
            China          National Bureau of Statistics      Chinese Industrial Survey      2003-2012
                            National Administrative
           Colombia      Department of Statistics (DANE)    Annual Manufacturing Survey      1977-1991
            Finland              Bureau Van Dijk                      Amadeus                1995-2014
            France               Bureau Van Dijk                      Amadeus                1995-2014
           Germany               Bureau Van Dijk                      Amadeus                1995-2014
            Greece               Bureau Van Dijk                      Amadeus                1995-2014
             India           Central Statistical Office      Annual Survey of Industries     1985-2007
           Indonesia          Badan Pusat Statistik         Annual Manufacturing Survey      1975-1995
             Italy               Bureau Van Dijk                      Amadeus                1995-2014
           Norway                Bureau Van Dijk                      Amadeus                1995-2014
            Spain                Bureau Van Dijk                      Amadeus                1995-2014
           Sweden                Bureau Van Dijk                      Amadeus                1995-2014
          Switzerland            Bureau Van Dijk                      Amadeus                1995-2014
        United Kingdom           Bureau Van Dijk                      Amadeus                1995-2014
                                                           Annual Survey of Manufacturers,
         United States           Census Bureau                Census of Manufacturers        1976-2014


       Notes: Data includes nationally representative samples of firm-level data on revenue
       and number of employees, with varying coverage of capital stock (tangible fixed assets).
       Amadeus data includes both manufacturing and services firms.



from Amadeus and Alfaro and Chen (2018) use data from Orbis, a related firm
dataset produced by BVD.
    My sample covers both manufacturing and services firms in developed and de-
veloping countries. While the government surveys cover only manufacturing firms,
the BVD data covers the entire spectrum of 2-digit industries. I report results for
the pooled sample of all firms, separately for manufacturing firms, and separately
for services firms, though the latter subset lacks developing country coverage.12
BVD also reports additional branch locations and subsidiary ownership for many
firms. I drop all firms that list subsidiaries or additional branches so that reported
firm output aligns as closely as possible to my measure of temperature exposure at
the main location. I also drop firms containing fewer than three observations and
those with missing data for revenue or number of employees.
    In total, the sample includes 17 countries that cover 59.4% of the world's man-
  12
     I drop firms marked mining, construction, utilities, and agriculture, though results are very
similar when including these firms in the pooled sample.
8                                           NATH 2020



ufacturing output and 51.1% of the global population.13 The dataset also spans
virtually the full range of climate and income levels in the global cross-section.
According to the Penn World Tables, PPP-adjusted GDP per capita in my sample
ranges from $1,137 in India in 1985 to $64,274 in Norway in 2014, which covers the
3rd to the 99th percentile of the global population in 2014. Similarly, country-level
average daily maximum temperature in my sample ranges from 8.5 C in Norway
to 31.5 C in India, covering the 1st to the 90th percentile of global population-
weighted long-run temperature. Thus, to the extent that income and average tem-
perature predict adaptation to extreme temperatures, my data contains informa-
tion about the full range of heterogeneity in the global temperature-productivity
relationship.
Climate Data
I use temperature data from Version 3 of the Global Meteorological Forcing Dataset
(GMFD) produced at Princeton University. The data covers the entire world at a
0.25 by 0.25 grid for the years 1948-2016. GMFD is a reanalysis dataset that recon-
structs historical temperature using a combination of observational data and local
climate models. Following Graff Zivin and Neidell (2014), I use daily maximum
temperature as my variable of interest to best approximate the temperature people
experience during working hours.
    I match firm and climate data at the county level. The government surveys pro-
vide county location for each firm directly. The BVD data provides city name and
zip code, which I match to the county level using GeoPostcodes, a global geocoding
dataset provided by GeoData Limited.14 I apply nonlinear transformations to the
GMFD temperature variable at the pixel level, and then average across pixels to the
county level weighting by population.15
Other Data
I use purchasing power parity adjusted GDP per capita data from the Penn World
Tables as a measure of the income level of each country-year in my sample.

3        Empirical Strategy
I start by laying out the following three objectives for my empirical results to allow
me to quantify the effects of climate change on sectoral reallocation and aggre-
gate productivity. First, I need to estimate the causal effect of temperature on

    13
      I cannot include the United States in my main pooled specification because I can only access
the data at a secure government facility. I also exclude the data from China from my main
specification for data quality reasons explained in Section 4.
   14
      GeoData Limited estimates that their latitude and longitude coordinates for the center of each
zip code are precise to within 100 meters. I independently verify a subset of observations in each
country to ensure accuracy. I also hand-code a small number (under 1%) of unmerged observations
using city name, and drop those unmerged observations for which the city name is non-unique
within a country.
   15
      For some countries, the administrative unit to which I aggregate is more comparable to a town
than a county.
                       CLIMATE CHANGE & AGGREGATE PRODUCTIVITY                                9


productivity in manufacturing and services. Second, I need to estimate the het-
erogeneity in that relationship such that I can predict the response to temperature
for every country in the world. The model counterfactuals in Section 7 require an
estimate of the response of manufacturing productivity to temperature in Algeria
without having data from Algeria. Third, my estimates should incorporate the
benefits and costs of adaptation. Future projections should reflect that the effects
of a given temperature realization will likely change as countries grow richer, firms
improve technology, and agents adjust expectations to the shifting distribution of
temperatures. To quantify the effects of climate change in Section 7, I need to make
projections not just for Algeria today, but for future Algerian firms experiencing
climate change in 2080.
3.1    Conceptual Framework
To motivate my estimation strategy I start with a version of the production function
from Burnside, Eichenbaum and Rebelo (1993) with variable labor effort:

                             Y = AK  (e  L)1- with 0  e  1                                  (1)

The parameter e governs effective units of labor input. Intuitively, temperature
could affect e through several channels. Extreme temperatures could cause illness
or physical fatigue, impair cognitive function, or increase the disutility of labor
such that workers reduce effort or minutes spent working.16
   Rearranging the production function in terms of output per worker and taking
logs gives:

                       Y                 1                        K
                  ln        = ln(e) +      ln(A) +             ln                           (2)
                       L                1-                  1-    Y

   Equation 2 provides the basis for using output per worker as the dependent
variable in my main specification. The change in output per worker equals the
change in e when the firm's technology and capital-to-output ratio stay constant.
To gain further insight into the firm's optimal response to climate conditions, I
model worker effort as a function of exposure to extreme heat (cooling degree days),
extreme cold (heating degree days), and adaptation investments bh and bc :

                           e = 1 - CDD  gh (bh ) - HDD  gc (bc )                            (3)
                                   g  0, g < 0, g > 0

In this framework, the firm has access to separate technologies that mitigate the
  16
     The health effects of extreme temperatures have been widely documented, including in
Desch^enes and Greenstone (2011). Several laboratory experiments, including Seppanen, Fisk and
Lei (2006) find evidence of reduced worker cognitive functioning. Graff Zivin and Neidell (2014)
use time-use surveys to show that people work fewer minutes per day in the presence of extreme
temperatures.
10                                           NATH 2020



impact of extreme heat and extreme cold on worker effort with diminishing returns
in each.17 The first order conditions for a profit-maximizing firm yield the following
expression for the firm's optimal investment in hot weather adaptation bh :
                                                    ch  e
                               -g (bh ) =                                                      (4)
                                             p  M P L  L  CDD

Since g is convex in bh , Equation 4 predicts that firm adaptation investments will
be increasing in the firm's exposure to extreme heat (CDD), the marginal product
of labor, the firm's labor input, and the output price, and decreasing in the cost of
the adaptive technology, ch , and the level of worker effort.18 Thus, the firm's optimal
condition predicts that worker effort will be less sensitive to temperature at more
productive firms with more expected exposure to extreme temperatures, but that
this reduced sensitivity comes at a cost.
    To capture this heterogeneity, my empirical strategy focuses on modeling out-
put per worker, and consequently e, as a function of temperature realizations, the
level of productivity, and expectations over the distribution of temperature. By
measuring the effects of climate change on e, I can use my estimates to project
the change in the sector-by-country aggregate productivity parameters that govern
average output per worker in the model introduced in Section 5.
3.2       Causal Effect of Temperature
Following the framework outlined in Deryugina and Hsiang (2014), I start by noting
that workers experience daily realizations of weather. San Francisco and Washing-
ton D.C. have similar annual temperatures, but very different exposure to extremes.
To capture this logic, I treat daily output as a function of temperature on day d,
Yd = f (Td ). To aggregate to annual output, the level of my data, I sum daily outputs
along with functions of daily temperature, f (Td ), across all days experienced by
firm i in year t:
                                     365           365
                             Yit =         Yid =         f (Tid ) = F (T )it                   (5)
                                     d=1           d=1

   Thus, I treat nonlinear transformations of daily temperature summed over the
year as my primary independent variable of interest. Using annual data also has
the important advantage of allowing for intertemporal substitution of labor. If
workers produce less due to extreme temperatures on Tuesday but produce extra
     17
      Zhang, Deschenes, Meng and Zhang (2018) mention that capital equipment could also
perform poorly in extreme temperature conditions. If so, augmenting the production function
with variable effective capital utilization, u, as in Burnside and Eichenbaum (1996), would capture
this effect. In that case, the interpretation in Equation 2 would be that the reduction in Y L was
attributable to a combination of declines in e and u.
   18
      Optimal adaptation investment is decreasing in the level of worker effort because there are
concave returns to effort.
                    CLIMATE CHANGE & AGGREGATE PRODUCTIVITY                       11


on Saturday instead, annual data captures the effects of temperature net of this
reallocation.
    For parsimony, my main specification uses a piecewise linear functional form
for temperature, where output is allowed to vary linearly with daily maximum tem-
perature above 30 C (CDD) and below 5 C (HDD):
                            
                            1 (5 - Tmax )
                                              if Tmax < 5
                    f (T ) = 0                if 0  Tmax  30                   (6)
                            
                             2 (Tmax - 30) if Tmax > 30
                            

This formulation allows cold and hot temperatures to have separately estimated
effects, 1 and 2 , on labor productivity. I also conduct robustness checks with
more flexible functional forms such as a polynomial of degree four and bins of daily
maximum temperature.
    Following other work in the climate impacts literature, I isolate the causal im-
pact of temperature by exploiting interannual variation in weather. In line with the
framework outlined in Section 3.1 my main specification models log output per
worker at firm i in year t as a function of the vector of temperature effects,  :

                               Yit
                          ln         =  F (T )it + i + rt +   it                  (7)
                               Lit

I control for permanent firm-specific features such as technology and manage-
ment with firm fixed effects, i , and for unobserved aggregate shocks such as tech-
nological progress and recessions with region (country or state) by year fixed ef-
fects, rt . I cluster my standard errors at the firm and county-by-year level to ac-
count for both serial and spatial correlation. Equation 7 allows for estimating the
average treatment effect of temperature realizations, which fulfills part of the pur-
pose of this section.


3.3   Heterogeneity and Adaptation
Following the strategy of Carleton et al. (2018), I allow for heterogeneity in the
effect of temperature on output per worker by interacting the vector of temperature
coefficients with income and long-run average temperature. This setup follows
from the prediction in Section 3.1 that more productive firms in high-income coun-
tries and those that expect to experience extremes more frequently will be better
adapted. I specify the interacted regression as follows:

                        Yit
                   ln       =  F (T )it + 1 ln(GDP pc)rt × F (T )it
                        Lit
                        +2 T M EANi × F (T )it + i + rt + it                      (8)
12                                          NATH 2020



The interaction variables in Equation 8 are country-level annual GDP per capita
and long-run average daily maximum temperature in the county containing firm
i.19
     Estimating Equation 8 allows me to predict the treatment effects of extreme
cold, 1 , and extreme heat, 2 , as a function of two factors - income and average cli-
mate. While there are certainly other variables that affect temperature sensitivity,
this parsimonious specification makes it feasible to predict the treatment effects
in any country for which I have data on GDP per capita and average temperature.
Given the existence of this data for the full range of countries in the global cross-
section, as well as of readily available plausible future projections of temperature
change and economic growth, this approach allows me to project the effects of
temperature both across space and over time. In line with the goals for this section,
the interacted model allows me to predict temperature sensitivity in Algeria today
and in Algeria in 2080.
     The coefficients on the interaction terms in Equation 8 are identified using cross-
sectional, rather than panel, variation, but the identification assumption is also
weaker. Estimating the main causal effect of temperature relies on the standard
identification assumption - that the independent variable of interest is uncorre-
lated with omitted variables that affect output per worker conditional on the set of
controls. For the interaction variables, however, I am interested in how income and
climate predict temperature sensitivity, rather than in isolating their specific causal
effect. Thus, the identification assumption is not that income and climate are
uncorrelated with omitted variables affecting temperature sensitivity, but rather
that this correlation remains constant across space and over time. Indeed, the
aim is to use income and average climate as a proxy for the full set of underlying
mechanisms that govern adaptation. The cross-sectional approach will produce
valid predictions if the effects of temperature realizations on output per worker in
parts of the world with income levels and average temperatures similar to India are
similar to the effects measured in India.20
     Allowing the treatment effects of temperature to vary with long-run conditions
also bridges the gap between weather and climate. A primary concern with using
weather variation to inform estimates of the costs of climate change is that the
estimated treatment effects may change as agents adjust their expectations in the
long-run. I address this concern by explicitly modeling the treatment effects as a
function of those expectations, as represented by long-run average temperature.
In my formulation, climate is a distribution of temperatures and weather is a draw
from that distribution. By allowing the treatment effect of a draw to depend on the

     19
       I use country-level income because reliable global data on subnational income is unavailable.
Average temperature is calculated as a 40-year average in the county of firm i, which is the same
geographic scale at which contemporaneous temperature is measured.
    20
       Empirical estimation of adaptation in the climate impacts literature broadly relies heavily on
cross-sectional variation because of the inherent difficulty in finding quasi-experimental variation
in long-run conditions.
                       CLIMATE CHANGE & AGGREGATE PRODUCTIVITY                                  13


distribution, my estimates for the effects of each draw remain valid as the distribu-
tion shifts. Intuitively, a hot day in Toronto could be more harmful than a hot day
in Texas because it is more unexpected, but becomes less so as Toronto warms and
its agents adapt. I capture this effect by assigning Toronto the estimated treatment
effect of Texas once it heats up to that level.

4        Empirical Results
4.1      Main Regression Results
Table 2 contains the main results from estimating Equations 7 and 8. Column 1
displays the treatment effect of extreme temperatures for the average unit of output
in the countries in my sample by weighting observations by country-level GDP
and the inverse of each country dataset's sample size. While the estimated aver-
age treatment effects show that the effects of temperature are statistically different
from zero, the magnitude of these coefficients is far too small to be economically
meaningful. The estimates in Column 1 imply that a day with maximum temper-
ature of either -5 C or 40 C would reduce annual output per worker by just 0.03%
relative to a day in the moderate range of 5 C to 30 C.21
    Column 2 in Table 2 shows substantial heterogeneity in the effects of temper-
ature on annual output per worker. Note that I do not weight observations in
the regressions in which I model heterogeneity explicitly because the aim is to
understand how the treatment effect varies across the full range of the interaction
variables. The unweighted regression with differential sample sizes in different
places also effectively allows areas with more data, and consequently more pre-
cise estimates of the effect of temperature, to contribute more to estimating the
interaction terms.
    The main effects of temperature in the unweighted interacted regression in Col-
umn 2 are large, negative, and precisely estimated, though the magnitudes cannot
be interpreted without considering the interaction terms. The coefficients on both
interaction terms for log GDP per capita are large and positive, indicating that
richer countries are insulated from the effects of both extreme heat and cold. Con-
sistent with intuition about adaptation to long-run conditions, the coefficient on
the interaction term for average long run temperature is positive for hot extremes
and negative for cold extremes, indicating that places are less susceptible to tem-
peratures which they experience more frequently. All four interaction coefficients
on income and average temperature are consistent with the predictions from Equa-
tion 4 - more productive firms with more exposure to given extremes invest more
in adaptation.
    Figure 3 shows the predicted effects of temperature from Column 2 of Table 2 at
    21
     Note that my data contains information on revenues rather than physical output. The results
can be interpreted as the effect on physical labor productivity under the assumption that firms are
price-takers in the output market and the local shocks used to identify the effects do not affect
national or global product market prices.
14                                               NATH 2020



         Table 2: Effects of Daily Temperature on Annual Revenue per Worker

                                      (1)              (2)            (3)          (4)            (5)
                                Revenue/Worker   Revenue/Worker    Revenue     Employment   Revenue/Worker

            TMax-30               -0.0000311        -0.00119       -0.00250     -0.00131       -0.00100
                                    (-2.29)          (-4.73)        (-6.80)      (-5.25)        (-4.03)
            5-TMax                -0.0000315        -0.000956      -0.00180     -0.000842     -0.000452
                                    (-2.15)          (-2.15)        (-2.91)      (-1.92)        (-2.07)
     (TMax-30) X log(GDPpc)                        0.0000715       0.000178     0.000107      0.0000595
                                                     (4.07)         (6.79)       (6.06)         (3.65)
       (TMax-30) X TMax                            0.0000186      0.0000334     0.0000148     0.0000160
                                                     (4.85)         (6.24)       (3.93)         (3.96)
     (5-TMax) X log(GDPpc)                         0.0000898       0.000167     0.0000769     0.0000416
                                                     (2.14)         (2.85)       (1.85)         (2.02)
        (5-TMax) X TMax                            -0.00000292    0.00000212   0.00000504    0.000000703
                                                     (-1.54)        (0.93)       (2.85)         (0.59)
               N                   4125776          4125776        4125776      4125776        17938084
         Manufacturing                X                X              X            X              X
            Services                                                                              X
            Firm FE                   X                X              X            X              X
       Country X Year FE              X                X              X            X              X
  Inverse Sample Size Weights         X
          GDP Weights                 X
       Countries Included             15               15             15           15             15


Notes: t-statistics in parentheses. Dependent variables all in logs. Standard errors are two-way
clustered at the firm and county-by-year level. Column 1 shows the coefficients from estimating
Equation 7 and Columns 2-5 show the results from Equation 8. Outcome variables come from
the data sources listed in Table 1 and temperature data is from GMFD. Countries included are
Austria, Belgium, Colombia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, India, Indonesia, Italy, Norway,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom. Section 4.3 shows results for the United
States and Appendix C shows results for China.



points across the distribution of observed income and climate levels in the world.
Consistent with the results of the GDP-weighted regression in Column 1, the graphs
show that temperature has little effect on productivity in rich countries (top row),
with some effects from hot days in cold, rich places (top left cell) and mild effects
from cold days in hot, rich places (top right cell).
   Conversely, extreme temperatures have very large effects on productivity in poor
countries (bottom row). Experiencing one day at -5 C or 40 C in a poor country
with moderate long-run temperatures (bottom middle cell) reduces annual output
per worker by about 0.4%. In a working year consisting of 50 work weeks of 5 days
each, this is equivalent to each worker reducing production on that day to zero
                       CLIMATE CHANGE & AGGREGATE PRODUCTIVITY                                 15


 Figure 3: Predicted Heterogeneous Response of Annual Manufacturing Revenue
                   per Worker to Daily Maximum Temperature




Notes: Figure shows the predicted effect of temperature on revenue per worker at varying levels of
income and long-run average temperature by evaluating the interacted regression from Column 2
of Table 2. 95% confidence intervals are shown in blue.



with no compensating substitution to other days. These effects in poor countries
imply potentially large productivity costs from climate change in hot parts of the
world in the absence of adaptation. In parts of Sub-Saharan Africa, climate change
projections imply an increase in extreme heat on the order of moving 100 days
per year from 30 C to 40 C by 2080, which would suggest substantial declines in
manufacturing productivity in poor countries.
    Columns 3 and 4 of Table 2 separately estimate the effects of temperature on
revenue and employment. The effects of both hot days and cold days on revenue
are substantially larger than those on revenue per worker because firms adjust em-
ployment in response to extreme temperatures. As shown in Appendix Figures A-1
and A-2, which again evaluate the predicted coefficients throughout the covariate
space, these effects also primarily manifest only in poor countries. This finding is
consistent with the firm's first order condition in the framework laid out in Section
3.1 - firms should be expected to reduce labor input in response to the fall in the
16                                          NATH 2020



marginal product of labor driven by a decline in e. However, it is perhaps surprising
that firms in my sample do not face adjustment costs large enough to dissuade this
adjustment in response to the short-run variation used to identify these effects.
   Column 5 of Table 2 shows the effects of temperature on a pooled sample of
manufacturing and services firms. The effects are very similar to the sample of
only manufacturing firms in both magnitude and patterns of adaptation, with the
exception of the finding that colder countries are less vulnerable to extremely cold
temperatures. The sample size increases substantially in this specification because
many of the firms in my data are services firms, though I do not have any services
coverage in low-income countries.
4.2       Robustness
I conduct robustness checks with different ways to specify the functional forms of
temperature. Appendix Figures A-3 and A-4 show the predicted effects from the
main specification in Column 2 of Table 2 using bins and a polynomial of degree
four in daily maximum temperature, respectively. The results are qualitatively very
similar to the main specification.
    I also show robustness to including more stringent state-by-year, rather than
country-by-year, fixed effects. The results are very similar for specifications that
use all the data (pooling manufacturing and services firms) with more flexible func-
tional forms such as bins or a polynomial of degree four. These two specifications
are shown in Appendix Figures A-6 and A-7. These results are sensitive to func-
tional form, however. The more parsimonious functional forms with a single pa-
rameter each governing the response to cold days and hot days show muted effects,
particularly in the specification with manufacturing firms only. This is consistent
with the fact that considerably less variation in temperature realizations remains
within states in a given year, so more data and flexible estimation is necessary to
recover the underlying pattern.
    Figure A-8 shows robustness to including controls for capital. While the stan-
dard errors for this specification are somewhat larger because I lack data on capital
for approximately a quarter of the observations in the main specification, the pat-
tern of predicted effects is very similar.
4.3       U.S. Results
In this section, I use separate estimates of the effect of extreme temperatures on
manufacturing in the United States to externally validate the results in Section
4.1.22 Predictions using the global interacted regression suggest that temperature
has a negligible effect on manufacturing revenue per worker in rich, temperate
countries such as the U.S. (see the top middle cell of Figure 3). Figure 4 shows
the corresponding estimate for the treatment effect of temperature in the United
     22
    The results in Section 4.1 do not include data from the United States due to physical constraints
on data access. Plant-level manufacturing data from the United States Census Bureau must be
analyzed at restricted access Federal Statistical Research Data Centers (RDC).
                        CLIMATE CHANGE & AGGREGATE PRODUCTIVITY                                 17


Figure 4: Estimated Response of U.S. Annual Manufacturing Revenue per Worker
                        to Daily Maximum Temperature




       Notes: Figure shows the response of annual revenue per worker to daily maximum
       temperature estimated using Equation 7 with a polynomial of degree four. 95%
       confidence interval is shown in blue. Outcome variable data comes from the Annual
       Survey of Manufacturers and Census of Manufacturers from the U.S. Census Bureau.
       Temperature data is from GMFD. Standard errors are two-way clustered at the firm and
       county-by-year level.


States using data from the U.S. Census Bureau.
    Consistent with predictions from global data in Figure 3, I find a precisely es-
timated null effect of temperature on output-per-worker in the U.S.23 The U.S.
data also includes information on other inputs that I lack in my global sample,
allowing me to directly observe some of the adaptation costs incurred by U.S. firms.
Appendix Figure A-13 shows that the average U.S. plant increases expenditures on
electricity and other fuels by several thousand dollars for each extremely hot and
cold day, presumably for cooling and heating expenses.24 These expenditures are
small in the context of U.S. plant size, however, such that temperature still has a
null effect on revenue total factor productivity, which accounts for expenditures
on energy and materials, as shown in Figure A-12.
4.4      Projected Global Sensitivity to Extreme Temperatures
To connect the regression results from this section with the model presented in
Section 5, I predict the effects of temperature in all 158 countries for which I es-
timate the model. Figure 5a shows the predicted effects of a day with maximum
temperature of 40 C on annual manufacturing revenue per worker and Figure 5b
shows the effect of a -5 C day. Consistent with intuition about adaptation and
the results displayed in Figure 3, poor countries and those which experience given


  23
      The result displayed in Figure 4 uses a polynomial of degree four in daily maximum
temperature, but the null result is robust to choice of functional form. Appendix Table A-2 shows a
range of specifications, all of which are consistent with a null effect on output and employment.
   24
      Total energy expenditures are defined as the sum of electricity expenditures and the cost of
other fuels. Full results for this outcome variable are shown in Appendix Table A-3.
18                                         NATH 2020



                Figure 5: Predicted Effect of Extreme Temperatures on
                     Annual Manufacturing Revenue per Worker
                                          (a) 40 C Day




                                          (b) -5 C Day




Notes: Maps show predicted annual percentage point loss in revenue per worker from a 40 C day
and -5 C day obtained by evaluating the interaction regression in Column 2 of Table 2 at each
country's GDP per capita and long-run average temperature.


temperatures less frequently are more susceptible to extreme realizations.25
    Projecting the impacts of climate change also requires accounting for adap-
tation by adjusting the temperature sensitivities shown in Figures 5a and 5b to
projected changes in long-run average temperature. The firm's optimal adaptation
decision in Equation 4 implies that firms will increase investment in protection
     25
     Note that following Carleton et al. (2018), these predictions define full adaptation as
productivity that is invariant to temperature, and thus do not allow the effect of extreme
temperatures to go above zero. The effects of extreme temperatures are weakly negative in the range
of incomes and climates in the sample used for estimation, and I maintain this pattern as incomes
and temperatures go out of sample.
                        CLIMATE CHANGE & AGGREGATE PRODUCTIVITY                                     19


from extreme heat as the climate warms. I account for the benefits of these in-
vestments by reevaluating predicted heat sensitivity at projected end-of-century
temperatures in Appendix Figure A-17.26 The results show noticeably muted effects
when allowing for expectations to adjust to future temperatures. The mean global
damage from a 40 C day is about 34% lower when evaluated at future temperatures
(0.067% of annual revenues versus 0.1%).
    The adaptation benefits of adjusting to extreme heat come at a cost. If it were
costless to protect production from extreme heat, no firms would show effects of
temperature on productivity. Instead, my results show that firms which experience
given extremes infrequently find it optimal to invest less in adaptation, implying
that the costs they would incur to achieve a marginal reduction in temperature
sensitivity exceed the benefits. I leverage this intuition combined with the firm's
first order conditions in Section 3.1 to infer a revealed preference measure of these
adaptation costs following methods developed in Carleton et al. (2018). Appendix
D covers the details of this calculation.
    Quantifying the aggregate productivity consequences of climate change also
requires projecting temperature sensitivity in services. I make projections for ser-
vices using the pooled sample of manufacturing and services firms due to my lack
of services data coverage in poor countries.27 This choice follows from the esti-
mated strong gradient of temperature sensitivity with respect to income but very
similar coefficients between the manufacturing only and manufacturing/services
specifications in Columns 2 and 5 of Table 2.28 Intuitively, my results suggest that
manufacturing firms in India are a better proxy for services firms in India than ser-
vices firms in Germany would be. Appendix Figures A-20 and A-21 show predicted
current global sensitivity to hot and cold days in services using results from the
pooled regression. I follow the same procedure to account for future adaptation
benefits and costs as in manufacturing.
    Overall, the results in this section allow me to predict the sensitivity of non-
agricultural firm output per worker to extreme temperatures in every country in the
world in the present and future. I use these results to project the impact of climate
change on global comparative advantage between agriculture and manufacturing

   26
      End-of-century temperature projections are the 30-year average of annual average maximum
temperature from the climate model predictions used in Section 7.1. In Section 7.6 I also allow
for economic growth to make countries richer in the future, further reducing their temperature
sensitivity.
   27
      I show results for regressions using only services firms in Appendix Figures A-9, A-10, and A-11.
The results for extreme heat with more flexible functional forms such as a fourth degree polynomial
are qualitatively similar to those of the pooled manufacturing and services regression, but these
specifications are sensitive to functional form. Furthermore, the predictions in poor countries are
extrapolating far out of the sample, which only includes European firms in a narrow range of high
income levels.
   28
      A formal test shows that coefficients for manufacturing and services firms in the pooled
regression have statistically indistinguishable responses to extreme heat and marginally significant
evidence that services firms are less susceptible than manufacturing firms to extreme cold.
20                                           NATH 2020



in Section 7.1, and to simulate the corresponding changes in sectoral allocation
and aggregate productivity.

5         Model
This section lays out a static general equilibrium model of global production, con-
sumption, and trade in agriculture, manufacturing, and services to analyze how
changes in sectoral productivity affect sectoral specialization, trade flows, aggre-
gate productivity, and welfare. I show that the model makes ambiguous predictions
about how reductions in agricultural productivity affect the employment share of
agriculture, and that openness to trade is a key determinant of the aggregate con-
sequences of asymmetric sectoral productivity shocks.
5.1       Model Ingredients
Consumption Following the demand system specified in Comin, Lashkari and Mestieri
(2015), consumers in each country gain utility from final goods in each of the three
sectors - agriculture, manufacturing, and services - according to the following im-
plicitly defined utility function:
                        1        -1      1           -1           1        -1
                            a                  m                      s
                      
                      a U  Ca  +  m
                                  
                                    U              Cm + s
                                                        
                                                          U  Cs  = 1                     (9)

Here, { a , m , s } are utility elasticities for each sector that allow for nonhomothetic
preferences, {a , m , s } are fixed sectoral taste parameters, and  is the cross-
sector elasticity of substitution. I choose this nonhomothetic CES preference spec-
ification because it can closely match the observed pattern of smooth structural
transformation out of agriculture.29
    Households consume their full wage, w, which varies at the level of country k.
The aggregate budget constraint, summed across the country-level population, Lk ,
equates income to total expenditures across the three sectors:

                            Pak Cak + Pmk Cmk + Psk Csk = wk Lk                         (10)

      Demand for the final good in sector j in country k is given by:

                                                   Pjk    -
                                      Cjk = j                 U   j
                                                                                        (11)
                                                   wk
Production
The final good in sector j in country k is a CES composite of intermediate varieties


     29
     Nonhomothetic CES preferences improve model fit substantially compared to using general-
ized Stone-Geary preferences, another common specification used to represent nonhomotheticity
in the structural transformation literature, particularly in middle income countries. I show
robustness to using Stone-Geary preferences in Appendix F.1.
                     CLIMATE CHANGE & AGGREGATE PRODUCTIVITY                           21


indexed by i:
                                                              
                                               1     -1       -1
                                                     
                                Yjk =              yijk di                           (12)
                                           0


Intermediate goods producers each receive a productivity draw, zijk , drawn from
a Frechet distribution with sector-specific shape parameter j and sector-country
specific start value Zjk . The production function for intermediate goods is linear in
labor:

                                     yijk = zijk  lijk                               (13)
                                                                   -
                       zijk  Fjk where Fjk (zi ) = exp(-Zjk z )
                            and Zjk = f (µjk , Tjk , E (Tjk ))                       (14)

The sector-country specific aggregate productivity parameters, Zjk , connect the
model to my empirical results in Section 4. In particular, I allow Zjk to be a func-
tion of temperature realizations, Tjk , expectations over temperature, E (Tjk ), and a
vector, µjk , of country-sector specific features such as technology, institutions, and
human capital. In making future projections in Section 7, climate change enters
the model by perturbing the vector of Zjk with empirically estimated productivity
impacts that vary at the country-sector level.
Trade
The trade portion of my model follows Eaton and Kortum (2002). When selling
to foreign countries, intermediate goods producers face an iceberg trade cost, ijk ,
that varies at the exporter-importer-sector level. So, intuitively, shipping food from
Canada to Malawi incurs a different trade cost than shipping food from Malawi to
Canada, and manufactured goods shipped between Canada and Malawi have two
separate trade costs of their own. Services are nontradable.
    Intermediate goods producers price at marginal cost. Since labor is the only
input, the price of a domestically produced good in country k is given by pijk = zw   k
                                                                                     ijk
                                                                                         .
When selling to foreign country n and incurring the cost of trade, the intermediate
goods producer in country k prices as follows:
                                                   jkn wk
                                      pijk =                                         (15)
                                                    zijk

   This representation of trade incorporates Ricardian comparative advantage both
within and across sectors. A producer's ability to sell competitively priced exports
depends both on their productivity and on the domestic wage. Low productivity
countries will have low wages in equilibrium, so their relatively productive produc-
ers will be able to export their products even if their absolute productivity is low.
Thus, relative productivity between sectors is the key determinant of net imports
and exports.
22                                       NATH 2020



   The final goods producer sources each variety from the lowest-priced producer.
The sectoral final goods prices are given by the CES price index of all intermediate
varieties used in that sector:
                                                                 1
                                                1               1-
                                                       -
                                 Pjk =              p1
                                                     ijk di                       (16)
                                            0


Intuitively, the price of the final good in agriculture, Pak , can be thought of as a
price index for the complete basket of food items while the price of each individual
variety, piak , is the price of one particular food.  is the elasticity of substitution
between varieties.
Equilibrium
The model has two equilibrium conditions. First, total income in country k is the
sum of all domestic and foreign sales in all three sectors.
                                3                          N
                     wk Lk =          jkk Pjk Cjk +             jkn Pjn Cjn       (17)
                               j =1                       n=k


Here, jkn is the share of varieties from sector j consumed in country n that coun-
try k produces. So country k receives income both from its production share of
domestic consumption in sector j, and from the share of consumption in every
foreign country comprised of its exports. Since consumption equals income in
each country, this condition also ensures that trade balances.
    The second equilibrium condition concerns the labor market. The total labor
force is allocated across the three sectors:

                                    Lk = Lka + Lkm + Lks                          (18)

In autarky, market-clearing requires that income equals expenditures in each sec-
tor, Pjk Cjk = wk Ljk , which means that the employment share, ljk , equals the ex-
penditure share, Xjk . In the open-economy case, the employment share equals the
production share of revenues in each sector, incorporating net exports. This gives
the following equation from Uy, Yi and Zhang (2013):
                                                    N
                                                                  wn Ln
                          ljk = jkk Xjk +               jkn Xjn                   (19)
                                                n=1
                                                                  wk Lk

This condition illustrates the importance of both domestic consumer preferences
and international trade in determining the sectoral allocation of labor. Intuitively,
Equation 19 says that if country k has agricultural consumption worth 30% of spend-
ing and agricultural net exports worth 10% of GDP    , then 40% of its labor force will
be in agriculture.
                       CLIMATE CHANGE & AGGREGATE PRODUCTIVITY                                 23


Aggregate GDP and Willingness-To-Pay
I calculate the willingness-to-pay to avoid climate change productivity impacts as
equivalent variation using the nonhomothetic measure of utility.
    I also quantify the aggregate GDP effects of sectoral productivity changes by
using a T¨ ornqvist (1936) price index that uses sectoral expenditure shares from
before and after the shock, (Xjk0 and Xjk1 ), to construct an aggregate price index
with which to deflate nominal income:

                          T           (X      +Xjk1 )/2                  wk Lk
                         Pk =       Pjk jk0               - GDPk =          T
                                                                                              (20)
                                                                          Pk

This captures the logic of Baqaee and Farhi (2019), who extend Hulten (1978) to
show that the aggregate productivity impact of a sectoral shock is given by the
weighted average of the pre and post-shock sectoral shares. The intuition here is
simple. If productivity falls markedly in agriculture, the aggregate impact is accen-
tuated if more of the economy moves into agriculture and tempered by realloca-
tion to other sectors. Thus, quantifying the magnitude and direction of sectoral
reallocation is a key part of estimating the aggregate productivity consequences of
climate change.
5.2    Comparative Statics
I now use the model to characterize the factors that influence sectoral reallocation
in response to climate change. Consider a country that suffers an agriculture-
biased reduction in aggregate productivity, consistent with projections for hot parts
of the world made in Section 7. To see how the employment share in agriculture
changes in Equation 19, I first consider the impact on the agricultural expenditure
share, Xak . The expression for Xak from solving the consumer's problem is as fol-
lows:
                                                     1-           a -(1- )
                                              pak           wk
                             Xak = a                                                          (21)
                                              Pk            Pk

Taking logs gives:

                                                      pak                                wk
             logXak = log (a ) + (1 -  )log                  +(   a   - (1 -  ))log           (22)
                                                      Pk                                 Pk
                                      Substitution Effect                Income Effect

  The agriculture-biased reduction in productivity has two effects that appear in
Equation 22.30 First, the reduction in productivity drives down the equilibrium real
wage ( wk
       Pk
          ), making consumers poorer. If ( a - (1 -  )) < 0, as is the case with the

  30
     This equation also appears in Comin, Lashkari and Mestieri (2015). They estimate that
nonhomotheticities (the income effect) account for about 75% of observed historical structural
transformation, with changes in relative prices (the substitution effect) accounting for the rest.
24                                            NATH 2020



parameter estimates presented in Section 6, then the reduction in real wage drives
up the expenditure share on food, Xak . This is the effect of nonhomotheticity. Food
is a larger share of consumption for poorer people, so climate change tends to drive
up the share of agricultural consumption by making people poorer.
    Second, the relative decline in agricultural productivity will increase the domes-
tic price of agricultural goods relative to the aggregate price index ( p  ak
                                                                          Pk
                                                                              ).31 If  < 1,
as is also the case in Section 6, then the rising relative price of agricultural goods
raises the expenditure share on agriculture. Intuitively, if food is not substitutable
with other consumption, then its relative quantity falls less than the relative price
rises, and the share of spending on food goes up. This is the same logic that un-
derlies Baumol's cost disease (Baumol and Bowen, 1966), a theory that endeavors
to explain why low-substitutability service sectors with relatively low productivity
growth, such as health care and education, tend to rise as a share of expenditures
over time.
    Together, nonhomotheticity and low substitutability at the sector level combine
to push up the expenditure share on agriculture in response to declines in agricul-
tural productivity. The macro-development literature on structural transformation
(see, for instance, Gollin, Parente and Rogerson (2007)) refers to these features of
consumer preferences as `the food problem' - the explanation given to the large
share of the labor force in agriculture in most developing countries despite very
low absolute and relative productivity.
    These features of the model also explain why its predictions about the protec-
tive effects of reallocation diverge from those of Costinot, Donaldson and Smith
(2016). Their paper finds that reallocating production across crops reduces the
aggregate damages from climate change by two-thirds. To capture reallocation at
the crop level, their model has no income effects and high substitutability across
products.32 This specification makes sense for capturing reallocation across crops,
but does not generalize to the cross-sector case where income effects become im-
portant and the elasticity of substitution is very low. Intuitively, if the productivity
of corn falls markedly relative to the productivity of wheat, consumers can respond
by eating more wheat. If the productivity of producing food falls relative to the
productivity of manufacturing, however, consumers cannot subsist by eating more
manufactured goods.
    In contrast to the food problem, the Ricardian comparative advantage effects of
falling relative productivity in agriculture will tend to push labor into other sectors.
Returning to Equation 19, shifting comparative advantage away from agriculture
will tend to push up food imports (akk falls for country k ) and push down food
exports (akn falls). Equation 23 captures the horserace between the food problem

     31
      In a closed economy, relative sectoral prices are exactly proportional to sectoral productivities.
In an open economy, the domestic relative price of agriculture responds to domestic agricultural
productivity in proportion to the domestically produced share of consumption.
   32
      They estimate an elasticity of substitution of 5.4 across varieties of the same crop and 2.8 across
crops. I estimate an elasticity of 0.27 between sectors.
                      CLIMATE CHANGE & AGGREGATE PRODUCTIVITY                               25


and international trade that drives general equilibrium sectoral reallocation in re-
sponse to climate change.33
                                                N
                                                               wn Ln
                            lak = akk Xak +          akn Xan                              (23)
                                               n=k
                                                               wk Lk
                                         
                                                         


In autarky, falling relative agricultural productivity would drive up the employment
share in agriculture, exacerbating the aggregate productivity costs. In an econ-
omy with costless trade, climate change would dramatically shift the global geogra-
phy of agricultural production and trade flows, substantially limiting the aggregate
costs. To quantify the relative strength of these effects in practice, I need to estimate
the parameters of the model and simulate the general equilibrium response to the
estimated impacts of climate change on productivity at the country-sector level.

6        Model Estimation
I solve the model from Section 5 by computing the equilibrium numerically. The
method, explained in detail in Appendix E.1, confers several advantages over alter-
native approaches such as Dekle, Eaton and Kortum (2007) that use equilibrium
conditions to derive analytical expressions for comparative statics as a function of
key parameters. First, bypassing the need for analytical expressions allows me to
solve my model for an arbitrary range of demand systems, both within and across
sectors, and functional forms for the distribution of productivities, zijk . I illustrate
this by showing robustness to using lognormal, rather than Frechet, productivity
distributions in Appendix F.2.
    Second, simulating model components in levels, rather than changes, allows
me to estimate model parameters, such as sectoral bilateral trade costs, directly
using simulated method of moments (SMM). Explicitly computing all moments
­ wages, sectoral consumption and output shares, sectoral bilateral trade flows,
and sectoral price indices ­ for all countries enables me to assess the quality of
the model's fit across a wide range of empirical moments and disentangle com-
peting mechanisms in my counterfactuals. Essentially, this solution method offers
flexibility similar to the procedure of Adao, Costinot and Donaldson (2017) while
preserving representation of all components of the competitive equilibrium with
no restrictions on the counterfactual exercises that can be considered.
6.1      Parameter Estimates
Table 3 shows a list of the data sources and target moments corresponding to each
model parameter. I choose sector-country productivities, non-homothetic CES
preference parameters, and bilateral trade costs to match sectoral GDP shares,
    33
    The importance of trade for promoting structural transformation out of agriculture has been
previously emphasized by Tombe (2015), Teignier (2018), and Uy, Yi and Zhang (2013).
26                                          NATH 2020



                    Table 3: Model Parameters and Target Moments

              Parameters                Data Moment                    Data Source
                                     Sectoral GDP Shares               World Bank

              a , m , s              Sectoral GDP Shares               World Bank

                 a, m, s             Sectoral GDP Shares               World Bank

                  a , m        Calibrated from Tombe (2015)

                  jkn                     Trade Flows                 UN Comtrade

                  Zjk         Sectoral Value-Added per Worker          World Bank

                   Lk                     Population                   World Bank

             Notes: Table shows the data sources for moments targeted in my
             simulated method of moments procedure to estimate parameters for the
             model presented in Section 5. Data is for the global cross-section in 2011,
             accessed from the World Bank Databank.



value-added per worker, and bilateral trade flows for 158 countries. Appendix E.1
contains details about data construction and my SMM procedure.
    Table 4 displays my estimates of the preference parameters for the nonhomo-
thetic CES utility specification. Two points about these estimates are worth noting.
First, I estimate a cross-sector elasticity of substitution,  = 0.27, of substantially
less than one, indicating that the expenditure share in a sector sharply increases
with its relative price. My estimate of  to target the global cross-section of sectoral
shares matches up well with that of Comin, Lashkari and Mestieri (2015), who
use various historical panel datasets to estimate  between 0.2 and 0.6. Second,
I estimate that a - (1 -  ) = -0.44, which implies from Equation 22 that the
consumption share of agriculture is strongly diminishing in real income. Thus, my
parameter estimates imply clearly that a decline in aggregate productivity concen-
trated in agriculture will raise the expenditure share of agriculture through both the
income and substitution effect.
6.2       Model Fit
The model closely matches the features of the data most relevant to the counter-
factual simulations of the impacts of climate change. Table 5 summarizes the cor-
relation between key simulated moments in the model and their empirical coun-
terparts.34 I match the income level of each country almost exactly by scaling the
     34
   A coefficient of 1 with R2 = 1 would constitute a perfect fit. The fit for other moments in the
model is displayed in Appendix E.2 Figures A-27, A-28, and A-29.
                           CLIMATE CHANGE & AGGREGATE PRODUCTIVITY                                              27


                                      Table 4: Parameter Estimates

                Parameter                            Description                       Estimate
                                   Cross-Sector Elasticity of Substitution               0.27

                       a                Agriculture Utility Elasticity                   0.29

                      m               Manufacturing Utility Elasticity                    1

                       s                  Services Utility Elasticity                    1.15
                     a                  Agriculture Taste Parameter                     11.73
                     m                Manufacturing Taste Parameter                      3.70
                     s                    Services Taste Parameter                       10

                Notes: Parameters estimated using simulated method of moments.
                s is normalized to 10 as only relative values of j affect consumer
                choices. Since the focus is on cross-sector reallocation, I set the
                elasticity of substitution across varieties,  , equal to 1 for tractability
                so that varieties have equal revenue shares.


                                     Table 5: Summary of Model Fit

                                               (1)                      (2)                         (3)
                                     Data log(GDP per capita)   Data Ag Share of GDP              Data akk
                                                                                       (Ag Domestic Production Share)

   Simulated log(GDP per capita)              1.006
                                            (0.00251)

    Simulated Ag Share of GDP                                          0.866
                                                                      (0.0563)

          Simulated akk                                                                            1.009
  (Ag Domestic Production Share)                                                                  (0.0392)

           Observations                        158                      158                         158
                R2                            0.999                    0.603                       0.809


Notes: Table shows the results from regressing empirical moments in the data on their simulated
counterparts. Data on nominal income levels and the agriculture share of GDP are from the World
Bank. Data on the domestically produced share of expenditures in agriculture is constructed using
Comtrade data.


country-level aggregate productivity parameters. Similarly, my simulations closely
match the domestic production share of agricultural consumption since I choose
exporter-importer-sector-specific trade costs, jkn , to match all observed bilateral
28                                             NATH 2020



trade flows. As shown in Appendix Figure A-30, most developing countries import
little of their food. In the data, the average person in the poorest quartile of the
world consumes 91.3% domestically produced food (89.4% in the simulation) com-
pared to 45.1% in the richest quartile (52.4% in the simulation). I present suggestive
evidence on some of the underlying causes of these high barriers to trade in poor
countries in Section 9.
     My model also explains most of the variation in the global agriculture share of
GDP   . I slightly under-predict agricultural shares on average, but overall the model
explains 60.3% of the variation in the data. This is a relatively strong fit considering
that only the seven free parameters in Table 4 were chosen to match 316 target
moments consisting of GDP shares for agriculture, manufacturing, and services in
158 countries. As shown in Figure 6, the nonhomothetic CES demand specification
enables the simulation to closely mirror the smooth decline of agricultural GDP
with log income per capita.35

                    Figure 6: Agriculture Share of GDP - Data vs. Simulation




          Notes: Graph shows the fit of simulated agriculture share of GDP in the model to data
          from the World Bank. The simulation explains over 60% of the variation in the data,
          and reproduces the smooth pattern of non-homotheticity observed in the empirical
          relationship between agricultural shares and income.

   The model also reproduces the general pattern of high relative prices for agri-
cultural consumption in poor countries - a moment I do not target in my estima-
tion. In Figure 7, I compare the simulated pattern of the relative price of agri-
cultural and manufacturing consumption, Pak and Pmk , to an empirical analogue
     35
    For comparison, the best fit using a Stone-Geary utility specification has an R2 of 0.43 and
predominantly underpredicts the agriculture share as shown in Appendix Figure A-31.
                       CLIMATE CHANGE & AGGREGATE PRODUCTIVITY                                   29


constructed using aggregate sectoral price indices from the World Bank's Inter-
national Comparison Program. While the simulated and empirical price indices
have different units that prevent direct comparison, they share the same pattern of
high relative prices for food in developing countries with low relative agricultural
productivity.

                  Figure 7: Relative Price of Food - Data vs. Simulation




         The graph on the left shows the ratio of a country-level food price index to an
         aggregate price index using data from the International Comparison Program.
         The graph on the right shows an analogous moment in the model - the ratio
         of the aggregate agricultural and manufacturing price indices, Pa and Pm . The
         model reproduces the empirical relationship that poor countries tend to have
         higher relative prices for food - a moment I do not target in my estimation.


    Overall, the model matches the existing global pattern of sectoral specializa-
tion through a combination of consumer preferences and barriers to trade. Low
incomes and the high relative price of food drive up agriculture's share of expendi-
tures in poor countries through the nonhomotheticity and low elasticity of sub-
stitution in the preference specification. High estimated trade costs chosen to
rationalize observed trade flows tightly link domestic consumption to domestic
production, causing many developing countries to specialize in agriculture despite
its low productivity.36 In the next section, I use the model to investigate projected
sectoral reallocation in response to climate change and its welfare consequences.




  36
    As discussed in Section 5, this explanation is consistent with the work of Tombe (2015), Gollin,
Parente and Rogerson (2007), and the broader literature on structural transformation.
30                                           NATH 2020



7         Model Counterfactuals
This section uses the estimated model to project the impacts of climate change on
trade flows, sectoral specialization, prices, GDP, and welfare.
7.1       Estimated Productivity Impacts
I start by projecting the impacts of climate change on country-sector level produc-
tivity. For agricultural productivity effects, I use the estimates from Cline (2007)
displayed in Figure 1. As I explain in Appendix E.3, I choose these projections for
two reasons. First, they use globally representative data to produce results broadly
consistent with the literature on climate and agricultural production. Second, they
represent the most comprehensive available source of global impact estimates that
account carefully for adaptation and crop-switching within the agricultural sector.
    To project the impact of climate change on productivity in manufacturing and
services, I combine the country-sector specific temperature sensitivities estimated
in Section 4.4 with projections of the future distribution of temperature in 2080-
2099.37 I obtain future temperature predictions from the CSIRO-MK-3.6.0 model
produced by Jeffrey et al. (2013), one of the climate models used by Cline (2007),
for consistency with the projected changes in agricultural productivity.38 The pro-
jected changes in manufacturing and services productivity are shown in Figure 8a
and Appendix Figure A-24 respectively. Figure 8b brings together the estimated
impacts on agricultural productivity from Cline (2007) with my estimates of the
change in manufacturing productivity to show the change in the relative produc-
tivity of the model's tradable sectors for every country.
    The pattern in Figure 8b shows clearly that climate change shifts comparative
advantage in agriculture toward colder countries far from the equator on average.
While the negative effects of climate change on manufacturing productivity are
concentrated in similar parts of the world to agricultural productivity, they are
generally smaller in magnitude. Every country in Africa, South Asia, and Latin
America (with the exception of Egypt) has larger estimated productivity losses in
agriculture than manufacturing. Thus, to the extent that specialization follows
Ricardian comparative advantage, we would expect to see agricultural production
move toward colder places away from the equator in response to climate change.
    Next, I integrate these empirically estimated productivity changes into the model
by applying them to the sector-country specific aggregate productivity Zjk and re-
calculating equilibrium wages, prices, and trade flows.
     37
      I use the estimates that allow for firms to adjust adaptation investments to their end-of-century
temperatures. I account for the costs of this adaptation in Section 7.6.
   38
      My estimates from the interacted model in Section 4 give me an estimate of the reduction in
annual manufacturing and services output per worker for each degree-day above 30 C and below
5 C. The CSIRO model projections give me population-weighted change in degree-days above 30 C
and below 5 C for every country in the world in 2080-2099, which are shown in Appendix Figures
A-22 and A-23. I multiply the country-level coefficients by the projected changes in hot and cold
temperatures to get the impacts shown here.
                        CLIMATE CHANGE & AGGREGATE PRODUCTIVITY                                    31


            Figure 8: Projected Impact of Climate Change on Productivity
                                        (a) Manufacturing




                           (b) Agriculture Relative to Manufacturing




Notes: Panel A shows the projected impact of climate change on manufacturing productivity
in 2080-2099 obtained by multiplying predicted temperature sensitivities by CSIRO-MK-3.6.0
global climate model predictions of changes in exposure to extreme heat and cold. Temperature
sensitivities are calculated by evaluating the interaction regression from Column 2 of Table 2 at each
country's income and end-of-century long-run average temperature. Panel B shows the change
in agricultural productivity from Cline (2007) minus my estimate of the change in manufacturing
productivity, shown above, in percentage points.


7.2    Comparative Advantage and Trade
Figure 9 shows the projected equilibrium change in agricultural net exports in re-
sponse to climate change. Consistent with the estimated change in comparative
advantage, the predominant pattern is that hotter countries experiencing large
declines in agricultural productivity import more food, while cooler countries with
neutral or improving agricultural productivity export more food. For instance, Den-
32                                       NATH 2020



mark and Canada roughly double agricultural net exports, from 1.9% to 3.8% and
0.5% to 1.2% of GDP respectively. Conversely, most of Sub-Saharan Africa and
South Asia increase imports of food. The few exceptions to this finding are those
hot countries for whom the change in agricultural productivity is not large relative
to the change in manufacturing productivity, particularly in relation to their close
trading partners.


      Figure 9: Projected Impact of Climate Change on Agricultural Net Exports




Notes: Map shows model simulations of the change in agricultural net exports as a share of GDP
driven by the effects of climate change on sector-level productivity and comparative advantage
shown in Figure 8b.



   The magnitudes of the projected change in trade flows are generally modest as a
share of the economy. No country increases agricultural net exports by more than
6% of GDP, and only 12 out of 158 countries decrease agricultural net exports by
more than 10% of GDP.

7.3    Sectoral Reallocation
As shown in Section 5.2, the change in trade flows is only a partial summary of the
change in sectoral specialization. Agriculture's share of GDP (and consequently the
labor force) depends on both the change in net exports and the change in the ex-
penditure share on food. I reproduce Equation 23 summarizing labor reallocation
in response to an agriculture-biased decline in productivity here for convenience:

                                               N
                                                              wn Ln
                            lak = akk Xak +         akn Xan
                                              n=1
                                                              wk Lk
                                         
                                                        
                          CLIMATE CHANGE & AGGREGATE PRODUCTIVITY                              33


The change in net exports shown in Figure 9 captures the first and third effects
in the above equation. Given the strong nonhomotheticity and low cross-sector
substitutability implied by the estimates of a and  in Section 6, the change in the
agriculture expenditure share, Xak , is also likely to be substantial.
    The horserace between these two competing effects - comparative advantage
and `the food problem' - that govern sectoral reallocation in response to climate
change plays a critical role in the aggregate productivity and welfare consequences.
As discussed in Section 5, the simple logic formalized by Baqaee and Farhi (2019) is
that production moving toward the sector suffering a larger decline in productivity
exacerbates the aggregate consequences of a given shock.
    I decompose the competing effects of climate change on the agriculture share of
GDP by running separate counterfactuals with and without trade. In autarky, the
change in a sector's relative price equals the change in that sector's productivity.
Thus, I start by applying country-sector level price changes equal to the inverse
of the projected change in productivity and calculating the change in expenditure
shares. This gives me the change in Xak , which in autarky equals the change in
agriculture's share of GDP. In contrast, the standard counterfactual incorporating
trade gives me the full effect of both types of reallocation. Table 6 displays the base-
line, autarky counterfactual, and trade-inclusive counterfactual agriculture shares
of GDP for a selection of countries.

            Table 6: Counterfactual Agriculture GDP Shares - Selected Countries

 Country            Ag Productivity   Manufacturing   No Reallocation   Autarky   With Trade
                        Change         Productivity
                                         Change

 Argentina               -.111             0               .065          .067        .07
 Canada                  -.022            -.007            .019          .019        .026
 China                   -.072            -.036            .064          .068        .074
 Denmark                 .109             .006             .033          .032        .051
 Ethiopia                -.313            -.102            .359          .437        .409
 India                   -.381             0               .161          .224        .194
 Kenya                   -.054            -.044            .156           .16        .185
 Mozambique              -.217            -.104            .367          .426        .451
 Rwanda                  -.601            -.058            .409          .678        .351
 Poorest Quartile        -.319            -.02             .199          .256        .227
 World                   -.101            -.01             .038          .044        .043


Notes: Table shows model simulations of the change in agriculture share of GDP driven by the
effects of climate change.

   The results in Table 6 show that the consumption response and trade response
both have substantial effects on specialization in agriculture, with significant het-
erogeneity across countries. In Ethiopia and India the `food problem' effect domi-
34                                       NATH 2020



      Figure 10: Projected Impact of Climate Change on Agricultural GDP Share




Notes: Map shows the model simulations of the change in the agriculture share of GDP driven by
climate change.



nates and the agriculture share of GDP rises in response to climate change despite
large relative declines in agricultural productivity. In contrast, the trade effect dom-
inates in Rwanda, where the domestic production share of agricultural expendi-
tures falls from 85% to 54%. Other countries, such as Canada, Denmark, Kenya, and
Mozambique see an increase in agricultural specialization because of increased
exports driven by improvements in relative agricultural productivity compared to
their trading partners.
    Figure 10 shows the worldwide change in agriculture's share of GDP     . On average,
the global agriculture share of GDP rises from 3.8% to 4.3% because agricultural
productivity falls in more places than it rises, raising Xak , and net exports for the
world are zero. The dominance of the `food problem' is particularly relevant in
poor countries disproportionately suffering from extreme heat. The population-
weighted average change in agriculture's share of GDP in the poorest quartile of
the world is +2.8 percentage points. Thus, simulations suggest that climate change
will push more people in poor countries into farming as the productivity of those
farms declines dramatically.
7.4     Aggregate Productivity and Willingness-to-Pay
The estimated sectoral productivity effects combined with the changes in sectoral
specialization map directly into changes in aggregate productivity. Table 7 shows
the change in real GDP for each counterfactual in select countries, deflating nomi-
nal income at the country level using the Tornqvist price index from Equation 20.
   The results make clear that projected reallocation exacerbates the impact of
climate change on aggregate productivity in most countries, as well as globally
on average. Global GDP declines 1.9% in the counterfactual that holds sectoral
                          CLIMATE CHANGE & AGGREGATE PRODUCTIVITY                                 35


         Table 7: Counterfactual GDP Losses (Share of GDP) - Selected Countries

 Country            Ag Productivity   Manufacturing   No Reallocation   Autarky      With Trade
                        Change         Productivity
                                         Change

 Argentina               -.111             0               -.002          0             .001
 Canada                  -.022            -.007            -.018         -.018         -.016
 China                   -.072            -.036            -.043         -.045         -.045
 Denmark                 .109             .006              0             0             .005
 Ethiopia                -.313            -.102            -.163         -.218         -.217
 India                   -.381             0               -.074         -.131         -.127
 Kenya                   -.054            -.044            -.037         -.038         -.034
 Mozambique              -.217            -.104            -.14          -.192         -.199
 Rwanda                  -.601            -.058            -.334         -.557         -.508
 Poorest Quartile        -.319            -.02             -.083         -.132         -.126
 World                   -.101            -.01             -.019         -.023         -.021


Notes: Table shows model simulations of the change in GDP driven by the effects of climate change.


shares fixed, but declines 2.1% when allowing for reallocation. GDP in the poor-
est quartile of countries falls by 8.3% in the no reallocation counterfactual, and
falls 12.6% with reallocation. This happens for two reasons. First, as discussed in
Section 7.3, the `food problem' pushes up the labor share of agriculture in many
countries while agricultural productivity declines dramatically. Second, as Dingel,
Meng and Hsiang (2019) have shown, the spatial correlation of the productivity
impacts heighten their importance. Since food prices in Rwanda are a function of
agricultural productivity in Rwanda and its closest trading partners, the losses to
Rwanda intensify when accounting for shocks that hit their neighbors.
    How can reallocation that worsens aggregate productivity and measured GDP
be consistent with optimizing behavior? In Table 8, I calculate the willingness-to-
pay (WTP) to avoid climate damages under each counterfactual as the equivalent
variation loss in income at the baseline equilibrium set of wages and prices. The
results show that the full reallocation counterfactual reduces the welfare conse-
quences of climate change, as captured by willingness-to-pay, even while increas-
ing the impact on GDP. The WTP under the no reallocation counterfactual is partic-
ularly dramatic because it forces agents to deviate from optimal consumer behav-
ior. This highlights that the no reallocation counterfactual is actually an unrealistic
scenario. In the presence of declining income and large projected increases in food
prices, keeping fixed the expenditure share on food would require declines in the
quantity of food consumed that are strongly inconsistent with the observed low
substitutability between food and non-food. To summarize the intuition, people
are willing to sacrifice income (GDP) to reallocate expenditures toward food when
food prices rise because they need food to survive.
36                                                 NATH 2020



             Table 8: Equivalent Variation Willingness-to-Pay (Share of GDP)
                                   - Selected Countries

 Country             Ag Productivity   Manufacturing    No Reallocation   Autarky   With Trade
                         Change         Productivity
                                          Change

 Argentina                -.111             0                  -.008       -.002        0
 Canada                   -.022            -.007               -.018       -.016      -.014
 China                    -.072            -.036               -.057       -.04        -.04
 Denmark                  .109             .006                .003         0          .005
 Ethiopia                 -.313            -.102               -.364       -.171      -.169
 India                    -.381             0                  -.311       -.085      -.082
 Kenya                    -.054            -.044               -.052       -.035      -.031
 Mozambique               -.217            -.104               -.279       -.143      -.147
 Rwanda                   -.601            -.058               -.725       -.434      -.387
 Poorest Quartile         -.319            -.02                -.277       -.092      -.088
 World                    -.101            -.01                -.04        -.018      -.017


Notes: Table shows model simulations of the equivalent variation willingness-to-pay to avoid the
productivity effects of climate change using the non-homothetic CES measure of utility.


                    Figure 11: Willingness-to-Pay to Avoid Climate Change




Notes: Map shows model simulations of the willingness-to-pay to avoid the effects of climate
change as a share of GDP.




    Figures 11 and 12 show the global distribution of willingness-to-pay to avoid
climate change, and the change in food prices, Pak , which comprise a key driver
of the welfare losses. Food prices rise in 156 of the 158 countries, and rise by at
                       CLIMATE CHANGE & AGGREGATE PRODUCTIVITY                                 37


                Figure 12: Projected Percentage Change in Food Prices




Notes: Map shows model simulations of the change in the aggregate food price index, Pak , driven
by climate change.


least 25% in 41 countries containing over 32% of the world's population.39 Climate
change does net damage as measured by WTP in 150 countries, and causes welfare
losses exceeding 8% of GDP in 32 countries covering 27% of the world's population.
Because the losses are concentrated in poor countries, global willingness-to-pay
is only 1.7% of GDP. However, the population-weighted average global losses are
4.7% of GDP, and the population-weighted average for countries in the bottom
quartile of income is 8.8% of GDP. The interpretation of this number is that climate
change will cost the average person in the poorest quartile of the world nearly 9%
of their income. Note that these results account neither for the costs of firm-level
adaptation investments nor for the benefits of anticipated economic growth, both
of which will be examined in Section 7.6.
7.5    Low Trade Cost Counterfactual
The analysis of sectoral reallocation and aggregate productivity in Sections 7.3 and
7.4 demonstrates that openness to trade mitigates the harm from climate change
by counteracting `the food problem.' To further investigate the importance of trade
policy, I run an additional counterfactual exercise in which I replace all bilateral
trade costs, jkn , for manufacturing and agriculture with a 100% tariff ( = 2), repre-
senting approximately the 90th percentile of trade openness.40 I choose this num-
ber rather than 0% to acknowledge the fact that some level of shipping costs, regu-
latory discrepancies, and language barriers are inherent to cross-country trade, so
  39
      The large changes in food prices also imply that the incidence of these losses may fall on
urban consumers more than on farmers suffering lost productivity. I investigate the distributional
consequences of climate change within countries further in Appendix F.3.
   40
      The 10th percentile of bilateral tariff-equivalent trade costs in my estimates is 122% in
agriculture and 85% in manufacturing.
38                                            NATH 2020



no amount of policy change could make trade perfectly costless. A 100% tariff-
equivalent trade cost is approximately equal to the cost I estimate for shipping
food from Belgium to Australia; representing an ambitious, yet realistically feasible,
change in global trade policy.
    To disentangle the benefits of trade for climate change adaptation from the
more general gains from trade, I rescale each country's vector of sectoral produc-
tivity parameters, Zjk , such that I continue to match the baseline levels of GDP
per capita in the initial equilibrium. Note, however, that without the estimated
high barriers to trade in developing countries the model can no longer match the
observed global pattern of the agriculture share of GDP   . In this hypothetical world
of increased openness, developing countries import substantially more food from
richer countries with high relative productivity in agriculture even in the absence
of climate change.
    Table 9 shows the WTP to avoid climate change under different trade cost sce-
narios for a select subset of countries especially vulnerable to climate change. Two
things about these results are worth noting. First, as shown in Table 9, reducing
trade barriers dramatically reduces the costs of climate change in the hardest-hit
countries. Overall, the WTP for the average person in the lowest quartile of global
income is only 2.9%, relative to 8.8% in the estimated trade cost case.
    Second, the effects of openness to trade vary substantially across countries. For
40 countries representing 15.1% of the global population, WTP to avoid climate


             Table 9: Equivalent Variation Willingness-to-Pay (Share of GDP)
                              Alternative Trade Cost Cases

 Country                         Autarky            Estimated Trade Cost Case    Low Trade Cost Case

 Rwanda                           -.434                       -.387                     -.086
 Central African Republic         -.428                       -.356                     -.037
 Chad                              -.25                       -.226                     -.032
 Malawi                           -.225                       -.225                     -.119
 Zimbabwe                         -.223                       -.212                     -.074
 Zambia                           -.208                       -.199                     -.001
 Ethiopia                         -.171                       -.169                     -.091
 Sierra Leone                      -.13                       -.164                     -.105
 India                            -.085                       -.082                     -.013
 Poorest Quartile                 -.092                       -.088                     -.029
 World                            -.018                       -.017                     -.013


Notes: Table shows model simulations of the willingness-to-pay to avoid the effects of climate
change under different scenarios - autarky, estimated global barriers to trade, and an alternative
scenario setting all bilateral trade costs to approximately the 90th percentile level of trade openness.
                       CLIMATE CHANGE & AGGREGATE PRODUCTIVITY                                    39


change as a share of GDP is higher in the low trade cost scenario.41 The intuition
for this result is as follows. When trade barriers are high and local consumption
depends mostly on local production, the effects of deteriorating productivity are
also concentrated locally. Conversely, more trade makes the world more interde-
pendent and dilutes the effects of a local shock across many countries. If consump-
tion in Austria is more linked to production in Zimbabwe, then Austrian consumers
suffer more from shocks that hit Zimbabwe. Conversely, Zimbabwean consumers
insulate themselves from the local shock by consuming a more diversified global
portfolio of products.
    Overall, trade reduces the aggregate global willingness-to-pay to avoid climate
change by 7.4% relative to autarky under existing global trade policy, and by 30.7%
under the specified alternative assumption of freer trade. This pattern holds much
more starkly in poor countries. For the average person in the poorest quartile of
the world, trade reduces WTP by 4.5% relative to autarky under existing policy, but
by 68.2% under freer trade. I discuss possible policy mechanisms to realize these
gains in Section 9.
7.6     Future Projections
The results in Sections 7.1 to 7.5 use projections for future temperature change,
but hold the baseline global economy fixed at the present day equilibrium. In this
section, I endeavor to account for the effects of anticipated economic growth by
allowing global income levels to evolve according to an example set of projections
from the Shared Socioeconomic Pathway (Scenario Three) developed by Cuaresma
(2017) of the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis.42
    Allowing for economic growth to take place has two important effects on the
aggregate consequences of climate change. First, the agriculture share of GDP
declines as countries grow richer due to nonhomothetic preferences for food, re-
ducing the aggregate consequences of agriculture-specific productivity shocks. I
capture this effect in the model by applying projected income growth to 2080 as
sector-neutral increases in the baseline values of Zjk . Second, my results from Sec-
tion 4 imply that sensitivity to temperature for manufacturing and services firms
declines markedly as countries become richer. I capture this by re-evaluating the
sensitivity to temperature shown in Figures 5a and 5b at 2080 levels of log GDP per
capita. Appendix Figures A-25 and A-26 show that the effects of temperature on
non-agricultural productivity accounting for adaptation are substantially muted,
even in this relatively low growth scenario that projects only slightly more than a
doubling of global income between 2015 and 2080.
    Table 10 shows the impact of expected economic growth on the agriculture
share of GDP and expected willingness-to-pay. The willingness-to-pay numbers
   41
       To be clear, these countries still experience overall gains from trade. But once those general
gains are netted out, they suffer larger climate change damages in this scenario.
    42
       Use of the Shared Socioeconomic Pathways in future projections of climate change damages
follows from the work of Carleton et al. (2018) and many others.
40                                                   NATH 2020



in Columns 5 and 6 of Table 10 also incorporate the firm-level adaptation costs
calculated in Appendix D, thus accounting more comprehensively for the costs
as well as benefits of adaptation. This particular future scenario includes little to
no projected growth for many currently poor countries, allowing for contrast with
those that grow faster. This comparison shows the importance of economic growth
in reducing climate change damages. Table 10 shows that Zimbabwe and Malawi
get substantially richer in this projection and their agriculture share of GDP and
welfare losses decline markedly. In contrast, climate change continues to be very
harmful to countries that grow slowly, such as Rwanda and Chad.
               Table 10: Equivalent Variation Willingness-to-Pay (Share of GDP)
             Accounting for Economic Growth and Adaptation Costs and Benefits

 Country                      Projected     Ag GDP        Ag GDP        Ag GDP         EV WTP        EV WTP
                                 GDP         Share       Share 2080   Share 2080     Losses from   Losses from
                              Per-Capita    Baseline      Baseline    Counterfac-      Present        2080
                                2080 /                                   tual         Baseline      Baseline
                               Present

 Central African Republic        1.47         .299          .287         .094           -.436         -.316
 Rwanda                          1.14         .409          .39          .322           -.394         -.366
 Zimbabwe                        4.17         .302          .122          .14           -.248         -.111
 Malawi                          2.84         .436          .309         .357           -.244         -.167
 Zambia                          1.52         .36           .28          .318           -.233         -.181
 Chad                            1.13         .257          .213         .243           -.226         -.221
 Sierra Leone                    1.49         .139          .177         .173           -.204         -.146
 Ethiopia                        1.23         .359          .333         .376           -.19          -.182
 India                           3.24         .161          .087         .106           -.082         -.045
 Poorest Quartile                3.05         .199          .126         .144           -.10          -.062
 World                           2.2          .038          .025         .028           -.027         -.015


Notes: Table shows model simulations of the effects of projected economic growth on the
agriculture share of GDP and the willingness-to-pay to avoid climate change in select countries.
Example economic growth projections come from Cuaresma (2017).

    The results in Table 10 show that the aggregate global WTP for climate change
is 2.7% of GDP at current global income levels and 1.5% at future projected in-
comes. The average WTP for a person in the bottom quartile of the world is 10.0%
from the present baseline and 6.2% from the future baseline. To summarize the
importance of the distributional consequences of climate change, I follow Jones
and Klenow (2016) to calculate the willingness-to-pay of a Rawlsian social plan-
ner taking the certainty equivalent of being any person in the world with random
probability.43 The Rawlsian welfare losses from climate change are 6.2% of global
GDP from the present income baseline and 3.6% of global GDP from the future

     43
          Following Jones and Klenow (2016) I use log utility in this calculation.
                    CLIMATE CHANGE & AGGREGATE PRODUCTIVITY                         41


baseline, more than twice as high as the aggregate willingness-to-pay calculated
by summing across agents.

7.7   Model Robustness
I consider robustness to three alternative model assumptions in Appendix F. In Ap-
pendix F.1 I represent subsistence requirements for food using generalized Stone-
Geary preferences instead of the nonhomothetic CES specification in the baseline
model. In Appendix F.2 I use lognormal, rather than Frechet, distributions for
sector-country productivities across varieties. In Appendix F.3 I lay out a version
of the model with heterogeneous workers by skill type in each country. Appendix
Table A-4 shows that the main counterfactual simulation results are very similar
under the first two alternative modeling assumptions. The third extension with
heterogeneous workers is not amenable to quantification, but I demonstrate the
qualitative robustness of the main results and use the model extension to explore
additional dimensions of the implications of climate change for comparative ad-
vantage across sectors and the distributional impact on low and high skill workers.

8     Supporting Empirical Evidence
In this section, I present country-level panel regression evidence consistent with
the model counterfactuals. In particular, my results in Section 7 suggest that the
`food problem' outweighs the trade response, on average, in driving sectoral reallo-
cation due to climate change. This finding is supported by the simulated method of
moments inference that underlies my parameter estimates, is consistent with both
cross-sectional and historical patterns of sectoral specialization in the world, and
is further bolstered by existing empirical evidence that aims to isolate the causal ef-
fect of agricultural productivity on structural transformation. In particular, Gollin,
Hansen and Wingender (2018) proxy for improvements in agricultural productivity
using variation in the development, diffusion, and climatic suitability for high-
yielding crop varieties and Bustos, Caprettini and Ponticelli (2016) study the in-
troduction of genetically engineered soybean seeds in Brazil. Both papers find that
rising agricultural productivity drove labor out of agriculture and into industry.
    More recent work by Fiszbein and Johnson (2020) provides evidence that the
relationship between agricultural productivity and structural change varies with
trade openness as predicted by the model in Section 7. They use a similar high-
yielding crop variety instrument to show that agricultural productivity growth re-
duces agriculture's employment share in more closed economies, but raises it in a
subset of countries sufficiently open to trade. Since only a minority of countries
meet their threshold of openness, their results further support the conclusion that
the `food problem' dominates comparative advantage in driving reallocation when
agricultural productivity improves. Here, I present evidence relevant to the con-
verse more representative of climate change - that exogenous declines in agricul-
tural productivity increase the agriculture share of GDP and labor on average.
42                                         NATH 2020



   Table 11 summarizes the data sources used in this part of my analysis.44 Fol-
lowing Schlenker and Roberts (2009), I use "growing degree days" (GDD) between
0 C and 29 C and "killing degree days" (KDD) above 29 C as temperature trans-
formations representing positive and negative shocks to agricultural productivity
respectively. I aggregate GDD and KDD to the country level for each year weighting
by each pixel's share of cropland.45

                             Table 11: Country-Level Panel Data

                 Variable                                 Data Source

               Temperature                Berkeley Earth Surface Temperature Dataset

             Ag Share of GDP                               World Bank

          Ag Share of Labor Force              International Labour Organization

          Food Share of Imports                          UN Comtrade

                   GDP                                     World Bank

          Notes: Data covers 164 countries from 1960-2012 with varying coverage by
          country and dataset. Economic data from all sources above are retrieved from
          the World Bank Databank.


   I estimate the following panel regression with observations at the country-year
level for four separate outcome variables - log GDP, food share of imports, agricul-
tural share of GDP, and agricultural share of labor:

                         Yit = 1 GDDit + 2 KDDit + i + t +              it                   (24)

The regression exploits idiosyncratic variation in weather controlling for country
fixed effects, i , and year fixed effects, t , to estimate the plausibly causal effect
of shocks to agricultural productivity. I weight observations by their share of the
global agricultural labor force to recover expected reallocation for the average farm
worker in the world.
    The results in Table 12 are broadly consistent with my model simulations in
Section 7. The composition of imports shifts toward food in response to negative
agricultural productivity shocks (KDD), and away from food in response to positive
shocks (GDD), but the magnitudes of these changes are small. Consistent with
      I use BEST temperature data with a 1 global grid in this specification because aggregating
     44

GMFD temperature data from a 0.25 grid for every country worldwide exceeds my available
computational resources.
   45
      Following standard procedure in estimating temperature effects on agricultural productivity,
degree days are calculated by fitting a sinuisoidal curve through daily minimum and maximum
temperature, and then integrating the proportion of each day above a certain threshold.
                        CLIMATE CHANGE & AGGREGATE PRODUCTIVITY                                     43


                         Table 12: Country-Level Panel Regression

                         (1)                 (2)                    (3)                (4)
                      log(GDP)    Food Share of Imports     Ag Share of GDP     Ag Labor Share

        KDD X 100       -0.121            0.00258                0.00875            0.00991
                       (-2.31)             (0.64)                 (1.08)             (1.55)

    GDD X 100          0.0505             -0.00429               -0.00140           -0.00138
                        (1.64)             (-2.45)                (-1.54)            (-0.38)

   Observations         3602                2916                   3171               3715
    Country FE            X                  X                      X                   X
         Year FE          X                  X                      X                   X
 Ag Labor Weights         X                  X                      X                   X

Notes: t-statistics in parentheses. Reported Driscoll and Kraay (1998) standard errors are robust
to heteroskedasticity, spatial correlation, and autocorrelation of up to 5 lags. Results come from
estimating Equation 24 with crop-area weighted growing and killing degree days. Data covers 164
countries from 1960-2012 with varying coverage by country and outcome variable. Economic data
from all sources above are retrieved from the World Bank Databank.


an important role for `the food problem,' the agriculture share of GDP and labor
rise with KDD and fall with GDD, with magnitudes roughly similar to those in the
model. In the regression, the agriculture share of GDP rises by slightly under 1
percentage point for an agriculture-biased shock that reduces GDP by 12%. Simi-
larly, in my model simulations, the agriculture share of GDP rises by 2.1 percentage
points in countries suffering large declines in agricultural productivity (<10 per-
centage points) from an average agricultural productivity fall of 29.5%.
    The results from the country-level regressions are imprecise and insufficient
in isolation to make full general equilibrium projections or welfare calculations
relating to sectoral reallocation in response to climate change.46 Taken together
with the analysis in Sections 6 and 7 and the existing body of evidence, however,
these results reinforce the important role of the `food problem' in mediating the
aggregate consequences of climate-driven agricultural productivity shocks.




   46
     I show results for the unweighted regressions in Appendix Table A-1. I gain precision in the
unweighted specification because the agriculture labor share weights are missing for a nontrivial
share of the observations, but have a less interesting interpretation of the coefficients as effects on
the average country in the world rather than on the average unit of agricultural labor.
44                                   NATH 2020



9    Discussion
This paper has three sets of implications relevant to policy on climate change and
development. First, the results inform cost-benefit analysis on policies to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions and mitigate climate change. These results are not a
comprehensive evaluation of the costs of climate change - I omit international
migration, uncertainty, health effects, and non-temperature effects such as storms
and sea-level rise, among other topics, from my analysis. I do, however, address an
existing challenge in the literature by estimating the welfare consequences of the
global change in aggregate productivity in a framework that accounts for realloca-
tion of production between agriculture and non-agriculture.
    Second, my results inform decisions about the best way to channel efforts to
adapt directly to the consequences of climate change. If it were true that agri-
cultural activity is likely to shift substantially away from hot developing countries,
optimal investments in adaptation might focus on retraining farm workers to tran-
sition to non-agricultural occupations. Instead, my finding that climate change is
more likely to increase specialization in agriculture in hot countries underscores
the urgent need to reduce the temperature-sensitivity of production through tech-
nology, irrigation, heat-resistant crop varieties, or other means. The agricultural
productivity consequences projected by Cline (2007) will take place gradually and
worsen far into the future, and need not be invariant to efforts to reduce them.
    Third, and perhaps most importantly, my results speak to the importance of re-
ducing barriers to trade in developing countries as a mechanism for climate change
adaptation. The results in Section 7.4 show that increasing trade openness could
dramatically reduce exposure to climate damages in the poorest countries in the
world. Reducing tariffs would be one place to start, but tariffs account for a rel-
atively small proportion of estimated trade costs. As Tombe (2015) documents
at length, red tape barriers appear to be a far more important deterrent in many
places. Figures 13a and 13b show data from the World Bank Ease of Doing Business
Indicators on fees and delays associated with importing a container.
    The average country in Sub-Saharan Africa requires 9 documents and over $2700
in fees for customs clearance, document processing, customs brokerage, terminal
handling, and inland transport to import a 20-foot container of goods, exclusive of
tariffs and unofficial payments. Importing a shipment to Sub-Saharan Africa also
requires waiting an average of 37 days upon arrival at the border for compliance
with customs clearance, inspection procedures, and document preparation, likely
a prohibitive length of time for many food imports. Such patterns help clarify the
statistic presented in this paper that the domestic production share of agricultural
consumption ranges around 90% in much of this part of the world. Given that
these types of trade barriers do not involve international negotiations or physi-
cal constraints to shipping over long distances, they could represent a relatively
tractable target for reforms that could make a substantial impact on climate change
adaptation.
                       CLIMATE CHANGE & AGGREGATE PRODUCTIVITY                                  45


                          Figure 13: Non-Tariff Barriers to Trade
                 (a) Direct Costs to Import a 20-Foot Long Container (USD)




                                (b) Days to Import a Container




Notes: Panel A shows the direct cost to import one container of goods. Costs include documents,
administrative fees for customs clearance, terminal handling charges, and inland transport, but not
tariffs or taxes. Panel B shows the average number of days required to import a container. Delays
include customs clearance, government inspection procedures, and documentary compliance
requirements. Data comes from the World Bank Ease of Doing Business Index.



10      Conclusion
Standard intuition suggests that reallocation should improve outcomes. Falling
productivity raises prices and encourages substitution to other products. But this
logic does not hold for broad categories of necessary consumption, such as food.
If a fall in productivity causes the price of corn to rise sharply, people can adapt by
eating more rice. But when people become poorer and the relative price of food
rises, they cannot compensate by substituting away from food.
46                                   NATH 2020



    This paper investigates the importance of subsistence requirements for food
for the general equilibrium and aggregate productivity effects of climate change. I
show that climate change predominantly shifts comparative advantage in agricul-
ture away from the equator as the effects of extreme temperatures on non-agricultural
productivity are generally smaller than those in agriculture. On average, however,
the effect of declining agricultural productivity moves specialization toward, rather
than away from, agriculture because of the special properties of consumer prefer-
ences for food. Countries experiencing large climate change losses in agriculture
that are more open to trade suffer less because they are more able to increase im-
ports of food and shift production toward other sectors. Overall, reducing barriers
to trade could decrease the losses from climate change by more than half for the
poorest quartile of the world's population.
    I conclude with several suggestions for future research. First, while my work is
informative for cost-benefit analysis of climate change mitigation, additional effort
is required to integrate these general equilibrium effects directly into calculating
the social cost of carbon. Second, while my analysis shows that reducing barriers to
trade is a necessary condition to induce sectoral reallocation that curtails the costs
of climate change, I cannot conclude that it is sufficient. A low trade cost counter-
factual in which specialization in agriculture shifts away from the equator still relies
on assumptions about diminishing returns to producing tradable manufactured
goods in developing countries, as well as on the availability of complementary
inputs such as soil quality necessary to expand agricultural production in colder
countries. A final topic concerns the political economy of trade policy regarding
food. Policymakers often prioritize "food security" as a stated aim, implying a pref-
erence for domestic food production secure from interference by foreign countries.
To the extent that this goal conflicts with adaptation to climate change in light
of large declines in agricultural productivity in certain regions, it may be worth
examining this tradeoff more closely, both in practice and in perception.
                   CLIMATE CHANGE & AGGREGATE PRODUCTIVITY                      47


References
Adao, Rodrigo, Arnaud Costinot, and Dave Donaldson, "Nonparametric coun-
  terfactual predictions in neoclassical models of international trade," American
  Economic Review, 2017, 107 (3), 633­89.

Alfaro, Laura and Maggie X Chen, "Selection and market reallocation: Productivity
  gains from multinational production," American Economic Journal: Economic
  Policy, 2018, 10 (2), 1­38.

Baqaee, David Rezza and Emmanuel Farhi, "The macroeconomic impact of
  microeconomic shocks: beyond Hulten's Theorem," Econometrica, 2019, 87 (4),
  1155­1203.

Baumol, William J and William G Bowen, "Performing Arts: The Economic
  Dilemma (New York: The Twentieth Century Fund)," 1966.

Bloom, Nicholas, Mirko Draca, and John Van Reenen, "Trade induced technical
  change? The impact of Chinese imports on innovation, IT and productivity," The
  Review of Economic Studies, 2016, 83 (1), 87­117.

Burnside, Craig and Martin Eichenbaum, "Factor Hoarding and the Propagation of
  Business Cycle Shocks," American Economic Review, 1996.

  , , and Sergio Rebelo, "Labor hoarding and the business cycle," Journal of
  Political Economy, 1993, 101 (2), 245­273.

Burstein, Ariel and Jonathan Vogel, "International trade, technology, and the skill
  premium," Journal of Political Economy, 2017, 125 (5), 1356­1412.

Bustos, Paula, Bruno Caprettini, and Jacopo Ponticelli, "Agricultural productivity
  and structural transformation: Evidence from Brazil," American Economic
  Review, 2016, 106 (6), 1320­65.

Carleton, Tamma, Michael Delgado, Michael Greenstone, Trevor Houser, Solomon
  Hsiang, Andrew Hultgren, Amir Jina, Robert E Kopp, Kelly McCusker, Ishan Nath,
  James Rising, Ashwin Rode, Hee Kwon Seo, Justin Simcock, Arvid Viaene, Jiacan
  Yuan, and Alice Zhang, "Valuing the Global Mortality Consequences of Climate
  Change Accounting for Adaptation Costs and Benefits," 2018.

Chen, Wei, Xilu Chen, Chang-Tai Hsieh, and Zheng Michael Song, "A Forensic
 Examination of China's National Accounts," 2019.

Cline, William R, Global warming and agriculture: End-of-century estimates by
  country, Peterson Institute, 2007.
48                                   NATH 2020



Comin, Diego A, Danial Lashkari, and Mart´
                                         i Mestieri, "Structural change with long-
  run income and price effects," National Bureau of Economic Research Working
  Paper, 2015.
Costinot, Arnaud, Dave Donaldson, and Cory Smith, "Evolving comparative
  advantage and the impact of climate change in agricultural markets: Evidence
  from 1.7 million fields around the world," Journal of Political Economy, 2016, 124
  (1), 205­248.
Cuaresma, Jesus´ Crespo, "Income projections for climate change research: A
  framework based on human capital dynamics," Global Environmental Change,
  2017, 42, 226­236.
Dekle, Robert, Jonathan Eaton, and Samuel Kortum, "Unbalanced trade," American
 Economic Review, 2007, 97 (2), 351­355.
Deryugina, Tatyana and Solomon M Hsiang, "Does the environment still matter?
 Daily temperature and income in the United States," National Bureau of
 Economic Research Working Paper, 2014.
Deschenes, Olivier and Michael Greenstone, "The economic impacts of climate
 change: evidence from agricultural output and random fluctuations in weather,"
 American Economic Review, 2007, 97 (1), 354­385.
Desch^
     enes, Olivier and Michael Greenstone, "Climate change, mortality, and
 adaptation: Evidence from annual fluctuations in weather in the US," American
 Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2011, 3 (4), 152­85.
Desmet, Klaus and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, "On the spatial economic impact of
 global warming," Journal of Urban Economics, 2015, 88, 16­37.
Dingel, Jonathan I, Kyle C Meng, and Solomon M Hsiang, "Spatial Correlation,
  Trade, and Inequality: Evidence from the Global Climate," National Bureau of
  Economic Research Working Paper, 2019.
Driscoll, John C and Aart C Kraay, "Consistent covariance matrix estimation with
  spatially dependent panel data," Review of Economics and Statistics, 1998, 80 (4),
  549­560.
Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel Kortum, "Technology, geography, and trade,"
  Econometrica, 2002, 70 (5), 1741­1779.
Fiszbein, Martin and Will Johnson, "Agricultural Productivity, International Trade,
  and Structural Change," 2020.
Gollin, Douglas, Casper Worm Hansen, and Asger Wingender, "Two blades of grass:
 The impact of the green revolution," National Bureau of Economic Research
 Working Paper, 2018.
                   CLIMATE CHANGE & AGGREGATE PRODUCTIVITY                     49


  , Stephen L Parente, and Richard Rogerson, "The food problem and the evolution
  of international income levels," Journal of Monetary Economics, 2007, 54 (4),
  1230­1255.

Gopinath, Gita, S                 ¨
                ¸ ebnem Kalemli-Ozcan,    Loukas Karabarbounis, and Carolina
 Villegas-Sanchez, "Capital allocation and productivity in South Europe," The
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2017, 132 (4), 1915­1967.

Hicks, Joan Hamory, Marieke Kleemans, Nicholas Y Li, and Edward Miguel,
  "Reevaluating agricultural productivity gaps with longitudinal microdata,"
  National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper, 2017.

Hulten, Charles R, "Growth accounting with intermediate inputs," The Review of
 Economic Studies, 1978, 45 (3), 511­518.

Jeffrey, Stephen, Leon Rotstayn, MA Collier, Stacey Dravitzki, Carlo Hamalainen,
  Chris Moeseneder, KK Wong, and Jozef Syktus, "Australia's CMIP5 submission
  using the CSIRO-Mk3. 6 model," Aust. Meteor. Oceanogr. J, 2013, 63, 1­13.

Jones, Charles I and Peter J Klenow, "Beyond GDP? Welfare across countries and
  time," American Economic Review, 2016, 106 (9), 2426­57.

Lagakos, David and Michael E Waugh, "Selection, agriculture, and cross-country
  productivity differences," American Economic Review, 2013, 103 (2), 948­80.

Lyu, Changjiang, Kemin Wang, Frank Zhang, and Xin Zhang, "GDP management to
  meet or beat growth targets," Journal of Accounting and Economics, 2018, 66 (1),
  318­338.

Matsuyama, Kiminori, "Agricultural productivity, comparative advantage, and
 economic growth," Journal of Economic Theory, 1992, 58 (2), 317­334.

Mendelsohn, Robert, William D Nordhaus, and Daigee Shaw, "The impact of global
 warming on agriculture: a Ricardian analysis," The American Economic Review,
 1994, pp. 753­771.

Nordhaus, William D, "An optimal transition path for controlling greenhouse
 gases," Science, 1992, 258 (5086), 1315­1319.

Schlenker, Wolfram and David B Lobell, "Robust negative impacts of climate
  change on African agriculture," Environmental Research Letters, 2010, 5 (1),
  014010.

   and Michael J Roberts, "Nonlinear temperature effects indicate severe damages
  to US crop yields under climate change," Proceedings of the National Academy of
  sciences, 2009, 106 (37), 15594­15598.
50                                  NATH 2020



Seppanen, Olli, William J Fisk, and QH Lei, "Effect of temperature on task
  performance in office environment," 2006.

Somanathan, E, Rohini Somanathan, Anant Sudarshan, Meenu Tewari et al., "The
  impact of temperature on productivity and labor supply: Evidence from Indian
  manufacturing," 2015.

Teignier, Marc, "The role of trade in structural transformation," Journal of
  Development Economics, 2018, 130, 45­65.

Tombe, Trevor, "The missing food problem: Trade, agriculture, and international
  productivity differences," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2015, 7
  (3), 226­58.

T¨
 ornqvist, Leo, "The Bank of Finland's consumption price index," 1936.

Uy, Timothy, Kei-Mu Yi, and Jing Zhang, "Structural change in an open economy,"
 Journal of Monetary Economics, 2013, 60 (6), 667­682.

Zhang, Peng, Olivier Deschenes, Kyle Meng, and Junjie Zhang, "Temperature
  effects on productivity and factor reallocation: Evidence from a half million
  Chinese manufacturing plants," Journal of Environmental Economics and
  Management, 2018, 88, 1­17.

Zivin, Joshua Graff and Matthew Neidell, "Temperature and the allocation of time:
  Implications for climate change," Journal of Labor Economics, 2014, 32 (1), 1­26.
                      CLIMATE CHANGE & AGGREGATE PRODUCTIVITY                                 51


Appendix A: Additional Regression Results
Figure A-1: Predicted Heterogeneous Response of Annual Manufacturing Revenue
                         to Daily Maximum Temperature




Notes: Figure shows the predicted effect of temperature on the log of manufacturing revenues at
varying levels of income and long-run average temperature by evaluating the interacted regression
from Column 3 of Table 2. 95% confidence intervals are shown in blue. Outcome variables come
from data sources listed in Table 1 and temperature data is from GMFD.


     Figure A-2: Predicted Heterogeneous Response of Annual Manufacturing
                   Employment to Daily Maximum Temperature




Notes: Figure shows the predicted effect of temperature on the log of manufacturing employment at
varying levels of income and long-run average temperature by evaluating the interacted regression
from Column 4 of Table 2. 95% confidence intervals are shown in blue. Outcome variables come
from data sources listed in Table 1 and temperature data is from GMFD.
52                                         NATH 2020



Figure A-3: Predicted Heterogeneous Response of Annual Manufacturing Revenue
                Per Worker to Bins of Daily Maximum Temperature




Notes: Figure shows the predicted effect of temperature on manufacturing revenue per worker
at varying levels of income and long-run average temperature using bins of daily maximum
temperature in the specification from Equation 8. Days are grouped into 5 C bins. 95% confidence
intervals are shown in blue. Outcome variables come from data sources listed in Table 1 and
temperature data is from GMFD.



Figure A-4: Predicted Heterogeneous Response of Annual Manufacturing Revenue
      Per Worker to Polynomial of Degree 4 of Daily Maximum Temperature




Notes: Figure shows the predicted effect of temperature on manufacturing revenue per worker at
varying levels of income and long-run average temperature using a polynomial of degree four in
daily average temperature in the specification from Equation 8. 95% confidence intervals are shown
in blue. Outcome variables come from data sources listed in Table 1 and temperature data is from
GMFD.
                       CLIMATE CHANGE & AGGREGATE PRODUCTIVITY                                 53


     Figure A-5: Predicted Heterogeneous Response of Annual Manufacturing
      Revenue Per Worker to Daily Maximum Temperature - State-by-Year FE




Notes: Figure shows the predicted effect of temperature on manufacturing revenue per worker at
varying levels of income and long-run average temperature using the specification from Equation
8 with state-by-year fixed effects and a polynomial of degree four in daily maximum temperature.
95% confidence intervals are shown in blue. Outcome variables come from data sources listed in
Table 1 and temperature data is from GMFD.


Figure A-6: Predicted Heterogeneous Response of Annual Manufacturing/Services
     Revenue Per Worker to Daily Maximum Temperature - State-by-Year FE




Notes: Figure shows the predicted effect of temperature on revenue per worker at varying levels
of income and long-run average temperature for a pooled sample of manufacturing and services
firms using the specification from Equation 8 with state-by-year fixed effects and a polynomial of
degree four in daily maximum temperature. 95% confidence intervals are shown in blue. Outcome
variables come from data sources listed in Table 1 and temperature data is from GMFD.
54                                         NATH 2020



Figure A-7: Predicted Heterogeneous Response of Annual Manufacturing/Services
     Revenue Per Worker to Daily Maximum Temperature - State-by-Year FE




Notes: Figure shows the predicted effect of temperature on revenue per worker at varying levels of
income and long-run average temperature for a pooled sample of manufacturing and services firms
using the specification from Equation 8 with state-by-year fixed effects and bins of daily maximum
temperature. 95% confidence intervals are shown in blue. Outcome variables come from data
sources listed in Table 1 and temperature data is from GMFD.



Figure A-8: Predicted Heterogeneous Response of Annual Manufacturing Revenue
        Per Worker to Daily Maximum Temperature - Controls for Capital




Notes: Figure shows the predicted effect of temperature on manufacturing revenue per worker at
varying levels of income and long-run average temperature using the specification from Equation
8 with controls for capital. 95% confidence intervals are shown in blue. Outcome variables come
from data sources listed in Table 1 and temperature data is from GMFD.
                      CLIMATE CHANGE & AGGREGATE PRODUCTIVITY                                 55



 Figure A-9: Predicted Heterogeneous Response of Annual Services Revenue Per
       Worker to Polynomial of Degree 4 of Daily Maximum Temperature




Notes: Figure shows the predicted effect of temperature on services revenue per worker at varying
levels of income and long-run average temperature using the specification from Equation 8 with
a polynomial of degree four in daily maximum temperature. 95% confidence intervals are shown
in blue. Outcome variables come from data sources listed in Table 1 and temperature data is from
GMFD.



 Figure A-10: Predicted Heterogeneous Response of Annual Services Revenue Per
                 Worker to Bins of Daily Maximum Temperature




Notes: Figure shows the predicted effect of temperature on services revenue per worker at varying
levels of income and long-run average temperature using the specification from Equation 8 with
bins of daily maximum temperature. 95% confidence intervals are shown in blue. Outcome
variables come from data sources listed in Table 1 and temperature data is from GMFD.
56                                         NATH 2020




 Figure A-11: Predicted Heterogeneous Response of Annual Services Revenue Per
                     Worker to Daily Maximum Temperature




Notes: Figure shows the predicted effect of temperature on services revenue per worker at varying
levels of income and long-run average temperature using the specification from Equation 8. 95%
confidence intervals are shown in blue. Outcome variables come from data sources listed in Table
1 and temperature data is from GMFD.


                       Table A-1: Country-Level Panel Regression

                        (1)                (2)                  (3)                (4)
                     log(GDP)    Food Share of Imports    Ag Share of GDP   Ag Labor Share

      KDD X 100       -0.0223           0.00638               0.0165            0.00483
                      (-0.55)            (1.80)                (3.92)            (3.14)

      GDD X 100       0.00251           -0.00191             -0.00165           -0.00113
                       (0.44)            (-2.87)              (-1.53)            (-1.74)

     Observations      7561              5775                  5522               3718
     Country FE          X                 X                     X                 X
       Year FE           X                 X                     X                 X
 Ag Labor Weights

Notes: t-statistics in parentheses. Reported Driscoll and Kraay (1998) standard errors are robust
to heteroskedasticity, spatial correlation, and autocorrelation of up to 5 lags. Results come from
estimating Equation 24 with crop-area weighted growing and killing degree days. Data covers 164
countries from 1960-2012 with varying coverage by country and outcome variable. Economic data
from all sources above are retrieved from the World Bank Databank.
                         CLIMATE CHANGE & AGGREGATE PRODUCTIVITY                                           57


Appendix B: U.S. Results

  Figure A-12: Estimated Response of U.S. Annual Manufacturing TFPR to Daily
                            Maximum Temperature




Notes: Figure shows the estimated effect of temperature on manufacturing TFPR using the
specification from Equation 7 with a polynomial of degree four in daily maximum temperature.
95% confidence interval is shown in blue. Outcome data comes from the Annual Survey of
Manufacturers and Census of Manufacturers from the U.S. Census Bureau. Temperature data is
from GMFD.

                                   Table A-2: U.S. Productivity Results

                     Revenue/Worker      Revenue    Employment       TFPR       Revenue/Worker   Revenue/Worker

     TMax-30           -0.0000109       0.0000220    0.0000330    0.00000134      -0.0000422       0.0000110
                         (-2.21)          (2.01)      (3.49)        (0.33)          (-2.97)          (0.46)

     5-TMax            0.0000365        0.0000338   -0.00000269   -0.00000685     -0.0000226        0.000154
                         (5.65)          (2.65 )      (-0.26)       (-1.30)         (-1.71)          (3.56)

   Observations         2852000          2852000     2852000       2852000         2852000          2852000
     Firm FE               X                X           X             X               X                X
 Country X Year FE         X                X           X             X               X                X
  State X Year FE                                                                     X
  Sales Weighting                                                                                      X


Notes: t-statistics in parentheses. Dependent variables all in logs. Standard errors two-way
clustered at the firm and county-by-year level. Estimates use the regression model from Equation 7
with outcome variable data from 1976-2014 from the Annual Survey of Manufacturers and Census
of Manufacturers from the U.S. Census Bureau and temperature data from GMFD.
58                                                NATH 2020




             Figure A-13: Estimated Response of U.S. Annual Manufacturing
            Plant-Level Energy Expenditures to Daily Maximum Temperature




Notes: Figure shows the estimated effect of temperature on manufacturing energy expenditures
using the specification from Equation 7 with a polynomial of degree four in daily maximum
temperature. 95% confidence interval is shown in blue. Energy expenditures are the sum of
cost of fuels and electricity expenditures in the Annual Survey of Manufacturers and Census of
Manufacturers from the U.S. Census Bureau. Temperature data is from GMFD.




                                      Table A-3: U.S. Energy Results

                     log(Energy Expenditure)   Energy Expenditures   log(Energy Expenditures)   Energy Expenditures

      TMax-30              0.0000822               0.0000890                  251.1                    6056
                             (6.03)                  (3.24)                   (4.45)                  (1.32)

       5-TMax              0.0000108               0.00000184                 490.8                   13840
                             (0.78)                  (0.04)                   (3.57)                  (1.69)

     Observations           2852000                 2852000                  2852000                 2852000
       Firm FE                 X                       X                        X                       X
 Country X Year FE             X                       X                        X                       X
  Sales Weighting                                      X                                                X


Notes: t-statistics in parentheses. Standard errors two-way clustered at the firm and county-by-
year level. Estimates use the regression model from Equation 7 with outcome variable data from
1976-2014 from the Annual Survey of Manufacturers and Census of Manufacturers from the U.S.
Census Bureau and temperature data from GMFD. Dependent variable is the sum of electricity
expenditures and cost of fuels, in logs or levels.
                    CLIMATE CHANGE & AGGREGATE PRODUCTIVITY                        59


Appendix C: China Results
This section explains the data quality issues that lead me to estimate the results in
Section 4.1 excluding data from China. At a high level, I find evidence consistent
with the conclusions of Chen, Chen, Hsieh and Song (2019) that Chinese micro-
data after 2007 are unreliable due to systematic manipulation by local officials. The
details are as follows.
    To start with, Zhang, Deschenes, Meng and Zhang (2018) analyze data from
China for the years 1998-2007 and find that both cold and hot temperatures harm
output and productivity, consistent with my findings. Using the overlapping subset
of years from my data, which goes from 2003-2012, I am able to replicate their
findings fairly closely, as shown in Appendix Figure A-14. Notably, I am also able to
use my main results from the rest of my global data in Figure 3 to closely predict
the response of output to temperature in China based on their income level and
average climate. My prediction and the estimates from Zhang, Deschenes, Meng
and Zhang (2018) are shown in Figure A-15. While I slightly overpredict sensitivity
to cold and underpredict sensitivity to heat, my results are broadly consistent with
their findings, lending external validity to my work.
    However, when I estimate the response to temperature in my full sample of
Chinese firms from 2003-2012, I produce the highly anomalous results shown in
Figure A-16. This estimate using my full sample of Chinese data implies that ex-
treme temperatures sharply and statistically significantly increase output, a finding
inconsistent with my results from any other country in the world. Notably, this
anomalous result begins to appear by including later years starting with 2008 in
the regression, the same year Chen, Chen, Hsieh and Song (2019) start to find
discrepancies in the data. They state that "local statistics increasingly misrepresent
the true numbers after 2008" and "the micro-data of the ASIF [have] overstated
aggregate output."
    A somewhat puzzling fact is that my results suggest that this documented ma-
nipulation of data in China is systematically correlated with temperature. One
plausible hypothesis is that Chinese provincial officials inflate reported manufac-
turing output to meet GDP targets in response to declines in other sectors more
susceptible to temperature, such as agriculture. These targets have historically
played a central role in the evaluation and promotion of government officials, and
Lyu, Wang, Zhang and Zhang (2018) demonstrate that reported provincial GDP just
barely hits target thresholds with implausible frequency. I cannot provide further
evidence on the particular sources and methods of manipulation, but given the
widespread external documentation of problems with this subset of the Chinese
firm data and my very short panel that would remain when excluding these years
in China, I exclude this dataset entirely from my main analysis. Still, I view the
consistency of both my replication and predictions with the results of Zhang, De-
schenes, Meng and Zhang (2018) as validating my central analysis.
60                                        NATH 2020



                  Figure A-14: China Replication - Overlapping Years




Notes: Left panel of the figure shows the effect of temperature on annual manufacturing output
in China estimated by Zhang, Deschenes, Meng and Zhang (2018) using data from the Chinese
Industrial Survey of the National Bureau of Statistics from 1998-2007. Right panel shows my
replication of their result using data from the same source for 2003-2007 - the overlapping years
of my data coverage. Temperature data is from GMFD.



             Figure A-15: China Manufacturing Temperature Sensitivity
                             - Estimated and Predicted




Notes: Left panel of the figure shows the effect of temperature on annual manufacturing output
in China estimated by Zhang, Deschenes, Meng and Zhang (2018) using data from the Chinese
Industrial Survey of the National Bureau of Statistics from 1998-2007. Right panel shows the
predicted effect of temperature in China from evaluating my global interacted specification from
Column 2 of Table 2 at China's income and average long-run temperature from 1998-2007. I do not
use any data from China in my estimation or prediction, but replicate the pattern closely.
                      CLIMATE CHANGE & AGGREGATE PRODUCTIVITY                                 61


                    Figure A-16: China Replication - Different Years




Notes: Left panel of the figure shows the effect of temperature on annual manufacturing output
in China estimated by Zhang, Deschenes, Meng and Zhang (2018) using data from the Chinese
Industrial Survey of the National Bureau of Statistics from 1998-2007. Right panel shows my
replication of their result using data from the same dataset for 2003-2012 - the years of my data
coverage. Temperature data is from GMFD.




Appendix D: Adaptation Benefits and Costs
In this section I explain how I use revealed preference methods developed by Car-
leton et al. (2018) to infer the costs firms incur from reducing the sensitivity of
their production to extreme temperatures. To build intuition start by considering
a simple example of otherwise identical firms in two cities, Seattle and Houston.
Houston is hotter than Seattle, but Seattle heats up over the course of the century
such that its exposure to CDD in 2100 is that of Houston in 2020. Let  repre-
sent lost annual revenues from exposure to a cooling degree day, a function of the
adaptation investments the firm chooses to make. The annual costs of extreme
heat to a firm in Seattle are given by CDDSeattle  Seattle . Since Seattle suffers little
exposure to extreme heat, its firms choose a lower (more negative)  than firms
in Houston, as I find in my empirical estimates. If Seattle firms had chosen the
Houston  associated with greater expected exposure to heat, the marginal benefits
they would obtain are as follows:

                          M B = CDDSeattle  (Houston - Seattle )

    Given that Seattle firms do not choose Houston , we know that the marginal costs
of this incremental reduction in temperature sensitivity must exceed the marginal
benefits. By repeating this logic for the firm's estimated temperature sensitivity
for every year of warming from Seattle2020 to Seattle2100 , we can construct the full
marginal cost curve for the Seattle firm's projected change in chosen  from 2020
62                                          NATH 2020



to 2100:
                                 2099             2099
                        TC =            M Ct =            CDDt  (t+1 - t )                      (25)
                               t=2020            t=2020

    Note that the continuous version of Equation 25 also follows straight from the
firm's first-order condition in the framework in Section 3.1. The firm's lost revenues
from extreme heat are CDD   so the marginal benefit the firm receives from
a reduction in  is given by CDD. Since the firm's optimal choice of  equates
marginal benefit to marginal cost, we have marginal cost c = CDD for the full
range of CDDs.
    The total benefits of future adaptation for firms in Seattle are given by the change
in damages from choosing their optimal level of adaptation for expected heat ex-
posure in 2100 rather than remaining at the adaptation level they choose in 2020:

                               T B = CDD2100  (2100 - 2020 )                                    (26)

    Because CDDs are increasing as countries become hotter, the benefits of adap-
tation in Equation 26 exceed the costs in Equation 25. Figure A-17 shows predicted
manufacturing sensitivity to a hot day at end-of-century temperatures, which is
substantially muted relative to the sensitivities at current temperatures shown in
Figure 5a. Figure A-18 show the costs of achieving this reduced sensitivity, as cal-
culated using Equation 25, and Figure A-19 show the net benefits of firms adapting
to changes in expected exposure to extreme heat.

                      Figure A-17: Predicted Effect of a 40 C Day on
                       Annual Manufacturing Revenue per Worker
                              At 2080 Average Temperatures




Notes: Map shows the predicted annual percentage point loss in revenue per worker from a 40 C
day obtained by evaluating the interaction regression in Column 2 of Table 2 at each country's level
of income and end-of-century long-run average temperature. Temperature sensitivities are lower
in this figure than in Figure 5a because my results predict that firms will adapt to hot temperatures
as the world warms.
                       CLIMATE CHANGE & AGGREGATE PRODUCTIVITY                                   63


                        Figure A-18: Firm-Level Adaptation Costs
                            (Share of Manufacturing Output)




Notes: Map shows my calculations of the costs firms pay to achieve the lower temperature
sensitivity shown in Appendix Figure A-17 compared to Figure 5a. I infer these costs using a
revealed preference approach developed by Carleton et al. (2018) that infers adaptation costs from
the foregone benefits firms would have attained by reducing their heat sensitivity. The procedure is
detailed in Appendix D.



                    Figure A-19: Firm-Level Adaptation Net Benefits
                           (Share of Manufacturing Output)




Notes: Map shows my calculations of the net benefits firms receive by investing to reduce their
heat sensitivity as the climate warms. The benefits come from reducing heat sensitivity to the level
shown in Appendix Figure A-17 compared to the original level in Figure 5a. The inferred costs are
shown in Appendix Figure A-18. The procedure to calculate these costs and benefits is detailed in
Appendix D.
64                                        NATH 2020




           Figure A-20: Predicted Effect of a 40 C Day on Annual Services
                                Revenue per Worker




Notes: Map shows the predicted annual percentage point loss in revenue per worker from a 40 C
day obtained by evaluating the interaction regression for a pooled sample of manufacturing and
services firms in Column 5 of Table 2 at each country's level of income and long-run average
temperature.




           Figure A-21: Predicted Effect of a -5 C Day on Annual Services
                                Revenue per Worker




Notes: Map shows the predicted annual percentage point loss in revenue per worker from a -
5 C day obtained by evaluating the interaction regression for a pooled sample of manufacturing
and services firms in Column 5 of Table 2 at each country's level of income and long-run average
temperature.
                      CLIMATE CHANGE & AGGREGATE PRODUCTIVITY                                65




             Figure A-22: Projected Change in Exposure to Extreme Heat




Notes: Map shows projections from the CSIRO-MK-3.6.0 global climate model of future exposure to
extreme heat as measured by the change in cooling degree days above 30 C from 2015 to 2080-2099.




             Figure A-23: Projected Change in Exposure to Extreme Cold




Notes: Map shows projections from the CSIRO-MK-3.6.0 global climate model of future exposure to
extreme cold as measured by the change in heating degree days below 5 C from 2015 to 2080-2099.
66                                         NATH 2020




     Figure A-24: Projected Impact of Climate Change on Services Productivity




Notes: Map shows the projected impact of climate change on services productivity in 2080-2099
obtained by multiplying predicted temperature sensitivities by CSIRO-MK-3.6.0 global climate
model predictions of changes in exposure to extreme heat and cold. Temperature sensitivities
are calculated by evaluating the interaction regression from Column 5 of Table 2 at each country's
income and end-of-century long-run average temperature.




Figure A-25: Projected Impact of Climate Change on Manufacturing Productivity
               Accounting for Economic Growth and Adaptation




Notes: Map shows the projected impact of climate change on manufacturing productivity in 2080-
2099 obtained by multiplying predicted temperature sensitivities by CSIRO-MK-3.6.0 global climate
model predictions of changes in exposure to extreme heat and cold. Temperature sensitivities are
calculated by evaluating the interaction regression from Column 2 of Table 2 at each country's
end-of-century long-run average temperature and 2080 income as projected by Cuaresma (2017).
These estimates that account for economic growth show reduced losses relative to those in Figure
8a because my empirical results suggest that firms in richer countries have reduced exposure to
extreme temperatures.
                       CLIMATE CHANGE & AGGREGATE PRODUCTIVITY                                  67


       Figure A-26: Projected Impact of Climate Change on Services Productivity
                   Accounting for Economic Growth and Adaptation




Notes: Map shows the projected impact of climate change on services productivity in 2080-2099
obtained by multiplying predicted temperature sensitivities by CSIRO-MK-3.6.0 global climate
model predictions of changes in exposure to extreme heat and cold. Temperature sensitivities are
calculated by evaluating the interaction regression from Column 5 of Table 2 at each country's end-
of-century long-run average temperature and 2080 income as projected by Cuaresma (2017). These
estimates that account for economic growth show reduced losses relative to those in Appendix
Figure A-24 because my empirical estimates suggest that firms in richer countries have reduced
exposure to extreme temperatures.


Appendix E: Model Estimation
Appendix E.1: Solution Algorithm & Simulated Method of Moments
I solve the model presented in Section 5 numerically by directly simulating each
component. I draw productivities, zijk , from Frechet distributions for 20,000 vari-
eties for each sector for each country. I assign production of each variety in each
country to the world's lowest cost producer based on wages, trade costs, and the
productivity draw zijk . This allows me to calculate prices, revenues, and bilateral
imports and exports for each sector and country. I start by guessing a vector of
wages across all countries and then iterate until the equilibrium conditions hold
and national income equals national expenditures for each country.
    I estimate the consumption parameters, productivity parameters, and trade
costs using simulated method of moments and calibrate the trade elasticities using
the values estimated by Tombe (2015); a = 4.06, and m = 4.63. To assign values
to Zjk , I choose country level relative sectoral productivities to match the ratio of
value-added per worker in agriculture, manufacturing, and services, and adjust the
overall level of {Zak , Zmk , Zsk } to match country-level nominal GDP.47 I estimate the
consumption parameters to minimize the sum of squared distance from sectoral
share data, and search for bilateral trade costs to match the data on bilateral trade
  47
   Since trade flows are in nominal terms, I match nominal GDP in the model for consistency. The
nonhomothetic price index deflates nominal income to a measure of welfare.
68                                        NATH 2020



flows by sector. I iteratively loop over the searches for each set of parameters to
match all moments as closely as possible.
    For the trade moments, I obtain data from UN Comtrade and classify HS 1988/92
codes 1-24 as agriculture and 28-97 as manufacturing to best approximate food and
non-food imports. Since trade data is reported in gross output terms but GDP is in
value-added, I follow Tombe (2015) and deflate the trade data by country-sector-
level value-added to output ratios obtained from the United Nations Statistical
Division. Following recommendations from UN Comtrade documentation, I use
importer-reported trade data where possible, but default to exporter-reported data
for smaller developing countries with large discrepancies between importer and
exporter reported data.
Appendix E.2: Additional Model Fit Figures

                Figure A-27: Sectoral GDP Shares - Data vs. Simulation




Notes: Left graph shows the fit of simulated manufacturing share of GDP in the model to data from
the World Bank. Right graph shows the same comparison for services share of GDP.
                       CLIMATE CHANGE & AGGREGATE PRODUCTIVITY                                 69




 Figure A-28: GDP Per Capita and Agriculture Share of GDP - Data vs. Simulation




Notes: Left graph shows another view of the fit of simulated agriculture share of GDP in the model
to data from the World Bank also shown in Figure 6. Right graph shows the same comparison for
GDP per capita. A perfect fit would have all data points be on the 45 line such that the simulated
and actual values are equal. The simulation explains over 60% of the variation in the agriculture
share of GDP and over 99% of the variation in per capita income.




  Figure A-29: Domestic Production Share of Expenditures - Data vs. Simulation




Notes: Graph shows the fit of simulated domestic production share of agricultural (left) and
manufacturing (right) consumption in the model to data from Comtrade. As shown in Section 5.2,
openness to food imports is a crucial parameter governing the response of labor reallocation to
climate change. The simulation explains over 80% of the variation in the data for this moment.
70                                        NATH 2020



 Figure A-30: Domestic Production Share of Expenditures in Agriculture - Model
                                 Simulation




Notes: Figure shows that the share of expenditures on domestically produced goods in agriculture
is very high in many developing countries with high barriers to trade. Table 5 shows that these
simulated values track closely to the data.




Appendix E.3: Cline Productivity Estimates
The analysis in Cline (2007) uses micro-data from 18 countries in Africa, North
and South America, and Asia representing over 35% of the world's agricultural pro-
duction to estimate Ricardian cross-sectional regressions of agricultural output (in
dollars) from grains, fruits, vegetables, and livestock as a function of temperature,
precipitation, and irrigation. Because we expect farmers to optimize crop choice
and land use decisions in response to local long-run climate conditions, I interpret
the estimated effects of temperature and precipitation from these cross-sectional
regressions as net of adaptation through choice of crops and livestock. Projec-
tions using the empirical estimates are averaged with projections from leading crop
models from agronomy, which also account for adaptation through crop-switching
and adjusted farming techniques. The crop model projections in Cline (2007) ac-
count for reallocation across crop types within country, shifting planting dates, and
increased irrigation and fertilizer use. None of the estimates in the analysis account
for any response of international trade.

Appendix F: Model Robustness
In this section, I evaluate the robustness of the counterfactual model simulations
presented in Section 7 to three sets of different assumptions - an alternative spec-
ification for nonhomothetic consumer preferences, an alternative functional form
to represent sector-country level productivity distributions, and a version of the
model that allows for heterogeneous workers in each country.
                      CLIMATE CHANGE & AGGREGATE PRODUCTIVITY                               71


Appendix F.1: Stone-Geary Preferences
I test that the model predictions are robust to the way nonhomothetic consumer
preferences are specified by estimating a version of the model in which the repre-
sentative agent in country k has the following generalized Stone-Geary preferences
over the sectoral final goods in agriculture, manufacturing, and services:48

                                          1             -1         1             -1
             U (Cka , Ckm , Cks ) =   
                                      a (Cka - Cka )         + m
                                                               
                                                                 (Ckm - Ckm )    


                                                              
                                      1              -1       -1
                                  +s (Cks - Cks )
                                                                                          (27)

    This specification is ubiquitous in the literature on structural transformation
and has the advantage of intuitively capturing subsistence requirements for food
by specifying a level of consumption below which people cannot survive. However,
the model fit to the data is much weaker with Stone-Geary preferences than with
the primary nonhomothetic CES specification, as shown in Figure A-31.
    Table A-4 shows that the results in this version of the model are very similar
to the baseline specification. For the poorest quartile of the global population,
climate change increases agriculture's share of the labor force by 2.8 percentage
points, reduces GDP by 10.7 percentage points, reduces welfare (as captured by
willingness-to-pay) by 7 percentage points, and raises food prices by 37%. These
results are very similar to the results in the baseline specification.
Appendix F.2: Lognormal Productivity Distributions
I estimate a version of the model with lognormal, rather than Frechet, sector-country
productivity distributions to test robustness to functional form. In this specifica-
tion the productivity draw, zijk , received by each intermediate goods producer is
drawn from a lognormal distribution with sector-specific variance parameter j
and sector-country specific mean parameter Zjk :


                                                             (ln(x) - Z )
                       zijk  Fjk where Fjk (zi ) = 
                                                                  

    I estimate j to match the standard deviation of the productivity distributions
in the Frechet case, which yields estimates of a = 0.337 and m = 0.398. I estimate
Zjk to match both the ratio of value-added per worker across sectors and the overall
level of value-added per worker in each country, as in the Frechet case.
    Table A-4 shows that the results with lognormal productivity distributions are
very similar to the baseline specification, with slightly larger declines in GDP and
  48
    The consumption parameter estimates from applying the simulated method of moments
procedure to this version of the model are  = 0.89, a = 0.020, m = 0.141, s = 0.839, Ca = 75.5.
72                                        NATH 2020



             Figure A-31: Agriculture Share of GDP - Data vs. Simulation
                              Stone-Geary Specification




Notes: Graph shows the fit of simulated agriculture share of GDP to data from the World Bank with
an alternative model specification using Stone-Geary preferences over sectoral consumption. The
best fit with Stone-Geary preferences has an R2 of only 0.43 and dramatically underpredicts the
agriculture share in middle-income countries especially. In contrast, the chosen nonhomothetic
CES preferences from Comin, Lashkari and Mestieri (2015) explain over 60% of the variation.


            Table A-4: Climate Change Counterfactual Results Summary
                          Alternative Model Assumptions

 Country                      Ag Labor            GDP          Willingness to     Food Prices
                              Share                                  Pay

 Baseline
 World                          .005              -.021            -.017              .223
 Poorest Quartile               .028              -.126            -.088              .377
 Lognormal Productivity
 World                          .005              -.023            -.018              .209
 Poorest Quartile               .022              -.131             -.09              .338
 Stone-Geary Preferences
 World                          .003              -.018            -.015              .219
 Poorest Quartile               .028              -.107             -.07              .371
                        CLIMATE CHANGE & AGGREGATE PRODUCTIVITY                                     73


welfare, and slightly smaller changes in food prices and agricultural labor shares in
low-income countries.
Appendix F.3: Heterogeneous Workers
The baseline model makes the assumption that each country contains a popula-
tion of representative agents that each receive the same wage. In practice, we ob-
serve that wages differ substantially across sectors. Agricultural workers have lower
wages than non-agricultural workers in most parts of the world, and especially so
in poor countries.
    In this section, I specify a version of the model with heterogeneous worker skill
levels and explore how this extension affects the primary comparative statics of
interest in the paper.49 While an alternative model specification with adjustment
costs that impede moving across sectors could also replicate the pattern in the
macro data, recent empirical evidence points to worker heterogeneity as the cen-
tral force underlying sectoral wage differences. In particular, Hicks, Kleemans,
Li and Miguel (2017) find that workers experience only small gains in wages by
moving from agriculture to non-agriculture when controlling for individual-level
fixed effects. This suggests that low wages in agriculture stem from the different
characteristics of the people working in that sector, rather than from barriers that
prevent them from realizing large productivity and wage gains from a potential
move into non-agricultural sectors.
    In the version of the model with worker heterogeneity I start by assuming that
each country has a fixed endowment of high-skill and low-skill workers, LH and
LL . Intermediate goods producers in each of the three sectors employ workers of
both types and have sector-specific CRS production functions with varying skill-
intensity (for simplicity I assume that manufacturing and services have the same
skill-intensity):

                                                         1-
                                         Yia = zia lHia lLia
                                                          1-
                                        Yim = zim lHim   lLim                                     (28)
                                                         1-
                                         Yis = zis lHis lLis
                                              >

    Manufacturing and services are more high-skill intensive than agriculture, as
reflected by the high-skill labor production elasticities  >  . Solving the firm's
problem gives the following optimal ratio of high-skill and low-skill workers em-
ployed in each sector as a function of the production elasticities and relative wages:

   49
      Note that I do not estimate this version of the model because the simplified framework with
two types of workers does not straightforwardly correspond to the data. In addition, it is not obvious
how to estimate separate production elasticities by sector and skill-level, even if high-skill and low-
skill workers were well-defined in practice.
74                                          NATH 2020




                                     LHm        wL
                                         =
                                     LLm   1 -  wH
                                     LHa        wL
                                         =
                                     LLa   1 -  wH

    With  >  , these conditions imply that manufacturing and services firms will
employ a higher share of high-skill workers than agricultural firms for any set of
relative wages. The relative wage will adjust to satisfy both these conditions as well
as the labor market clearing conditions in both sectors - total employment by skill
type across the three sectors must add up to the country-level endowment of each
skill type - such that wages respond both to productivity and to the relative scarcity
of each type of worker.
    This version of the model leaves several predictions of the baseline specification
unchanged, and makes two distinct predictions worth highlighting. The predic-
tions of the baseline model that carry through in this extension concern the ba-
sic dynamics of sectoral reallocation in response to a productivity shock. As in
the baseline model, a decline in agricultural productivity (Za falls) will raise the
marginal cost of production for firms in agriculture, forcing them to raise prices in
a competitive market. The variety-level increases in pa will raise the corresponding
aggregate price index for the final good in agriculture, Pa . Consumer preferences
remain as in the baseline specification, so Equation 22 governing the expenditure
share in agriculture will continue to dictate that Xak rises in response to the rise in
Pa and the decline in real wages associated with the productivity shock. As in the
baseline model, Equation 23 shows that agriculture's share of GDP will rise with
the expenditure share if the response of net exports to the change in comparative
advantage is not sufficiently large. Thus, the competing forces of subsistence food
requirements and international trade that govern the primary sectoral reallocation
comparative statics are qualitatively robust to the extension with worker hetero-
geneity.
    The model extension adds two dimensions of richness to our understanding
of sectoral reallocation following a productivity shock in agriculture: more infor-
mation about the distributional consequences of climate change and a more nu-
anced representation of comparative advantage. First, incorporating heteroge-
neous workers into the model allows me to examine the distributional consequences
of climate change within, in addition to across, countries. On this point, the model
predicts that the relative wage of low-skill workers to high-skill workers rises with
the revenue share of agriculture.50 Since agriculture is the less skill-intensive sector,
the `food problem' actually works to partially insulate farmers from the welfare

     50
    The outline of the proof of this statement is as follows. In a perfectly competitive market with
low-skill and high-skill workers as the only inputs to production, each sector's revenues are split
between their workers according to their Cobb-Douglas production elasticities. So total income for
                        CLIMATE CHANGE & AGGREGATE PRODUCTIVITY                                    75


costs of declining agricultural productivity. Intuitively, inelastic demand for the
sectoral output good causes a strong response of the output price that raises the
relative wages of the low-skill workers disproportionately employed in that sector.
So while the relationship between greater openness to international trade, sectoral
reallocation, and aggregate productivity remains similar in the case of heteroge-
neous workers, the extended model suggests that the adaptation gains from trade
will likely be smaller for agricultural and other low-skill workers if trade moves
domestic production away from that sector and dampens the increase in its output
price.
    The second insight of the model with heterogeneous workers is that compar-
ative advantage depends not only on the relative aggregate productivities in each
sector, but also on the relative scarcity of high-skill and low-skill workers. Burstein
and Vogel (2017) use a very similar model to specify a generalized definition of
comparative advantage that incorporates both these Ricardian and Heckscher-Ohlin
forces. In this framework, comparative advantage evolves endogenously with sec-
toral reallocation as relative wages shift with labor demand. Movement into (away
from) agriculture raises (lowers) the relative wage of low-skill workers and shifts
comparative advantage further toward (away from) manufacturing. For the pri-
mary climate change counterfactuals of interest in the paper, this additional chan-
nel would have the effect of attenuating the degree of sectoral reallocation in both
directions. If the `food problem' shifts production toward agriculture when its pro-
ductivity falls, the resulting increase in the relative wage of low-skill workers pushes
comparative advantage further toward manufacturing and endogenously strength-
ens the importance of the trade response pulling labor away from agriculture. Sim-
ilarly, in the case of relatively free trade, production moving away from agriculture
would reduce the relative wage of low-skill workers and endogenously dampen the
movement of comparative advantage away from agriculture.
    Overall, extending the model to represent workers of heterogeneous skill type
leaves the fundamental predictions about climate change and sectoral realloca-
tion unchanged, but sheds additional light on the forces underlying comparative
advantage and the distributional consequences of climate change.




each category is given by:

                             wL LL = (1 -  )Ra + (1 - )Rm + (1 - )Rs
                                    wH LH = Ra + Rm + Rs

Consider a 1% increase in the revenue share of agriculture, ra , and a 1% decline in the revenue share
of manufacturing, rm . The change in low-skill share of total income is given by  -  and the change
in the high-skill share of total income is given by  - . With  >  the low-skill share of total income
                                                                            wL
rises. Since the total number of low-skill and high-skill workers is fixed, wH
                                                                               also rises.
