                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    IMPERFECT MACROECONOMIC EXPECTATIONS:
                             EVIDENCE AND THEORY

                                    George-Marios Angeletos
                                           Zhen Huo
                                       Karthik A. Sastry

                                      Working Paper 27308
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27308


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2020




This paper was prepared for the 2020 NBER Macroeconomics Annual. We owe special thanks to
our discussants, Ricardo Reis and Jessica Watcher, and the organizers, Martin Eichenbaum and
Erik Hurst. We also thank Fabrice Collard for help with some of the material in Section 5. We
finally thank Jeffrey Campbell, Olivier Coibion, Nicola Gennaioli, Cosmin Ilut, Yueran Ma, and
Alp Simsek for useful comments. Angeletos acknowledges the financial support of the National
Science Foundation (Award #1757198). There is no other financial interest or conflict to disclose.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by George-Marios Angeletos, Zhen Huo, and Karthik A. Sastry. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Imperfect Macroeconomic Expectations: Evidence and Theory
George-Marios Angeletos, Zhen Huo, and Karthik A. Sastry
NBER Working Paper No. 27308
June 2020
JEL No. E03,E3,E7,G02

                                        ABSTRACT

We document a new fact about expectations: in response to the main shocks driving the business
cycle, expectations under-react initially but over-shoot later on. We show how previous,
seemingly conflicting, evidence can be understood as different facets of this fact. We finally
explain what the cumulated evidence means for macroeconomic theory. There is little support for
theories emphasizing under-extrapolation or two close cousins of it, cognitive discounting and
level-K thinking. Instead, the evidence favors the combination of dispersed, noisy information
and over-extrapolation.

George-Marios Angeletos                        Karthik A. Sastry
Department of Economics, E52-530               Department of Economics, MIT
MIT                                            77 Massachusetts Avenue E52-300
50 Memorial Drive                              Cambridge, MA 02139
Cambridge, MA 02142                            ksastry@mit.edu
and NBER
angelet@mit.edu

Zhen Huo
Department of Economics
Yale University
New Haven, CT 06520
zhen.huo@yale.edu
1 Introduction

The rational expectations hypothesis is a bedrock of modern macroeconomics. It is often combined with a
strong, complementary hypothesis that all data about the state of the economy is common knowledge. But
an explosion of recent theoretical and empirical work has questioned both premises. This has pushed the
discipline back toward reckoning with the "wilderness" of alternative models for expectations formation
and equilibrium (as Sargent, 2001, paraphrasing Sims, 1980, famously put it).
    One strand of the literature emphasizes informational frictions, which are sometimes rich enough to
blur the boundary between the rational and non-rational.1 Moving strictly beyond the rational model,
some authors emphasize biases to over-extrapolate the past,2 while others advocate for two close cousins
of under-extrapolation, cognitive discounting and level-K thinking.3 Another strand emphasizes overcon-
fidence in various information sources, or prioritization of those that seem "representative."4
    What does survey evidence on expectations tell us within the space of these alternative hypotheses?
And what kind of evidence is most useful for building macroeconomic models and providing guidance
about counterfactual scenarios?
    In the hopes of answering these questions, and helping identify "where we are in the wilderness," this
article uses a simple but flexible framework to accomplish the following goals: to draw a variety of recent
theoretical and empirical contributions under a common umbrella; to guide a new, more informative, em-
pirical strategy; and to select among competing theories of "imperfect expectations" in macroeconomics.
    Our main empirical finding is initial under-reaction of beliefs in response to shocks followed by de-
layed over-reaction. Both unemployment and inflation expectations have an initially sluggish response to
the shocks that drive most of the business-cycle variation in these variables. But over medium horizons,
forecasts tend to over-shoot the actual outcomes.
    This pattern speaks in favor of models that combine two key mechanisms: dispersed, noisy informa-
tion and over-extrapolation. The former leaves room for theories emphasizing higher-order beliefs. The
latter points in the opposite direction of cognitive discounting and level-K thinking, two concepts that, at
least for our purposes, are close cousins of under-extrapolation.
    We also demonstrate why our empirical strategy is more informative, at least vis-a-vis the class of theo-
ries under consideration, than previous alternatives. And we explain how our findings help resolve the ap-
parent inconsistency between three previous empirical findings, which indeed serve as our starting point.

Understanding prior, seemingly conflicting, evidence. Previous empirical studies of expectations have
often relied on simple regressions or correlations between actual outcomes and their forecasts in surveys.5
  1 This includes works on rational inattention (Sims, 2003, 2010; Mackowiak and Wiederholt, 2009; Matejka, 2015), sticky infor-

mation (Mankiw and Reis, 2002; Kiley, 2007), and higher-order uncertainty (Morris and Shin, 2002, 2006; Woodford, 2003; Nimark,
2008; Angeletos and Lian, 2016, 2018).
  2 Gennaioli, Ma, and Shleifer (2015); Fuster, Laibson, and Mendel (2010); Guo and Wachter (2019)
  3 Gabaix 2020; Garcia-Schmidt and Woodford 2019; Farhi and Werning 2019; Iovino and Sergeyev 2017.
  4 Bordalo, Gennaioli, and Shleifer (2017); Kohlhas and Broer (2019).
  5 This applies to the papers cited below, as well as Andrade and Le Bihan (2013), Gennaioli, Ma, and Shleifer (2015), Kohlhas

and Broer (2019), and Fuhrer (2018). See also the discussion of Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2012) in Section 5 and Appendix B.



                                                              1
In Section 3, we revisit three such previously documented facts, henceforth referred to as Facts 1-3:

  F1. For both unemployment and inflation, aggregate forecast errors are positively related to lagged ag-
       gregate forecast revisions, as in Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2015), or CG hereafter. This pattern
       suggests that aggregate forecasts under-react to aggregate news.

  F2. The opposite pattern is often present at individual-level forecasts: as previously shown in Bordalo,
       Gennaioli, Ma, and Shleifer (2018), or BGMS hereafter, individual forecasts appear to over-react to
       own revisions (in the case of inflation, although not in the case of unemployment).6

  F3. Finally, the following pattern, first noted in Kohlhas and Walther (2018), or KW hereafter, points
       toward over-reaction even at the aggregate level: aggregate forecast errors are positively correlated
       with the actual levels of unemployment and inflation.

These facts elude a simple, unified explanation. Do beliefs in the data under-react to innovations, as pre-
dicted by theories emphasizing informational frictions, higher-order uncertainty, cognitive discounting
and level-K thinking? Or do they over-react, suggesting an entirely different mechanism?
    To provide a clearer picture, we turn to theory. In Section 4, we introduce the "PE version" of our
framework. Like the related empirical literature, this abstracts from the equilibrium fixed point between
expectations and outcomes. But it allows for two key mechanisms: dispersed noisy information and over-
extrapolation. A third mechanism, over-confidence, is also nested but turns out to be rather inessential.
    The combination of dispersed information and over-extrapolation makes a sharp prediction for the
impulse response functions (IRFs) of the average forecasts and forecast errors to aggregate shocks. In the
first few periods after a shock occurs, the informational friction guarantees that forecasts under-react. But
as time passes and learning kicks in, this friction dies out and over-extrapolation takes over, guaranteeing
that forecast eventually over-react. The most telling feature of the combination of the two mechanisms is
therefore a reversal of sign in the IRF of the average forecast errors.
    The regressions underlying Facts 1 and 3 can be described as different weighted averages of this IRF.
The one in CG happens to put more weight on the early portion of this IRF, where errors are positively
correlated with past revisions due to dispersed information, while that in KW happens to put more weight
on the later portion, where errors are negatively correlated with outcomes due to over-extrapolation. This
resolves the apparent conflict between the form of under-reaction documented in CG and the form of
over-reaction documented in KW, but perhaps most importantly underscores the difficulty in interpreting
and using this kind of evidence. A similar point applies to the BGMS evidence, or Fact 2.

Focusing on impulse response functions (IRFs). Under the lens of our analysis, a superior empirical
strategy emerges: the IRFs of the average forecasts and the average forecast errors to aggregate shocks
provide strictly more information than the aforementioned empirical strategies and are also more easily
interpretable. This leads to our main empirical contribution, which appears in Section 5 and which is to
  6 For inflation forecasts, the same pattern has been independently documented in Kohlhas and Broer (2019). BGMS offer a

comprehensive investigation across variables, surveys, and empirical methods.



                                                             2
show that the hypothesized pattern of "sign reversal" in the response of forecast errors holds true in the
data. We summarize this below as Fact 4:

 F4. Consider two shocks, one that accounts for most of the business-cycle variation in unemployment
      and other macroeconomic quantities, and another that accounts for most of the business-cycle vari-
      ation in inflation.7 Construct the IRFs of the average forecasts of unemployment and inflation to the
      corresponding shocks. In both cases, average forecasts are initially under-react before over-shooting
      later on, or predicting larger and longer-lasting effects of the shock than those that occur.

For the reasons already explained, Fact 4 alone helps nail down the "right" combination of frictions under
the lens of our framework: to match this fact, it is necessary and sufficient to combine over-extrapolation
with a sufficiently large informational friction. And since this combination implies Facts 1-3, Fact 4 sub-
sumes them and serves as a "sufficient statistic" for the counterfactuals of interest (more on this below).
   We provide additional evidence for each of the two mechanisms as follows. First, we show that the sub-
jective persistence, as revealed by the term structure of subjective expectations, is larger than the objective
persistence, as measured by the impulse response of the outcome. And second, we show that the forecasts
revisions of one one agent help predict the forecast errors of other agents. The former fact speaks directly
to over-extrapolation, the latter to not only noisy but also dispersed, or private, information.

From PE to GE. In Section 6, we incorporate a GE feedback between expectations and outcomes. This
part of our paper, which builds on the methods of Angeletos and Huo (2019), lets us accomplish four
                                                                                                                      8
goals. First, we extend our lessons about the "right" model of beliefs to a broader GE context.                           Second,
we connect level-K thinking and cognitive discounting to the GE implications of under-extrapolation, and
spell out the empirical content of these theories vis-a-vis expectations data. Third, we clarify how the
causal effect of the belief distortions on macroeconomic outcomes depends parameters that determine
the relative strength of PE and GE effects, such as the marginal propensity to consume. Finally, we quantify
these distortions in a three-equation New Keynesian model.

The bottom line. The combination of old and new evidence we marshal in this paper offers, not only
support for theories emphasizing informational frictions and higher-order uncertainty, but also guidance
on what type of departure from full rationality seems most relevant in the business cycle context. In par-
ticular, we argue that over-extrapolation is needed in order to not only reconcile the previous, seemingly
conflicting evidence of CG, KW and BGMS, but also account for the eventual overshooting in the response
of the average forecasts we have documented here.
   Conversely, we have ruled out theories that rely heavily on under-extrapolation of the present to the
future, whether in the simple PE form of under-estimating the persistence of an exogenous fundamental
or in the related GE forms of cognitive discounting and level-K thinking. These mechanisms are at odds
both with the dynamic overshooting of the average forecasts documented here and with the over-reaction
of individual forecasts documented in Bordalo et al. (2018) and Kohlhas and Broer (2019).
  7 These shocks are described at the end of Section 2 and are obtained from Angeletos, Collard, and Dellas (2019).
  8 This echoes lessons from Angeletos and Lian (2018), Angeletos and Huo (2019), and Farhi and Werning (2019).




                                                               3
   The same is true for adaptive expectations insofar as the latter means systematic anchoring of current
expectations to past outcomes. Adaptive expectations can generate a similar "stickiness" or sluggishness
in the response of average forecasts to aggregate shocks as that generated by dispersed, noisy information.
But only the latter helps account for why such stickiness is absent in the response of individual forecasts
to individual news, or why individual forecast errors are predictable by the past information of others.
This echoes a broader lesson of our analysis, which is to highlight how the similarities or differences of the
properties of the individual and average forecast errors help disentangle mechanisms.

Over-extrapolation in finance and macro. Our main empirical finding echoes a literature in finance
documenting a similar pattern--slow initial reaction and subsequent over-reaction--in individual stock
prices (De Bondt and Thaler, 1985; Cutler, Poterba, and Summers, 1991; Lakonishok, Shleifer, and Vishny,
1994). Theoretical work such as Barberis, Shleifer, and Vishny (1998), Daniel, Hirshleifer, and Subrah-
manyam (1998), and Hong and Stein (1999) provide parsimonious interpretations which combine tenta-
tive initial reactions with medium-run over-reaction due to over-extrapolation. More recently, Greenwood
and Shleifer (2014) and Gennaioli, Ma, and Shleifer (2015) demonstrate patterns in survey expectations of
stock returns and firm earnings that are also suggestive of over-extrapolation.
   We complement these works in three ways. First, we provide the first, to the best of our knowledge,
evidence of over-extrapolation in expectations of unemployment and inflation. Second, we propose and
implement a new empirical strategy, in terms of the IRFs of forecast errors to identified aggregate shocks,
and explain why this strategy is best suited to guide theory. And third, we show how to combine over-
extrapolation and dispersed, noisy information in a GE setting. Both our empirical strategy and our GE
tools could find applications in finance in the future.

Other related literature. We distill the essence of a diverse set of theories of expectation formation, and
use survey evidence to evaluate their potential relevance for business cycles. But we do not address related
laboratory evidence (e.g., Nagel, 1995; Dean and Neligh, 2017; Landier, Ma, and Thesmar, 2019) and field
experiments (Coibion, Gorodnichenko, and Kumar, 2018; Coibion, Gorodnichenko, and Ropele, 2019).
   We also leave out of the analysis a variety of other plausible theories, which help explain different
types of data. These include wishful thinking (e.g., Brunnermeier and Parker, 2005; Caplin and Leahy,
2019); over-weighting of personal experience (e.g., Malmendier and Nagel, 2016; D'Acunto, Malmendier,
Ospina, and Weber, 2019; Das, Kuhnen, and Nagel, 2020); heterogeneous priors (e.g., Caballero and Sim-
sek, 2017; Geanakoplos, 2010); adaptive learning (e.g., Eusepi and Preston, 2011; Evans and Honkapohja,
2001; Sargent, 2001); uncertainty shocks (e.g., Bloom, 2009a; Baker, Bloom, and Davis, 2016); robustness
and ambiguity (e.g., Hansen and Sargent, 2012; Ilut and Schneider, 2014; Bhandari, Borovicka, and Ho,
2019); non-Bayesian belief contagion (e.g., Carroll, 2001; Burnside, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo, 2016); and
other plausible departures from the fully rational model (e.g., Gabaix, 2019; Molavi, 2019; Woodford, 2018).
   Finally, we do not address questions relating to optimal macroeconomic policy in the presence of in-
formational frictions (e.g., Angeletos and La'O, 2020; Lorenzoni, 2010; Paciello and Wiederholt, 2014) and
mis-specified beliefs (e.g., Adam and Woodford, 2012; Angeletos and Sastry, 2020; Caballero and Simsek,
2019; Gabaix, 2020).


                                                      4
2 Data and Measurement

We focus on two macroeconomic outcomes: unemployment and inflation. We now review the exact data
sources we use for forecasts and realized outcomes of these variables.

Forecasts from the Survey of Professional Forecasters. Our main dataset for forecasts is the Survey
of Professional Forecasters (SPF), a panel survey of about 40 experts from industry, government, and
academia, currently administered by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. Every quarter, each sur-
vey respondent is asked for point-estimate projections of the civilian unemployment rate and the GDP
deflator, among several macro aggregates. Our main sample runs from 1968.Q4 to 2017.Q4.
    Whenever our analysis requires requires aggregate (or "consensus") forecasts, we use the median fore-
cast of the object of interest (e.g., unemployment or inflation at a given horizon). Using the median instead
of the mean in standard in the related empirical literature. The rationale is that it alleviates concerns about
outliers and/or data-entry errors, which could be quite influential in the 40-forecaster cross section, from
driving the results. That said, our main empirical finding is robust to using the mean instead of the median.
    For the individual-level results, where concerns about outliers are even more relevant, we always trim
observations in forecast errors and revisions that are plus or minus 4 times the inter-quartile range from
the median, where both reference values are calculated over the entire sample.9

Other survey sources. Although our main analysis focuses on the SPF, we provide corroborating evidence
from two additional survey datasets. The first is the Blue Chip Economic Indicators Survey, a privately-
operated professional forecast with a similar scale and scope to the SPF. We use Blue Chip data from 1980
to 2017 and focus on the reported "consensus forecast" for unemployment and GDP deflator.10 The second
source is the University of Michigan Survey of Consumers, which is (for our purposes) a repeated cross-
section of about 500 members of the "general public" contacted by phone. Like with the Blue Chip survey,
we focus on end-of-quarter waves. We take the Michigan survey inflation forecast as the median response
to the question about price increases.11 We code also a forecast for the growth rate of unemployment based
on a question about whether unemployment will increase or decrease over the coming twelve months.12
For this measure we take the cross-sectional mean, which corresponds to a "consensus forecast" about the
sign of the growth rate of unemployment.
  9 For context, in a Gaussian distribution, the probability of an observation so far in the tails is about 6.8 × 10-8 . Nonetheless,

in the sample of three-quarter ahead inflation forecast errors, there are 57 such observations out of 7,438 forecaster-quarter
observations, or about 106 times the aforementioned probability. All of these outliers involve forecast errors greater than 5.37
percentage points and often appear to be typos (an extra digit).
 10 This dataset is available at the monthly frequency, so we use end-of-quarter forecasts (i.e., those made in March, June,

September, and December) for comparability with the SPF. The reported inflation forecasts in the Blue Chip consensus are ac-
tually quarter-to-quarter, so we construct the consensus estimate of longer-horizon inflation as the "chained consensus" rather
than the "consensus of chained inflation."
  11 The exact question is the following: "By about what percent do you expect prices to go (up/down) on the average, during the

next 12 months?" Respondents can key in a response rounded to the nearest whole number.
 12 The exact question is the following: "How about people out of work during the coming 12 months. Do you think that there

will be more unemployment than now, about the same, or less?" There are three responses, as indicated in the question.




                                                                 5
Macro data (and vintages thereof ). Our unemployment measure u t is the average BLS unemployment
rate in a given quarter t . Our inflation measure t is the annualized percentage increase in GDP or GNP de-
flator over the four quarters up to t .13 For the corresponding forecast data, our "default" choice of horizon
is k = 3, in line with the main specification of CG, but we explore other choices for robustness.
    In our replication of CG, BGMS and KW in Section 3, we use first-vintage macro data for consistency
with these works.14 However, such measurement is not necessarily the right one vis-a-vis theory. If agents
are forecasting the actual levels of unemployment and inflation, the econometrician should use the final-
release data. We will thus verify the robustness of the relevant facts to the use of final-release data.
    We finally use final-release data in our study of IRFs in Section 5 both for the above reason and for
consistency with the main macro time-series literature. But once again, we consider the opposite mea-
surement (in this case, first-vintage data in place of final-release data) for robustness.

Shocks. Our study of IRFs requires the use of identified shocks. For our main exercises, we borrow two
such shocks from Angeletos, Collard, and Dellas (2019): their "main business cycle shock," which accounts
for the bulk of the business-cycle co-movements in unemployment, hours worked, output, consumption,
investment; and a nearly-orthogonal shock that accounts for most of the fluctuations in inflation. A de-
scription of these shocks and the rationale for using them are provided in Section 5. For robustness, we
also consider other, more "standard," shocks, such as a technology shock identified as in Galí (1999).


3 A Puzzling Empirical Backdrop: Under-reaction or Over-reaction?

This section reviews three stylized facts about macroeconomic forecasts. One of them suggests that expec-
tations under-react to news. The other two point in the opposite direction. The apparent contradiction
paves the way for the theoretical exercise and the empirical strategy we undertake in the subsequent sec-
tions: we will eventually argue that there is a "better" way to think about the issue both in the theory and
in the data.


3.1 Fact 1: under -reaction in average forecasts

Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2015), henceforth CG, test for a departure from full-information rational ex-
pectations by estimating the predictability of professionals' aggregate ("consensus") forecast errors using
information in previous forecast revisions.
        ¯ t [x t +3 ] denote the median expectation of variable x t +3 (either unemployment or inflation) mea-
    Let E
sured at time t . Let E   ¯ t -1 [x t +3 ] be the median forecast at time t - 1.15 The associated forecast error from
                           ¯ t [x t +3 ], suppressing notation for the variable x and the forecast horizon, and the
time t is Errort  x t +3 - E
 13 The ambiguity between GDP and GNP matches the fact that the Survey of Professional Forecasters changed its main target

variable from GNP (and the deflator thereof) to GDP (and the deflator thereof) starting in 1992.
  14 We take all vintage data series from the Philadelphia Fed's website:                https://www.philadelphiafed.org/
research-and-data/real-time-center/survey-of-professional-forecasters/
 15 In the data, we prefer to use the median to limit the influence of outliers and/or data entry errors. But results with the mean are

essentially identical. In the theory, means and medians coincide because we let all variables and signals be Normally distributed.


                                                                  6
                      Table 1: Predicting Aggregate Forecast Errors with Revisions, from (1)

                                                   (1)               (2)           (3)               (4)
                                                   Unemployment                          Inflation
                                              1968-2017       1984-2017        1968-2017      1984-2017

                       Revisiont (K CG )         0.741            0.809           1.528          0.292
                                                (0.232)          (0.305)         (0.418)        (0.191)

                               R2                0.111            0.159           0.278          0.016
                                N                 191                136           190               135

Notes: The dataset is the Survey of Professional Forecasters and the observation is a quarter between Q4-1968 and Q4-2017. All
regressions include a constant. The forecast horizon is 3 quarters. Standard errors are HAC-robust, with a Bartlett kernel and lag
length equal to 4 quarters. The data used for outcomes are first-release ("vintage").




                                ¯ t [x t +3 ] - E
forecast revision is Revisiont  E               ¯ t -1 [x t +3 ]. CG run the following regression that projects aggregate
forecast errors onto aggregate forecast revisions:

                                              Errort =  + K CG · Revisiont + u t                                              (1)

where K CG , in shorthand notation that references the authors, is the main object of interest.
    Table 1 reports results from estimating (1) at the horizon k = 3 for both unemployment and inflation
in our data. We report results over the full sample 1968-2017 (columns 1 and 3), and also over a restricted
sample after 1984 (columns 2 and 4). We may believe a priori that the latter is a more consistent and
"stationary" regime for the US macroeconomy (i.e., after the oil crisis and Volcker disinflation).
    Like the original authors, we find in all specifications a point estimate of K CG > 0: when professional
forecasters, in aggregate, revise upward their estimation of unemployment or inflation, they on average
always "undershoot" the eventual truth. For inflation, we find the predictability is considerably lower
on the restricted sample, which underscores the large influence of the aforementioned key events for US
inflation expectations. Appendix Table A.1 shows robustness along a number of dimensions including (i)
using different forecast horizons; (ii) putting final release data in place of the vintage data; and (iii) using
forecasts from the Blue Chip Economic Indicators survey. All findings, including the differences across
older and newer samples, are very similar to those reported in Table 1.
    The finding of K CG > 0 rejects full-information rational expectations: since Revisiont ,k is necessarily
known to the representative agent at time t , it should not be systematically predict that agent's forecast
error at t + 1 if that agent is rational.16 But note that it provides ambiguous evidence on the separate hy-
potheses of informational frictions versus non-rationalit y. In particular, the fact is just as consistent with a
population of rational but heterogeneously informed agents (as indeed Coibion and Gorodnichenko, 2015,
propose in their paper) as it is with a representative irrational agent who systematically under-reacts to
 16 An auxiliary assumption in this context, which we will not question throughout the analysis, is "perfect recall": a rational,

Bayesian agent who forgets past information (like last period's forecast) could make such a predictable error.


                                                                 7
                      Table 2: Predicting Individual Forecast Errors with Revisions, from (2)

                                                      (1)              (2)            (3)               (4)
                                                     Unemployment                           Inflation
                                                 1968-2017       1984-2017       1968-2017        1984-2017

                     Revisioni ,t (K BGMS )         0.321            0.398           0.143          -0.263
                                                   (0.107)           (0.149)        (0.123)         (0.054)

                                R2                  0.028            0.052           0.005           0.025
                                N                   5,383            3,769           5,147           3,643

Notes: The observation is a forecaster by quarter between Q4-1968 and Q4-2017. The forecast horizon is 3 quarters. Standard
errors are clustered two-way by forecaster ID and time period. Both errors and revisions are winsorized over the sample to restrict
to 4 times the inter-quartile range away from the median. The data used for outcomes are first-release ("vintage").




news because of a behavioral bias (as indeed Gabaix, 2020, proposes in his own paper). Similarly, an "old-
fashioned" model of adaptive expectations can also generate the fact. It is only by combining this fact with
the additional fact reported next that we can start disentangling the role of informational frictions and
mis-specified beliefs.


3.2 Fact 2: over -reaction in individual forecasts

To probe further the need for irrationality to explain the data, recent papers by Bordalo et al. (2018), Fuhrer
(2018), and Kohlhas and Broer (2019) have studied forecast error patterns at the individual level in the pro-
fessional forecasts. Let Errori ,t  x t +3 - Ei ,t [x t +3 ] and Revisioni ,t ,  Ei ,t [x t +3 ] - Ei ,t -1 [x t +3 ] denote forecast
errors and revisions for a particular forecaster, indexed by i , at the baseline horizon k = 3. Each of the
aforementioned studies estimates the following regression that translates (1) to the individual level:

                                          Errori ,t =  + K BGMS · Revisioni ,t + u i ,t                                          (2)

where the object of interest K BGMS , named in shorthand reference to the authors of Bordalo et al. (2018), is
the individual-level analogue to K CG . Regardless of the information structure, individual-level rationality
imposes K BGMS = 0.
    In columns 1 and 3 of Table 2, we provide estimates of the individual-level regression (2) in the SPF
over the full sample for our two variables of interest, unemployment and inflation. Columns 2 and 4 of the
same table conduct the analysis on the sub-sample from 1984 to the present. Results for different horizons
and data choices (vintage versus final) are similar and reported in Appendix Table A.2.
    For unemployment, we find substantial evidence that K BGMS > 0 over the full and restricted sample
period. And for inflation, we find imprecise evidence that K BGMS > 0 over the full sample, which includes
the 1970s and Volcker disinflation, but strong evidence of K BGMS < 0 in the "more stationary" environment
post 1984.



                                                                 8
                 Table 3: Predicting Aggregate Forecast Errors with Recent Outcomes, from (3)

                                               (1)              (2)            (3)               (4)
                                              Unemployment                           Inflation
                                          1968-2017         1984-2017      1968-2017      1984-2017

                            x t (K KW )     -0.061            -0.036          0.111          -0.068
                                            (0.056)           (0.038)        (0.075)        (0.068)

                               R2            0.016             0.007          0.058          0.012
                                N             194               136            193               135

Notes: The dataset is the Survey of Professional Forecasters and the observation is a quarter between Q4-1968 and Q4-2017. All
regressions include a constant. The forecast horizon is 3 quarters. Standard errors are HAC-robust, with a Bartlett kernel and lag
length equal to 4 quarters. The data used for outcomes are first-release ("vintage").




    BGMS argue that a negative relation between revisions and subsequent errors, or K BGMS < 0, is a robust
feature of the forecasts of various macroeconomic variables. A closer look at their findings yields a more
nuanced picture. But if we take for granted their thesis, we have that macroeconomic forecasts appear to
over-react at the individual level at the same that they appear to under-react at the aggregate level.
    We reinforce this apparent contradiction below. But we also invite the reader to keep the following
basic insight in mind: while the CG evidence confounds the effects of informational frictions and non-
rationality, the BGMS evidence speaks exclusively to the latter. We will leverage on this insight later to
argue that the gap between the CG and the BGMS evidence speaks to the role of informational frictions.


3.3 Fact 3: over -reaction in aggregate forecasts

Facts 1 and 2 by themselves may suggest that going to the individual-level data is necessary, if not suffi-
cient, to see evidence of over-reaction. But a recent paper by Kohlhas and Walther (2018) calls into ques-
tion this view by presenting an additional moment: the slope of forecast errors in current realizations of
the variable, as measured in the following regression:

                                                     Errort =  + K KW · x t + u t                                             (3)

In our implementation, Errort is the error in three-quarter-ahead forecast of unemployment or annual
inflation, and x t is the current (forecasting) period's realization of one or the other.
    Clearly, K KW = 0 is inconsistent with full-information rational expectations. It is also hard to square
with the CG evidence. More heuristically, in a world of "sluggish" expectations, we may expect K KW > 0, or
a positive correlation between today's realization and the direction of the forecast error k periods out.
    Table 3 reports results from estimating (3). For unemployment we find weak evidence supporting the
hypothesis that K KW < 0. The results for inflation depend once again on whether we want to consider data
from the 1970s and early 80s. In the whole sample, the evidence is more supportive of K KW > 0. But in
the more recent sample period, for inflation too we find weak evidence of K KW < 0. Appendix Table A.3

                                                                  9
probes robustness to different data choices and sub-samples and uncovers broadly consistent results. KW
provide evidence of K KW < 0 for forecasts of other variables, such as GDP growth.17
     All in all, there is a good case for K KW < 0 in the data. This is consistent with a world of over-reactive
expectations: as an example, if agents are forecasting unemployment to be too high in recessions (high
x t , negative forecast error) and too low in booms (low x t , positive forecast error), then we may naturally
get K KW < 0. But in such a world we would also expect K CG < 0, which is not what we found earlier. This
reinforces the puzzle: the picture for over- or under-reaction is unclear even if we focus on the properties
of aggregate forecasts.


4 A Simple Model

In this section we introduce a simplified version of our framework, which combines dispersed noisy infor-
mation with misspecified beliefs but abstracts from the fixed point between expectations and outcomes.
We use this to reconcile Facts 1-3, but also, and more importantly, to pave the way to our preferred empir-
ical strategy, which we in turn implement in the next section.


4.1 Primitives

Let {x t } be a stochastic process that a group of agents, indexed by i  [0, 1], are trying to forecast (e.g.,
unemployment or inflation). Ideally we want to think of x t as endogenous to the agents' behavior. But for
now, to put the focus only on the expectations formation process, we assume that x t follows an exogenous
AR(1) process with Gaussian errors. That is,

                                                                    1
                                                            x=         t ,                                                            (4)
                                                                 1 - L

where   (0, 1) parameterizes the persistence of the process, t  N (0, 1) is a Gaussian innovation, and L
denotes the lag operator (i.e., Lx t = x t -1 ).
     An agent's observation of x t is contaminated with idiosyncratic noise. That is, each agent in period t
observes a signal s i ,t given by
                                                                            u i ,t
                                                           s i ,t = x t +            ,                                                (5)
                                                                               
where  measures precision and u i ,t i i d N (0, 1) is idiosyncratic Gaussian noise. As in a large literature, we
can think of this noise either literally, as the product of dispersed noisy information (Lucas, 1972; Morris
and Shin, 2002), or metaphorically, as a representation of rational inattention and imperfect perception
(Sims, 2003, 2010; Woodford, 2003; Mankiw and Reis, 2002).
  17 One discrepancy between our implementation of KW and the original one is that these authors apply an HP filter to x . We
                                                                                                                        t
prefer not to do so because it complicates the mapping to the theory: as the filtered value of x t is a function of realizations after t ,
finding K KW = 0 does not necessarily reject full-information, rational expectations under their approach, whereas it does under
ours. That said, the big picture is the same. And in Subsection 5.4 and Table 4 we will use an instrumental-variables method that
conditions on pre-determined data (identified shocks) to achieve a similar goal of extracting the business cycle component of
variation in x t .



                                                                   10
    We depart from this literature by adding two forms of irrationality, or belief misspecification. First,
whereas the true process of the private signal is given by (5), agents perceive this process to be
                                                                           u i ,t
                                                          s i ,t = x t +                                                           (6)
                                                                              ^
for some perceived precision ^ > 0 that may differ from . And second, whereas the true process from x t is
given by (4), agents perceive this process to be
                                                                    1
                                                           xt =          t                                                         (7)
                                                                  1-  ^L
for some perceived persistence ^ which may differ from  .
    The case ^ >  captures overconfidence: each agent thinks their information is better than it truly is.
The opposite case, ^ < , captures underconfidence. Moore and Healy (2008) provide a representative
review of the experimental psychological evidence for such biases. Their broad conclusion is that over-
confidence is consistently prevalent for reported beliefs in the laboratory, but that the extent of effects can
be context-specific. Kohlhas and Broer (2019) and Bordalo et al. (2018) use, respectively, ^ >  and a close
variant of it to reconcile Facts 1 and 2.18 We will nest this possibility in the subsequent analysis but also
show that ^ >  serves the same goal while also matching Facts 3. And we will provide additional evidence
in favor of ^ >  in the form of our (not yet introduced) Fact 4 about dynamic over-shooting.
    The case ^ >  encodes an over-extrapolation of today's state to tomorrow, while ^ <  encodes under-
extrapolation. Both narratives are appealing in different economic contexts. On the one hand, Greenwood
and Shleifer (2014) and Gennaioli, Ma, and Shleifer (2015) argue that over-extrapolation is evident both in
stock-market expectations and in expectations of firms' sales forecasts; see also Guo and Wachter (2019)
for how a simple model with over-extrapolation over dividend growth can explain a variety of asset-price
phenomena. On the other hand, level-K thinking (Garcia-Schmidt and Woodford, 2019; Farhi and Wern-
ing, 2019) and cognitive discounting (Gabaix, 2020) are "close in spirit" to the opposite scenario, ^ < ,
because they cause agents to be under-estimate the (endogenous or exogenous) response of future out-
comes to current innovations. We will make this connection formal in Section 6.4, once we extend the
analysis to a GE context and properly nest these models.
    As anticipated in the Introduction and will become clear in the sequel, only the second type of mis-
specification (^ =  ) is strictly needed for our main purposes. The first type (^ = ) is nevertheless useful
for two complementary reasons: it enlarges the set of theories nested in, or proxied by, our framework; and
it helps clarify which evidence is most directly relevant in the GE context of Section 6.


4.2 Facts 1, 2, and 3 in the Model

The structure introduced above yields a highly tractable, finite ARMA representation of the individual and
average forecasts, which can be found in Lemma 1 in the Appendix. This in turns allows a simple, closed-
form characterization of the theoretical counterparts of the regressions reviewed in Section 3.
 18 The variant used in Bordalo et al. (2018) is motivated by a broader concept, "diagnostic expectations," the precise formal

content of which varies across applications. It is the specific formalization employed in Bordalo et al. (2018) that is very similar to
over-confidence; this similarity is evident in the modified Kalman filter that is at the core of that paper.


                                                                  11
Proposition 1 (Regression coefficients in the theory). The theoretical counterparts of the coefficients of
regressions (1), (2) and (3) are given by the following:

                                        K CG = K CG (^,  , ^ )  1 ^-1 - 2 (^ - )                                                          (8)
                                        K KW = K KW (^,  , ^ )  3 ^-1 - 4 (^ - )                                                          (9)
                                     K BGMS = K BGMS (, ^,  , ^ )  -5 (^ -  ) -  6 (^ - )                                               (10)

for some scalars 1 , ..., 6 that depend on the deeper parameters but are necessarily positive. In particular,
1 , 2 , 3 , and 4 are functions only of (^,  , ^ ), whereas 5 and 6 depend also on .

    Let us unpack these expressions. First of all, note that the actual precision, , enters only the BGMS
coefficient. That is, the moments of the average forecasts do not depend on the true level of noise, condi-
tional on the perceived noise. The latter dictates how each agent's forecasts responds to her information,
and hence also how the average forecasts respond to the underlying shocks. The actual idiosyncratic noise,
instead, washes out at the aggregate level.
    Consider next condition (8), which characterizes the CG coefficient. With rational expectations, which
herein means ^ =  and  = ^ , K CG is merely a monotone transformation of the level of noise. In particular,

                                                                       1-g
                                                              K CG =                                                                    (11)
                                                                        g

where g  (0, 1) is the Kalman gain.19 This is the structural interpretation given in CG.
    Our result qualifies this structural interpretation in two ways. First, if we maintain  = ^ but allow ^ = ,
                                                         ^ in place of its objective counterpart. That is,
we get an analogue of (11) with a subjective Kalman gain g
even in the absence of over-extrapolation, the CG coefficient tells us something about the subjective level
of noise, which does not have to coincide with the objective level. Second, if we allow ^ =  , we now have
that K CG confounds two mechanisms: a high value for K CG could be evidence of either large informational
friction or large under-extrapolation. Or, a low value for K CG could hide a large information friction if there
is also large over-extrapolation. Indeed, K CG could even be negative.
    Consider next condition (9), which characterizes the KW coefficient. The informational friction and
the over-extrapolation enter this coefficient in a qualitatively similar was they enter the CG coefficient.
The former contributes towards K KW > 0, the latter towards K KW < 0. The logic is exactly the same as that
for the CG coefficient. What is subtle is the possibility that the two forces balance out in such a way that
the one coefficient is negative at the same time that the other is positive, a point we revisit below.
    Finally, consider condition (10), which characterizes the BGMS coefficient. When ^ =  and  = ^,
K BGMS = 0. This is an example of the more general property that, under rational expectations, an indi-
vidual's forecast error is unpredictable by his own past information. Away from this benchmark, both
overconfidence (^ > ) and over-extrapolation (^ >  ) contribute towards K BGMS < 0. In the presence of
over-extrapolation, agents over-estimate the effect of any given innovation today on future outcomes. In
 19 As in the textbook version of the Kalman filter, g is such that E [z ] = (1 - g )E
                                                                     i ,t t            i ,t -1 [z t ] + g s i ,t and is an increasing and con-
tinuous function of , with g  0 as   0 and g  1 as   .



                                                                    12
the presence of over-confidence, they get this effect right but over-estimate the precision of the signal
they receive about the innovation. In both cases, they make a systematic mistake in the direction of over-
estimating the informational content of their current signal about the future outcome, and this mistake
manifests as K BGMS < 0. The converse is true for underconfidence or under-extrapolation.


4.3 The right combination of belief distortions

Let us summarize the lesson for two versions of our model that are familiar from the literature but fail to
match Facts 1-3:

Corollary 1. The following two cases are inconsistent with Facts 1-3:
    (i) Noisy but rational expectations: ^ =  <  and ^ =  implies K CG > 0, K KW > 0, and K BGMS = 0
    (ii) Noiseless but extrapolative expectations:  = ^   and ^ =  implies sign(K CG ) = sign(K KW ) =
sign(K BGMS ) = sign( - ^ ).

    The first case stylizes a large literature on informational frictions, and is precisely the case considered
in Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2015). This case counterfactually forces K CG and K KW to be the same sign,
a restriction first pointed out in Kohlhas and Walther (2018), because there is only a single "dampening"
force coming from noisy expectations. Moreover, this case cannot accommodate K BGMS = 0 because fore-
casters remain individually rational.
    The second model is an entirely "behavioral" one that admits a mis-calibrated representative agent, as
in Gabaix (2016, 2020). But switching from an under-extrapolative model (^ <  ) to an over-extrapolative
model (^ >  ) must necessarily flip all three signs for the aforementioned moments. Thus it too cannot
match the patterns observed so far.
    Let us now turn to the scenario that best accounts for the evidence.

Corollary 2 (Matching Facts 1-3). The combination of informational friction and over-extrapolation is nec-
essary and sufficient for all three facts in the following sense:
    (i) K CG > 0 and K KW < 0 only if 0 < ^ <  and ^ >  > 0,
    (ii) There exists an open set of parameter values, with 0 <   ^ <  and ^ >  > 0, such that K CG > 0,
K KW < 0, and K BGMS < 0.

    Figure 1 illustrates this by plotting the model's "sign predictions" for the three coefficients in the (^, ^)
space. For this picture, we set  = 0.90, which is illustrative but immaterial to the overall pattern. We also
restrict  = ^, that is, we assume away both over- and under-confidence. The blue region identifies the
combinations of ^ and ^ that match all three facts qualitatively.
    What happens if we let  = ^? The green, blue and orange regions remain intact, and so does the map-
ping from the specific values of K CG and K KW to the corresponding values of ^ and ^ . This is because the
stochastic properties of the average forecasts depend merely on the perceived level of noise and the de-
gree of over-extrapolation, not only the actual level. What changes as we vary , or equivalently the degree
of over-confidence, is only the position of the vertical red line, and along with it the specific value of this
"free" parameter needed to match a specific value for K BGMS .

                                                        13
                 Figure 1: The Regression Coefficients K CG , K KW , and K BGMS in the Theory




   This suggests a simple, recursive, identification strategy: first, calibrate  to actual process of unem-
ployment or inflation; next, identify ^ and ^ jointly from K CG and K KW ; finally, identify  form K BGMS .
Appendix Table A.4 implements this strategy and reports the specific values of the model parameters that
quantitatively match the evidence reported before. But both this identification strategy and Corollary 2
suffer from the same basic problem: it is unclear how the theory produces at once under-reaction in the
sense of K CG > 0 and over-reaction in the sense of K K W < 0. We cut the Gordian knot in the next subsection
by proposing a different, more transparent, way of connecting the theory and the data.
   We end this subsection with a bibliographical note. Kohlhas and Walther (2018) offer a different reso-
lution to Facts 1 and 3 (i.e., K CG > 0 > K KW ) than that presented. This alternative preserves rational expec-
tations by allowing for asymmetric attention to procyclical and countercyclical components of the fore-
casted outcome. But it imposes K BGMS = 0, failing to match Fact 2, and it does not square with Fact 4,
the new evidence we provide in Section 5. Kohlhas and Broer (2019) match Fact 2 by introducing over-
confidence, and Bordalo et al. (2018) achieve the same with a variant ("diagnostic expectations") that is
formally similar to over-confidence. But neither of these papers addresses Fact 3 and 4.


4.4 A more informative approach: impulse response functions (IRFs)

Our intuition about the various forces behind Facts 1-3, and particularly the tension between K CG and
K KW , had a dynamic flavor which was collapsed to essentially static moments. Indeed our derivation of
Proposition 1 quite literally involved starting with a moving-average form of each stochastic process and
then computing static correlations. Let us now explore more directly what we would learn from observing
directly the dynamic response of forecast errors in response to shocks.


                                                      14
Proposition 2 (IRF of Forecast Errors). Let {k }k =1
                                                     be the Impulse Response Function (IRF) of the average,
one-step-ahead, forecast error. That is, for all k  1,

                                                          x t +k - Et +k -1 [x t +k ]
                                                    k 
                                                                     t

is the k-th coefficient in the moving-average representation of the average forecast error.20
    (i) If ^ <  , or agents under-extrapolate, then k > 0 for all k  1.
    (ii) If ^ >  and ^ is small enough relative to ^ - , or agents over-extrapolate and learning is slow enough,
then k > 0 for 1  k < k IRF and k < 0 for k > k IRF , for some k IRF  (1, ).
    (iii) Finally, if ^ >  but ^ is large enough relative to ^ -  , or agents over-extrapolate but learning is fast,
then k < 0 for all k  1.

Corollary 3 (Delayed overshooting). The IRF of the average forecast errors starts positive but eventually
switches negative if and only if there is both over-extrapolation and sufficiently large informational friction.

    A sign-switch in the impulse response of forecast errors to a macro shock is "smoking-gun" evidence
for a combination of noise and over-extrapolation. A complementary lesson is that the point at which
the sign-switch occurs provides a gauge of the relative importance of the two mechanism: the slower the
learning relative to over-extrapolation, the longer it takes for the sign-switch to occur.
    This is, in our view, easier to interpret than our previous strategy of comparing K CG with K KW because it
gets to the heart of the economic question: at what point are economic agents sufficiently informed about
an economic event (i.e., particular shock) such that their model mis-specification becomes the dominant
explanation for any errors?
    Figure 2 illustrates these patterns by plotting the IRFs of outcomes and forecasts (left column) and
forecast errors and revisions (right column) in two scenarios: a benchmark without over-extrapolation
(top row), and a variant with (bottom row). The key observation is that only with the combination of slow
learning and over-extrapolation can the theory generate a sign reversal for the aggregate forecast errors, or
average forecasts that undershoot initially and overshoot later on.
    Now, to drive home the connection to K CG and K KW , consider the MA representations of the forecast
errors, the forecast revisions, and the actual outcome:
                                                                                                         
                 Errort ,t +1 =          k t +1-k    Revisiont =              f k t -k      Outcomet =           k t -k .
                                  k =0                                 k =0                              k =0

where {k } and { f k } are the IRFs of, respectively, the average forecast errors and the average forecast revi-
sions. Using these representations, the coefficient of regression (1) can be expressed as

                                              Cov(Errort ,t +1 , Revisiont )
                                                                                         
                                                                                                   ·f
                                                                                         k =0 k +1 k
                                     K CG =                                       =                2
                                                                                                                            (12)
                                                    Var(Revisiont )                             f
                                                                                            k =0 k
 20 We exclude  from this statement because it is mechanically 1. Also, all our theoretical statements focus on one-step-ahead
               0
forecasts for expositional simplicity, but our empirical implementations of the theory use the exact counterparts of the objects
constructed in the data (e.g., as the three-quarter-ahead forecasts of annualized inflation).



                                                                  15
                           Figure 2: IRFs of Aggregate Forecasts and Errors in the Theory

                  1                                               1



                0.8                                             0.8



                0.6                                             0.6



                0.4                                             0.4



                0.2                                             0.2



                  0                                               0



                -0.2                                           -0.2
                       0      5      10       15       20    25       0    5      10      15   20   25




                  1                                               1



                0.8                                             0.8



                0.6                                             0.6



                0.4                                             0.4



                0.2                                             0.2



                  0                                               0



                -0.2                                           -0.2
                       0      5      10       15       20    25       0    5      10      15   20   25




and similarly the coefficient of regression (2) can be expressed as

                                           Cov(Errort ,t +1 , Outcomet )
                                                                               
                                                                                    
                                                                               k =0 k +1
                                                                                         · k
                                  K KW =                                   =                             (13)
                                                   Var(Outcomet )                 
                                                                                  k =0
                                                                                        2k

This makes clear that K CG and K KW are, up to rescaling, equal to the dot-products of the IRF of the forecast
errors with the IRF of, respectively, the revisions and the outcome.
   What does this look like? Consider the bottom row of Figure 2, which corresponds to the combination
of noise and over-extrapolation. The dynamic response of the forecast errors, or the red, solid IRF in the
bottom-right subfigure, exhibits the reversal property we noted earlier: forecast errors switch from positive
to negative after a while. A similar reversal is also present in the forecast revisions; see the green, dashed
line in the same subfigure. It follows that the dot-product of these two IRFs contains more positive terms
than the dot-product of either one of them with that of the outcome, which is given by the blue, solid line
in the bottom-left subfigure. This helps explain why K CG > 0 at the same time that K KW < 0.
   Apart from resolving the "mystery" behind the different signs of K CG and K KW , this exercise also under-
scores that the IRFs of the forecast errors contain strictly more information about the dynamic properties
of beliefs than any of the these regression coefficients. Either one of these coefficients offers a confusing
picture by averaging under- and over-reaction across different horizons. The IRFs let one see when exactly
beliefs under-shoot and when exactly they over-shoot.



                                                             16
5 A New Fact: Delayed Over-shooting

We now go after what the theory has identified as the most useful moment to characterize imperfect expec-
tations: the dynamic response of forecasts and forecast errors to shocks. Here we corroborate the hypoth-
esis derived above and uncover a consistent pattern of initial under-reaction and delayed over-shooting
in the response of forecast errors to shocks. This, at least in the context of the last section's analysis, is
"smoking gun" evidence of a combination of noisy information and over-extrapolation.


5.1 Methodology

We start with the details of the empirical implementation.

Identified shocks. As anticipated in Section 2, we consider two empirical shocks, both borrowed from
Angeletos, Collard, and Dellas (2019).21
    The first shock, which these authors call "main business cycle shock," is constructed by maximizing its
contribution to the business cycle variation in unemployment and is found to have the following proper-
ties: it encapsulates strong positive co-movement in employment, output, investment, and consumption
only over the business cycle; it is nearly indistinguishable, in terms of IRFs and variance contributions, to
the shocks identified by targeting any of the aforementioned variables; it has a negligible footprint on TFP
at all horizons; it has a small to modest footprint on inflation. It can thus be interpreted as an non- or
mildly-inflationary demand shock, which drives the bulk of the business cycle in the data.22
    The second shock is identified by maximizing its contribution to the business cycle variation in infla-
tion and it is found to have a negative but very small footprint on real quantities and zero footprint on TFP.
It is thus akin to the kind of markup or cost-push shocks the DSGE literature uses to account for the bulk
of the inflation fluctuations in the data.23
    We denote the two shocks, respectively, as (D   S
                                                t , t ) for "demand" and "supply". Whether these shocks,
or any other SVAR-based shocks, are "truly" structural is largely a philosophical question and certainly be-
yond the scope of the present paper. For our purposes, the appeal of the particular shocks compared to
others found in the literature (e.g., Galí, 1999; Sims and Zha, 2006) is that they drive a significant compo-
nent of the business-cycle variation in macroeconomic activity and inflation. There is thus a good chance
that they also drive a significant component of the corresponding variation in real-world expectations.
 21 The empirical strategy taken in that paper builds on the max-share approach (Uhlig, 2003; Barsky and Sims, 2011) but is

guided by the following goal: providing a parsimonious representation of the business cycle in terms of one dominant shock. To
this goal, Angeletos, Collard, and Dellas (2019) run a VAR on a set of ten or more key macroeconomic variables that includes the
two variables we focus on here, the rate of unemployment and the rate of inflation. They then compile a collection of multiple
shocks, each identified by maximizing its contribution to the volatility of a particular variable over a particular frequency band,
and they draw lessons from comparing the empirical footprint of all these shocks.
 22 Angeletos, Collard, and Dellas (2019) further show that this shock in the data is closely related to the following counterparts

in models: the investment-specific demand shock in Justiniano, Primiceri, and Tambalotti (2010), the risk shock in Christiano,
Motto, and Rostagno (2014), and the confidence shock in Angeletos, Collard, and Dellas (2018).
 23 The two shocks are not constructed to be orthogonal to one another, but are very close to being so in the data.




                                                                17
Main specification: ARMA-IV. To estimate dynamic responses to the aforementioned shocks, we con-
sider two different empirical strategies.
    The first is to estimate the IRFs via a parsimonious, instrumental-variables ARMA(P, K ) representation.
In particular, we estimate the following regression:
                                                        P                    K
                                                                   IV
                                            zt =  +          p · z t -p +          k · t -k + u t                               (14)
                                                      p =1                  k =0

Depending on the variable whose dynamic response we want to look at, z t is the actual outcome (unem-
ployment or inflation), the relevant forecast, or the corresponding forecast error. In all cases, t  {D   S
                                                                                                      t , t }
is one of the aforementioned two shocks drawn from Angeletos, Collard, and Dellas (2019). Finally, for
                   IV                                                                        24
p  {1, ..., P }, z t -p are the lagged values of z t instrumented by the lagged values of t . This IV approach
recovers the conditional dynamic responses to the structural shock under consideration--intuitively, how
z t moves when driven by the shock process of interest. We will call this method the "ARMA-IV" estimation.
    By estimating (14) for outcomes (e.g., z t equal to that quarter's unemployment rate or the past four
                                                                                         H
quarters' inflation rate), we can generate dynamic impulse response coefficients (out,h )h =0
                                                                                              as functions
of (0 , (p )P   p =1 ). For forecasts, we can do the same thing with z t equal to the forecast in period t (e.g,.
¯ t [u t +3 ] and E
E                  ¯ t [t +3,t -1 ]): estimate the impulse response coefficients (~fc,h )H and then "re-index" these
                                                                                                    h =0
                                                                                          H
coefficients to line up with the realized outcomes. More specifically, we generate (fc,h )h =0
                                                                                               such that fc,h =
                                                                                ~
0 for h < 3 (effectively imposing unpredictability of the shocks), and fc,h = fc,h -3 for h  3. Finally, we
can construct the IRF of the forecast errors either by taking the difference between the IRF of the outcome
and the forecasts, or by repeating the aforementioned procedure with x t being the average forecast error.
    In all cases, we construct standard errors for the coefficients that are heteroskedasticity and autocorre-
lation robust (HAC) with a 4-quarter Bartlett kernel; and then use the delta method to calculate standard
errors for the impulse response functions. All reported error bands are 68% confidence intervals (±1 · SE).

Local projection. Our main strategy strives for parsimony by requiring the IRFs to accept a low-dimension
ARMA representation as in (14). But we can also estimate impulse responses directly using the projection
method of Jordà (2005). In this case, the estimating equation, for each horizon 0  h  H , is the following:

                                                z t +h = h + h · t +  Wt + u t +h                                               (15)
          H
where (h )h =0
               trace out the dynamic response of the outcome, Wt is a vector of control variables, and 
are the coefficients on these controls. Consistently, across specifications, we include the lagged outcome
                               ¯ t -k -1 [x t -1 ] as control variables. Conceptually, as long as these controls are
x t -1 and the lagged forecast E
orthogonal to the shock t , these should not affect the population estimate we get of the impulse response
parameters; but their inclusion may help with small-sample precision. We find overall that results are not
sensitive to choices of controls. Standard errors are constructed in the same, aforementioned way.
    Finally, we set k = 3 quarters as the forecast horizon, in line with what we did in Section 3, and we set
H = 20 quarters as the maximum period for tracing out IRFs.
 24 The first-stage equation is given, in vector form, by Z                                                         P
                                                                t -1 =  + E t -K -1  + e t , where Z t -1  (z t -p )p =1 , E t -K -1 
            J
(t -K - j ) j =K +1 and J - K  P . Our main specifications use P = 3, K = 1, and J = 9 (i.e., 8 instruments for 3 regressors). But
the results are robust to P = 2 and P = 4, as well as to different J and K .


                                                                    18
                                       Figure 3: Dynamic Responses: Outcomes and Forecasts


                                                Unemployment                         Inflation (annual)
                                      0.4                   Forecast
                                                            Outcome        0.4

                         ARMA-IV
                                      0.2                                  0.2

                                      0.0                                  0.0
                                                                           0.2

                                      0.4
                                                                           0.4
                         Projection




                                      0.2                                  0.2

                                      0.0                                  0.0
                                                                           0.2
                                            0   4   8   12 16 20                 0    4      8     12 16 20
Notes: The sample period is Q1 1968 to Q4 2017. The shaded areas are 68% confidence intervals based on HAC standard errors
with a Bartlett kernel and 4 lags. The x-axis denotes quarters from the shock, starting at 0. In the first column the outcome is u t
                    ¯ t -3 [u t ]; in the second column the outcome is t ,t -4 , or annual inflation, and the forecast is E
and the forecast is E                                                                                                     ¯ t -3 [t ,t -4 ].




5.2 The fact: dynamic over-shooting

Figure 3 shows, in a two-by-two grid, the main impulse response estimates.25 In the first column, we show
the dynamic response of unemployment and median forecasts thereof to the demand shock D
                                                                                      t . The first
row shows the instrumented ARMA method of equation (14) , and the second row shows the projection
method of (15). For both methods, we "align" the forecast responses such that, at a given vertical slice
of the plot, the outcome and forecast responses are measured over the same horizon, and the difference
thereof is a measure of the response of forecast errors. In the second column, we plot the same for the
response of one-year-average inflation to the supply shock S
                                                           t.
    The consistent pattern across specifications is an initially delayed, and then over-persistent response
of forecasts to the shock. Consider, as an illustration, the response of unemployment and forecasts thereof
to D
   t . Unemployment spikes around quarter 3 in both estimation methods before reverting back to its
long-run mean. The point-estimate is extremely close to zero by t = 12 in both cases.
    Now consider the response of forecasts at t = 3 in the plot. These are forecasts made at t = 0, when
the very first macro data (e.g., BLS reports) from t = 0 become available. Forecasted unemployment im-
mediately spikes and begins to decay over the next 5-6 quarters. Forecasters remain convinced there are
 25 We report first-stage F statistics for the ARMA-IV estimates in Table A.5. These are low with respect to the reference values

suggested by Stock and Yogo (2005) which is part of the reason that we also consider alternative estimation methods including
the linear projection and multi-variate linear model.



                                                                    19
                                       Figure 4: Dynamic Responses: Forecast Errors


                                       Unemployment                                Inflation (annual)
                            0.4                       Projection
                                                                         0.4
                                                      ARMA-IV
                            0.2                                          0.2

                            0.0                                          0.0

                            0.2                                          0.2
                                  0     4     8     12 16 20                   0    4      8     12 16 20

Notes: The sample period is Q1 1968 to Q4 2017. The shaded areas are 68% confidence intervals based on HAC standard errors
with a Bartlett kernel and 4 lags. The x-axis denotes quarters from the shock, starting at 0. In the first column the outcome is u t
                    ¯ t -3 [u t ]; in the second column the outcome is t ,t -4 , or annual inflation, and the forecast is E
and the forecast is E                                                                                                     ¯ t -3 [t ,t -4 ].




adverse demand conditions, when in reality conditions have reverted back to the mean. A similar, and
indeed more dramatic, pattern is visible in the response of inflation to the supply shock (second row). And
these patterns look qualitatively and quantitatively quite similar with both the smooth, ARMA estimates
(left column) and the unrestricted projection regression estimates (right column).
    Figure 4 shows this overshooting pattern more clearly in terms of the impulse response of forecast er-
rors. For both the ARMA and projection methods, this is obtained by taking the difference of the previous
estimates for outcomes and forecasts. For both unemployment and inflation, we find evidence that fore-
cast errors start positive and then turn negative at longer horizons. The estimated "crossing points" of the
                                                              u                
forecast errors response with 0, using the ARMA method, are K IRF = 4.14 and K IRF = 6.43, respectively.26
    Finally, in the left panel of Appendix Figure A.1, we complete the picture with the "off-diagonal" im-
pulse responses of inflation to the demand shock and unemployment to the supply shock. The former is
weakly inflationary at longer horizons and the latter weakly contractionary at medium horizons. And in
both cases we have modest evidence of the over-shooting pattern of interest.


5.3 Robustness and extensions

Sample choice. We conduct a number of initial robustness checks, mirroring those in Section 3, related
to measurement and sample choice. The middle panel of Figure A.1 recreate the regression results in the
SPF, back again with modern data, in the sample 1984-2017. As discussed previously, we might think of the
post-Volcker and post-oil-crisis data as a more "consistently stationary" regime for forecasters trying to
model the world. We find largely the same patterns in forecast errors. The right panel of Figure A.1 recre-
ates the main analysis with forecast data from Blue Chip Economic Indicators over the shorter available
sample (1980-2017) and again finds the same patterns.27
 26 The corresponding estimates from the projection regressions are 4.87 and 7.79.
 27 We also replicate all SPF and Blue Chip findings with vintage data and find similar results (not reported for brevity).




                                                                    20
General public. Carroll (2003) and others have argued that the forecasts of professional forecasters are
in general good proxies for those of the general public. But does this apply to our particular finding?
    To address this question, we look at the University of Michigan Survey of Consumer Sentiment and
construct an "unemployment expectation" using the survey's question about whether unemployment will
                                                                             ¯ t [UnempUpt +4 ] that av-
go up, stay the same, or go down over the next 12 months. We code a variable E
erages the "up" responses, and code a data equivalent UnempUpt +4 using the BEA unemployment rate.28
For inflation, we use the survey's estimate for inflation over the next 12 months.29
    Appendix Figure A.2 shows the results from projecting our business cycle shocks on these variables
using (15). The left panel shows the response of the UnempUp variable and forecasts thereof to D
                                                                                               t . The
Michigan survey expectations perk up slightly before the shock hits (i.e.,. for t < 4) and then spike one
quarter "too late." We see further evidence that the general public is also particularly unable to forecast
the "mean-reverting" part of the shock, or the eventual downward trend in unemployment.
    The right panel shows the response of the response of GDP deflator and the annual inflation expec-
tation of the Michigan survey to S
                                 t . Here, responses are much too noisy to pick out an obvious "peak
response." Again, there is some weak evidence of anticipation, and at quarters 10 and onward evidence of
some over-extrapolation of recent price trends.

Other shocks of interest. An appealing feature of using projections and the ARMA-IV method is that it
is easy to combine with auxiliary identification techniques, without fully specifying a multivariate model
and considering the problem of jointly identifying many shocks. To illustrate this property, and probe the
robustness of our results to other candidate "supply and demand" shocks from the macroeconomics liter-
ature, Appendix Figure A.3 replicates our main analysis for three different shocks: a technology shock à la
Galí (1999), normalized here to be inflationary and contractionary; an oil price shock à la Hamilton (1996);
and the investment-specific shock extracted from the DSGE model of Justiniano, Primiceri, and Tambalotti
(2010). The former two are variations of "supply shocks" (to productivity or input costs), and we show the
response of inflation; the last is like a demand shock, and we show the response of unemployment. In all
cases we see evidence of the overshooting pattern.

Methods for estimating dynamics. Our ARMA-IV method resembles the method suggested by Romer
and Romer (2004) and applied by Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2012) in their study of how forecast errors
respond to structural shocks. That method estimates an empirical ARMA process like (14) via ordinary
least squares ("ARMA-OLS"). It therefore uses unconditional auto-covariance properties to pin down dy-
namics. Our prior is that, in a world of very different, shock-specific dynamics (induced, for instance, by
differential persistence in the driving process or differential ability to learn about these shocks), the ARMA-
OLS method could give mis-leading results. Indeed, in our replication of a key result from Coibion and
Gorodnichenko (2012), the response of inflation and forecast errors thereof to technology shocks, we find
evidence of our overshooting patterns when we use both our ARMA-IV method and a local projection. Ap-
 28 Results are similar if we treat a different portion (e.g., 1/2 or all) of the "about the same" responses as corresponding to "up."
 29 For consistency with the previous analysis, we compare this to data on the GDP deflator, even though this is almost certainly

not a perfect match for the price variable households have in mind when answering the survey.



                                                                 21
                                      Figure 5: Dynamic Responses in a Structural VAR

                                 ACD identification                                        Triangular identification
   0.4                                                                       0.4
                                      0.3
                                                                                                               0.3
                                                                             0.3
   0.2
                                      0.2                                                                      0.2
                                                                             0.2
     0                                0.1                                                                      0.1
                                                                             0.1
                                                                                                                 0
  -0.2                                 0
                                                                               0
                                                                                                               -0.1
  -0.4                               -0.1                                   -0.1
         0         10           20          0        10           20               0         10           20          0        10           20
   0.6                                                                       0.8
                                                                                                               0.6
                                      0.4                                    0.6
   0.4
                                                                             0.4                               0.4
   0.2                                0.2
                                                                             0.2                               0.2
     0
                                       0                                       0                                 0

  -0.2                                                                      -0.2
         0         10           20          0        10           20               0         10           20          0        10           20
   0.3                                                                       0.3
                                     0.25

   0.2                                0.2                                    0.2                               0.2
                                     0.15
   0.1                                                                       0.1                               0.1
                                      0.1

     0                               0.05                                      0                                 0
                                       0
  -0.1                                                                      -0.1
         0         10           20          0        10           20               0         10           20          0        10           20


Notes: The sample period is Q4 1968 to Q4 2017. The x-axis denotes quarters from the shock (starting at 0). The shaded areas
are 68% high-posterior-density regions and the point estimate is the posterior median. In the first row the outcome is u t and
                ¯ t -3 [u t ]; in the second row the outcome is t ,t -4 , or annual inflation, and the forecast is E
the forecast is E                                                                                                  ¯ t -3 [t ,t -4 ]; and in the
                                                                                 ¯ t -3 [t ,t -1 ]. The columns show results from a "max
last row, the outcome is t ,t -1 , or one-quarter inflation, and the forecast is E
share" identification and a triangular identification, respectively; see the main text for details.




pendix B unpacks the differences in methodology and demonstrates why the particular implementation
in Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2012) makes it impossible to see the over-shooting patterns uncovered
here: the forecast errors are therein restricted to be uniformly positive.

Two complementary SVARs. Another option for estimating complex dynamics, of course, is to jointly
estimate a multivariate model. We estimate a 13-variable VAR comprised of the ten key macroeconomic
variables from Angeletos, Collard, and Dellas (2019) plus three forecast variables of interest: the three-
period-ahead unemployment forecast, the three-period-ahead annual inflation forecast, and the three-
period-ahead quarterly inflation forecast.30 We apply the same Bayesian inference procedure as that pa-
 30 The ten macro variables are the following: real GDP, real investment, real consumption, labor hours, the labor share, the

Federal Funds Rate, the rate of change in the GDP deflator, labor productivity in the non-farm business sector, and utilization-
adjusted TFP. Full variable descriptions and data construction discussion is Angeletos, Collard, and Dellas (2019). The forecast
variables are the three-step-ahead unemployment and inflation forecasts from the SPF. The sample period is Q4 1968 to Q4 2017.



                                                                       22
per, including prior specification and posterior sampling procedures, and replicate their identification of
shocks that target the "max share" of the business-cycle variation in unemployment and inflation.31
    The left panel of Figure 5 shows the results. In the first row, we show the response of unemployment,
forecasts thereof, and forecast errors to the "unemployment shock." This can be compared directly to
the first column of Figures 3 and 4, and largely agrees about the potential for large and persistent "over-
shooting" in forecast errors. The second and third row show the response of outcomes and forecasts to
the inflation shock in the same SVAR model, but with different forecast horizons and transformations of
the outcome variable (annual averages in Row 2 versus quarter-to-quarter rates in Row 3). Here we find
quantitatively smaller effects per period, but also very persistent ones.32
    In the right panel of Figure 5, we show the results of two different "Cholesky" identifications based on
triangular short-run restrictions (ordering unemployment or inflation first). We find strong corroborating
evidence of over-shooting for unemployment but only very weak evidence for inflation. Hence, Fact 4 for
inflation seems to rely on filtering the "right" variation in the data. A related point is made below in the
context of Fact 3, where we show that this fact is reinforced when we focus on the shock that drives the
variation of inflation at business-cycle frequencies.

Dispersions, not means. Motivated by our framework, which emphasizes only mean forecasts, we have
not looked at the dynamics of the dispersion in forecasts. In Appendix Figure A.5, we re-estimate (15) using
the cross-sectional inter-quartile range of forecasts as the outcome.33 There is a rough pattern of disper-
sion spiking on impact of shocks, particularly in the "diagonal" responses. A "cheap" way to accommodate
this fact, which echoes Mankiw, Reis, and Wolfers (2004), in our framework is to let  be time-varying while
maintaining ^ fixed; this allows dispersion to vary without affecting at all the joint dynamics of average
forecasts and aggregate outcomes. The more interesting possibility that time-variation in the levels of un-
certainty and disagreement influence aggregate behavior (e.g., Bloom, 2009b; Bloom, Floetotto, Jaimovich,
Saporta-Eksten, and Terry, 2018) is left outside our analysis.


5.4 Three complementary tests

The impulse response evidence, combined with the discussion in Section 4, suggest we are heading to-
ward a model that includes both incomplete information and over-extrapolation. Here, before proceeding
to determine the implications of such a theory, we organize three additional tests that independently cor-
roborate our main story.

The "term structure" of forecasts. The impulse response functions plotted show forecasts of a constant
horizon at different dates after the shock. But they do not show a forecaster's belief at any fixed date about
how macro outcomes will behave in the future, which could perhaps offer the most direct evidence of over-
or under- extrapolation.
 31 We are grateful to Fabrice Collard for help with this replication.
 32 In Appendix Figure A.4, we show the "off-diagonal" impulse responses of unemployment to the supply shock and inflation to

the demand shock. They, too, show evidence of the overshooting.
  33 Results are similar using cross-sectional standard deviations, but the IQR method seems safer in the presence of outliers.




                                                                 23
                                      Figure 6: The Term Structure of Forecasts and Outcomes


                                  Unemployment                                                                     Inflation
                                                              0.20                                                                     0.25
                       0.40                                                                         0.60
                                                                                                                                       0.20
        k , outcomes




                                                                                     k , outcomes
                                                                 k, forecasts




                                                                                                                                          k, forecasts
                       0.30                                   0.15                                  0.40                               0.15
                                                                                                                                       0.10




                                                                 f




                                                                                                                                          f
        o




                                                                                     o
                       0.20                                   0.10                                  0.20                               0.05
                              0   1      2 3              4                                                0   1      2 3          4
                                      horizon                                                                      horizon

Notes: The sample period is Q4 1968 to Q4 2017. The x-axis denotes quarters from the shock or horizon of forecast (starting at 0).
                                                                                                                               f
The lines are one-standard-error bars. The orange lines plot the terms structure of forecasts, or k from (16), and the blue lines
show the response of outcomes, or o
                                  k
                                    from (17).




      We can estimate a version of this in the SPF data, for forecasts up to 4 quarters out; forecasts of longer
horizons are unavailable for the full sample. We thus consider the following "slice" of the projection re-
gressions for forecasted variable and the realized outcome at horizons k  {0, ..., 4}:

                                                  ¯ t [x t +k ] = k +  f · t +  · Wt + u t +k
                                                  E                                                                                                      (16)
                                                                      k


                                                   x t +k = o   o       o
                                                            k + k · t +  · W t + u t +k                                                                  (17)

We run these specifications for x equal to unemployment and inflation, and for  equal to the correspond-
ing shock. For consistency, we use the same control as those used earlier in projection (15).
                                                      f
      The coefficients of interest are (k , o
                                            k
                                              ), which reveal the persistence of outcomes and forecasts. If
  f
k < o
    k
      , which we have already verified for k = 3, we know agents under-react on impact. If o
                                                                                           k
                                                                                             is much
                                              f
more persistent across k than k , this is also evidence of over-extrapolation right at the impact of the
shock--that is, agents end up being more correct about impacts further in the future because their over-
extrapolation partially cancels out their under-reaction.
                                                                                                      f
      Figure 6 plots the results, showing the values of o
                                                        k
                                                          and k on the left and right scales, respectively. By
comparing the left and right scales, we see that forecasts at all horizons under-react. But by comparing the
blue line to the orange one, we also see that, in the case of unemployment, agents expect the effect of the
shock to persist longer than it actually does.

A "structural" version of Facts 1 and 3. Now that we have committed to some notion of what "business
cycle variation" we want to map to the model's shocks, we should recognize that a more precise analogue
to Facts 1 and 3 (and our argument linking these Facts to the IRFs) would involve sub-setting to this par-
ticular variation. We thus revisit those regressions with an appropriate instrumental variables strategy.34
 34 Note, of course, that there is no clear "filtered" or "shock-specific" version of Fact 2 that can be estimated in the data. Once

one subsets to aggregate variation, the BGMS regression essentially replicates the CG regression.


                                                                                24
                            Table 4: Forecast Error Predictability with Business-Cycle Variation

                                                           Unemployment                          Inflation
                Regression                             1968-2017       1984-2017       1968-2017       1984-2017

                                  Revisiont (K CG )       0.585           0.867           1.460           0.511
                                                         (0.393)         (0.270)         (0.521)         (0.358)
                     (1)            First-stage F         7.527           4.736           3.517           5.047
                                          N                189             130             188               130
                                   OLS Estimate           0.741           0.809           1.528           0.292

                                      x t (K KW )        -0.260          -0.073           0.085           -0.642
                                                         (0.144)         (0.086)         (0.125)         (0.328)
                     (3)            First-stage F         2.671           5.560           1.697           1.513
                                          N                191             136             190               135
                                   OLS Estimate          -0.061          -0.036           0.111           -0.068

Notes: The dataset is the Survey of Professional Forecasters and the observation is a quarter between Q4-1968 and Q4-2017. All
regressions include a constant. The forecast horizon is 3 quarters. Standard errors are HAC-robust, with a Bartlett kernel and lag
length equal to 4 quarters. The data used for outcomes are first-release ("vintage"). The F values are a (multivariate extension of)
the Kleibergen and Paap (2006) r k statistic and can be compared with critical values reported in Stock and Yogo (2005) for given
levels of tolerated bias.




Concretely, we estimate versions of (1) and (3) using the current and six lags of the corresponding shock as
an instrument for, respectively, Revisiont and x t . Table 4 reports the results.
     For Fact 1, we find similar values to the OLS estimates for unemployment, but slightly larger, and more
stable, values for inflation. This is consistent with the relative stability of our IRFs, as demonstrated in the
comparison of the left and middle panels of Figure A.1.For Fact 3, we find more negative values that the
OLS estimates. This underscores that the aspect of over-shooting that is picked up in the KW regression is
more pronounced when focusing on the relevant business-cycle variation.

Auxiliary support for dispersed, private information. By embracing over-extrapolation, we have com-
mitted to a model in which some noisy perception is necessary to capture the initial sluggishness in expec-
tations and the related Fact 1. Appendix C shows more clearly how to use a hybrid regression of individual
and aggregate predictability (Facts 1 and 2) to test for noisy signals in this class of models. The underlying
idea is that the difference between the CG and BGMS regression coefficients speaks directly to dispersed
private information per se: if aggregate forecast errors are strongly positively related to past aggregate re-
visions, and if in addition one's forecast errors are negatively, or less positively, related to his own past
revision, it has to be that one's forecast error is positively related to others' past revision. In other words,
there is evidence supporting the hypothesis of "forecasting the forecasts of others."35
 35 Another strand of evidence comes from recent field-experiment work in Coibion, Gorodnichenko, and Kumar (2018) and

Coibion, Gorodnichenko, and Ropele (2019).




                                                                 25
6 Imperfect Expectations in GE

We now put the accumulated evidence about expectations to work in an equilibrium macroeconomic
model. This serves four purposes. First, we verify that our main conclusions about identifying specific
frictions via survey data are robust to considering the GE fixed point. Second, we demonstrate how our
evidence can speak to intrinsically equilibrium theories of expectations formation, which had no place
in our earlier PE analysis. Third, we clarify how the causal effects of the imperfect expectations in such a
context depend on parameters that regulate GE feedbacks, such as the marginal propensity to consume,
or the slope of the Keynesian cross. And finally, we offer a proof-of-concept calibration exercise which
demonstrates how our evidence can offer not only theoretical but also quantitative guidance.


6.1 Primitives

Consider the New Keynesian model with no capital and perfectly rigid prices. Let y t be output and c t
be consumption, where all quantities are in log deviations. The market clearing condition is y t = c t and
output is purely demand-determined given a fixed path of nominal interest rates (which also equal real
interest rates).36
    When agents have different and potentially irrational expectations, aggregate demand can no more be
represented by the Euler equation of a representative consumer. Following the same steps as in Angeletos
and Lian (2018), one can instead obtain the following "modern" version of the Keynesian cross:

                                                                                
                                  ct =           k E
                                                   ¯ t [d - r t +k ] + (1 - )
                                                        t +1                           k E
                                                                                         ¯ t [ y t +k ]                      (18)
                                          k =0                                  k =0
      ¯ t denotes the average expectation in period t ,  is the subjective discount factor,  is the EIS, r t is
where E
the nominal (also real) interest rate, and d
                                           t is a demand (preference) shock. This condition follows from
aggregating the log-linearized optimal consumption function and aggregating. The second term captures
the consumers' present discounted value income, as in the Permanent Income Hypothesis (PIH).
    To see more clearly how (18) captures the Keynesian cross, let Y =  k E  ¯ t [ y t +k ] be the average,
                                                                                                  k =0
possibly irrational, expectation of permanent income. We can then read (18) as c = a + bY , where a 
 
     k E
  k =0
        ¯ t [d - r t ] is the intercept of the Keynesian cross and b  (1 - ) is its slope, or equivalently the
              t
marginal propensity to consume out of income (MPC).
    For our purposes, it is therefore best to replace  in condition (18) with 1 - mpc, treat mpc as a prim-
itive parameter, and think of mpc  0.3 as an empirically plausible benchmark. This is further justified in
Angeletos and Huo (2019) by drawing a connection between a heterogeneous-agent variant of the present
framework and the HANK literature.37
    Let t  d
           t - r t denote the "total demand shock" relative to steady state; formally, this is a rescaling
of the deviation of interest rates from the natural rate. We close the model by letting t be an exogenous
 36 For completeness, assume that labor is supplied to meet final demand; and that a competitive, representative firm operates a

linear production technology with constant productivity to produce the homogeneous final good.
  37 See also the related OLG versions of the New Keynesian model in Piergallini (2007), Del Negro, Giannoni, and Patterson (2015)

and Farhi and Werning (2019).


                                                                26
AR(1) process with persistence  and Gaussian one-step-ahead innovations t :

                                                                 1
                                                        t =         t                                     (19)
                                                              1 - L

A positive t can be either an expansionary monetary policy or an expansionary demand shock.
    Like in Section 4, we let each consumer observe only a noisy Gaussian private signal of t , the true
precision of which is given by  > 0:

                                                    u i ,t
                                     s i ,t = t +                  u i ,t i i d N (0, 1)                  (20)
                                                       

And we let consumers' subjective perception of the precision of their information and of the persistence of
the underlying impulse be, respectively, some ^ > 0 and some ^  (0, 1), which may differ from the objective
counterparts.


6.2 Solving and characterizing the fixed point

As already mentioned, Angeletos and Huo (2019) have solved the fixed point of a similar model as ours,
under the restrictions ^ =  and ^ = . The following two propositions extend their results to the present
environment and offer a simple description of how the frictions influence macro dynamics.

Proposition 3. An equilibrium to this model exists, is unique, and admits a finite ARMA representation for
the aggregate outcome and the average forecasts.

Proposition 4 (As-if Representation). There exist functions  f and b such that the unique equilibrium
dynamics of the imperfect-expectations economy is the same as that of a perfect-expectations counterpart
with the following Euler equation:

                                                                                d
                                      c t = -r t +  f Et [c t +1 ] + b c t -1 + t                         (21)

where  f =  f (^,  , ^ , mpc), b = b (^,  , ^ ; mpc), and Et is the rational, full-information, expectation op-
erator. Furthermore, b > 0 if and only if ^ < , and  f < 1 if and only if either ^ <  or ^ is small enough
relative to ^ - .

    This result offers a bridge to simple representative-agent macro models: b resembles habit persis-
tence,  f represents a form of myopia (if  f < 1) or hyperopia (if  f > 1). The economy with noisy per-
ception (^ <  and  < ) but no over-extrapolation (^ =  ) features both myopia ( f < 1) and anchoring
(b > 0). At the other extreme, if we shut down noisy perception (i.e., take ^ =   ), we find that over-
extrapolation alone maps to hyperopia ( f > 1) and under-extrapolation alone maps to myopia ( f < 1),
but neither by itself produces anchoring (b = 0).
    The case of most interest, over-extrapolation combined with sufficiently large noise, maps to  f < 1
and b > 0. The former dampens the economy's response to innovations, and to news about the future.
The latter plays a similar role as habit persistence in consumption--or, if we translate the results to other
contexts, as adjustment costs to investment, price-indexation in the NKPC, or momentum in asset prices

                                                              27
(see Angeletos and Huo, 2019, and references therein). Finally, compared to the versions of these mech-
anisms found in the DSGE literature, the ones obtained here have two distinctive qualities. First, they
are endogenous to policy, market structures and GE multipliers. And second, they are disciplined by the
provided evidence on expectations.38


6.3 Facts 1-4 in GE

Let us next focus on the connection with the data, which is the main contribution of our paper. The fol-
lowing result verifies that all our main insights from Section 5 go through modulo additional dependence
on GE feedback:

Proposition 5 (Facts 1-4 in GE ). Corollaries 1, 2 and 3 go through in the GE context, but all moments now
depend also on the MPC.

    That is: (i) we can still show that the pure noisy rational expectations and pure mis-specification mod-
els are insufficient to describe the observed moments; (ii) we can still select the combination of noise
and over-extrapolation as the "right" model; and (iii) we still have that delayed over-shooting in IRFs is
smoking-gun evidence of the combination of noise and over-extrapolation; but (iv) we now must condi-
tion all inference on additional information about the extent of GE feedback in the economy.


6.4 Imperfect reasoning versus imperfect expectations

A claim we have made earlier, and now have the tools to formalize, is that certain models of imperfect
reasoning in equilibrium work in similar ways as our more mechanical model of under-extrapolation and
are therefore not a good fit for the data. We consider, in particular, three such models:

   1. Dogmatic higher-order doubts. Assume that each consumer observes t with probability 1 but
      attaches only probability q  (0, 1) that any other consumers also observes t ; with the remaining
      probability, any other agent is expected to have her belief about t reset to the prior. Such a model
      is the main specification in Angeletos and Sastry's (2020) work on forward guidance at the ZLB. It
      captures the same kind of inertia in forward-looking higher-order beliefs and the same consequent
      forms of myopia and GE attention as those featured in Angeletos and Lian (2018) and our own GE
      setting, but replaces the informational friction with a systematic bias in beliefs. It therefore builds a
      bridge to the following two models, which introduce similar biases.

   2. Level-K thinking. Assume that a consumer of "level 1" perfectly observes t but assumes all others
      consumers a default action c id,t = 0; an agent of level 2 also perfectly observes t but assumes all other
      agents play the level-1 action; and this definition recursively extends up to order K , for some finite
      K > 2. Such models have been used to explain the sluggish, and often incomplete, convergence to
 38 Ma´
      ckowiak and Wiederholt (2015) and Afrouzi and Yang (2019) argue a version of the first point by focusing on the endogene-
ity of attention, or of  in our framework. Here, we instead emphasize the endogeneity of  f and b on the MPC and other GE
parameters for given , as in Angeletos and Huo (2019).



                                                             28
      Nash equilibrium play in laboratory settings (e.g., Nagel, 1995) and, more recently, agents' expecta-
      tions formation about "unconventional" policy (e.g., Garcia-Schmidt and Woodford, 2019; Farhi and
      Werning, 2019; Iovino and Sergeyev, 2017).

   3. Cognitive discounting (Gabaix, 2020). Agents have misspecified priors about the processes of the
      exogenous state and the endogenous aggregate spending. In particular, whenever that the actual
      laws of motion are
                                   t = t -1 + t                and        y t = R y t -1 + D t ,

      for some constants R and D (to be determined as part of the solution), the agents believe that

                                 t = m t -1 + t                and        y t = mR y t -1 + D t ,

      for some exogenous scalar m  (0, 1) that represents the degree of "cognitive discounting" applied
      when the consumers contemplate the future.

These models have different methodological underpinnings. But they induce essentially the same distor-
tion in beliefs. In particular, it is easy to show that all three models impose that the average subjective
expectation and the corresponding rational expectation are connected by the following restriction:

                                            ¯ t [ y t +1 ] = d · E
                                            E                     t [ y t +1 ],


where d  (0, 1) is a scalar that depends on the "deep" parameter   {q , K , m } of the respective model. This
scalar measures how much consumers underestimate the future response in the behavior of others and,
equivalently, the future response of y t . What differs is the reason for d < 1: underestimating the knowledge
of others (Model 1), underestimating the rationality of others (Model 2), or applying a behavioral discount
to the future (Model 3).
   Now note that the form of under-extrapolation accommodated in our framework plays the same role
as well. Indeed, if we shut down noisy perception, we can show that

                                                               ^ 
                                            ¯ t [ y t +1 ] =
                                            E                   E [ y t +1 ].
                                                                t

It follows that, for any of the aforementioned three models, we can find a value of ^ less than  such that
our model implies the same effective friction in the expectations. The next Proposition verifies that this
logic carries over to the entire set of predictions about outcomes and forecasts. The Corollary spells out
the relevant empirical implications.

Proposition 6. For any the three models described above and any value for the corresponding parameter
  {q , K , m }, there exists some ^ = f ( , , mpc) <  , such that the outcomes of the original model is observa-
tionally equivalent to our own model without noise ( = ^ = ) and under-extrapolation (^ <  ).

Corollary 4. For any the three models described above, the following properties hold: K CG = K BGMS > 0,
K KW > 0, and the IRF of the average forecast errors is uniformly positive. That is, these models are at odds
with Facts 2, 3 and 4.

                                                           29
    All these models have consumers under-estimate the future response of others, which in turn impact
behavior in a similar way as an under-estimation of the persistence of t . The only subtle difference be-
tween them is whether the belief mis-specification operates through both PE and GE considerations, or
only through GE. For the first two models (noiseless higher-order doubts and level K thinking), because
the extent of the friction is tied closely to the extent of strategic interaction, the replicating ^ will be a
function of the MPC.
    Our observation that pure under-extrapolation cannot explain the business-cycle macro data on im-
perfect expectations (Corollary 1 and Proposition 5) thus extends to the aforementioned GE dampening
models as well. First, each model restricts K CG = K BGMS , or it fails to provide a reason why the forecast
errors of one are predictable by the information of others. And second, even in variants that add some
noisy perception and that could thus help match the CG and BGMS evidence, none of these theories could
explain the observed over-extrapolation in impulse response functions.39
    The obvious caveat to this conclusion is that it only applies to the particular evidence we have consid-
ered here and may not extend to other contexts. Another caveat is that this conclusion is modulated by
parsimony: given the evidence at hand, we cannot reject the hypothesis that agents over-extrapolate the
aggregate shocks and at the same time are shallow thinkers with respect to GE.


6.5 A quantitative assessment

Let us now illustrate how our empirical findings can help quantify the GE effects of the documented mech-
anisms, using the New Keynesian model as our laboratory economy.40
    To speak jointly to data on output (unemployment) and inflation, let us first extend the model to allow
for partially flexible prices. This involves adding a block of non-competitive intermediate goods firms
who operate a linear technology and reset prices with probability 1 -   (0, 1) and a final goods firm that
competitively combines these goods with a constant-returns-to-scale technology. As in Angeletos and Lian
(2018) and Angeletos and Huo (2019), the model's three equations can be expressed as follows:
                                                                                            
                 c i , t = Ei , t          (1 - mpc)k +1 d
                                                         t +k - (i t +k - t +k +1 ) + mpc          (1 - mpc)k c t +k
                                    k =0                                                    k =0
                                                                        
                  i , t = Ei , t            ( )k (c t + s
                                                        t ) + (1 -  )          ( )k t +k
                                     k =0                               k =0

                   i t =  t

The first equation is the Dynamic IS Curve, modified to allow for informational frictions and mis-specified
beliefs along the lines discussed earlier. i t is the nominal interest rate, t is inflation, and d
                                                                                                 t is a preference
 39 Furthermore, in a survey of firms designed to shed light on related issues, Coibion, Gorodnichenko, Kumar, and Ryngaert

(2018) find support for informational frictions but no relation between measured level-K thinking and expectations.
  40 Previous works such as Mankiw and Reis (2007), Ma´    ckowiak and Wiederholt (2015) and Melosi (2016) have also sought to
quantify the macroeconomic effects of informational frictions in the baseline New Keynesian model, but have not disciplined
the exercise with the expectations evidence we consider here. Bordalo, Gennaioli, Shleifer, and Terry (2019), on the other hand,
quantify the role of over-extrapolation in an RBC model with credit friction, but they abstract from informational frictions and do
not address the particular patterns of the expectations of inflation and unemployment on which we focus.


                                                                   30
                                          Table 5: Model Parameters

                         (a) exogenously fixed                                 (b) calibrated

      Parameter                Description                  Value                                ^
                                                                                                        ^
                                                                                                        

                      1 - probability of price reset         0.6    Demand shock      0.80      0.95   0.36
                         Slope of Phillips Curve            0.02    Supply shock      0.57      0.82   0.15
                             Discount factor                0.99
         mpc        Marginal propensity to consume           0.3
                                    IES                      1.0
                            Policy rule slope                1.5



shock, which maps to our empirical demand shock. The second equation is the corresponding modifica-
tion of the NKPC.  is its slope with respect to the real marginal cost,  is the Calvo parameter (one minus
the probability of resetting prices), and s
                                          t is a cost-push shock, which maps to our empirical supply shock.
The third and final equation is the rule for monetary policy, in which  is the slope in current inflation.
   We close the model by specifying the shock processes and the belief structures in the same way as
before. Using the methods of Angeletos and Huo (2019), we then analytically solve for the equilibrium
responses of inflation and consumption as functions of two sets of parameters: the "familiar" parameters
(, mpc, ,  , ,  ); the actual and perceived persistence of the shocks ( , ^ ); and the perceived precision
(^). For the reasons already explained, the actual precision () does not enter the determination of either
the aggregate outcomes or the average expectations thereof.
   To connect the model to the data, we interpret t as the quarterly rate of inflation and the negative
of y t as the quarterly rate of unemployment. The first choice requires no justification. The second one
is based on the logic that, in our model, y t coincides with the output gap, which in turn is closely related
to unemployment both in richer models and in the data. We next fix the model's behavioral and policy
parameters to conventional values, as shown in left panel of Table 5. We finally pick, for each shock, the
values of  , ^ and ^ so as to match as well as possible the key evidence reported in Section 5--that is, the
IRF of outcomes and forecasts in Figures 3 and 4 (ARMA-IV method), as well as the "term structure" of
forecasts in Figure 6. These moments provide the most direct evidence of the forces we have in mind, as
discussed in Section 4. This procedure yields the parameters values seen in the right panel of Table 5.
   Figure 7 illustrates the model's fit vis-a-vis the empirical IRFs seen earlier in Figure 3. The fit is quite
good in the context of the demand shock, but mediocre in the context of the supply shock. This under-
scores that, although the model has the right qualitative ingredients, its quantitative performance is not
automatic: there is no abundance of degrees of freedom.
   We henceforth focus on the demand shock and study two counterfactuals. In the one, we shut down
the over-extrapolation, isolating the role of the information friction. In the second, we shut down both fric-
tions, recovering the textbook New Keynesian model. These counterfactuals are illustrated in, respectively,
the second and third column of Figure 8. The first column is the full model, with both frictions.


                                                       31
                                                         Figure 7: Model vs Data




                                      Figure 8: Counterfactuals for Demand Shock

  0.5                                          0.5                                       0.5

 0.45                                         0.45                                      0.45

  0.4                                          0.4                                       0.4

 0.35                                         0.35                                      0.35

  0.3                                          0.3                                       0.3

 0.25                                         0.25                                      0.25

  0.2                                          0.2                                       0.2

 0.15                                         0.15                                      0.15

  0.1                                          0.1                                       0.1

 0.05                                         0.05                                      0.05

   0                                            0                                         0
        0         5       10     15      20          0       5      10      15     20          0   5   10   15   20




            By comparing the second column to the third one, we see that the informational friction alone is the
source of both significant dampening and significant persistence relative to the frictionless benchmark.
Compared to the textbook model, the informational friction--calibrated to the evidence presented in this
paper--decreases the impact of the demand shock on the output gap by about 50% and its impact on
inflation by about 75%. As for the induced persistence, it is quantitatively comparable to that obtained in
richer DSGE model with the use of habit persistence in consumption and the hybrid version of the NKPC.
            This echoes the common message of a large literature on information frictions (e.g., Woodford, 2003;
Mankiw and Reis, 2007; Nimark, 2008; Ma´
                                       ckowiak and Wiederholt, 2015). The added value here is that we
have disciplined the theory with expectations evidence (as in Angeletos and Huo, 2019) and that we have
accommodated over-extrapolation. Without it, the model fails to capture Fact 4: as seen in the second
column of Figure 8, the forecasts in the noise-only model do not overshoot.
            By comparing the first column to the second one, we then see that the main effect of over-extrapolation
on actual outcomes is to amplify their responses to the shock. And while the over-shooting looks "small"
in terms of the size of the forecast errors, the aforementioned amplification is sizable for two reasons.
First, a small difference between ^ and  translates to a large difference in the kind of discounted present


                                                                   32
values that consumer spending and firm pricing. And second, any such belief mistake gets amplified at
the aggregate level by GE feedback.
    Needless to say, these counterfactuals should not be taken too seriously. They do, however, illustrate
the potential value of accommodating the mechanisms and the evidence presented here in richer models.
    We close this section with the following note. So far, we have utilized only evidence on average fore-
casts, ignoring the kind of individual-level evidence that was the focus of BGMS. This is because the BGMS
regression coefficient only helps pin down a "residual" parameter () that does not enter the dynamics
of either the aggregate outcomes or the average forecasts. The BGMS evidence therefore has no (inde-
pendent) effect on the counterfactuals conducted above.41 As for the CG and KW evidence, they were
subsumed by our evidence about IRFs.


7 Conclusion

Where are we in the "wilderness" of imperfect expectations? This paper organized theory and survey evi-
dence to answer this question, taking into account both the possibility for multiple competing distortions
in expectations formation and the equilibrium fixed point between expectations and outcomes.
    We proposed and implemented a new empirical strategy: estimation of the impulse response function
of the average forecast errors of unemployment and inflation to the shocks that drive most of the business-
cycle variation in these variables. We explained why in theory this strategy is both more informative and
more easily interpretable than alternatives found in previous empirical studies. And we demonstrated in
practice how the information extracted via our strategy helps achieve three goals: resolve the apparent
conflict between the empirical findings of previous works; help select among multiple competing theories
of expectation formation; and serve as a "sufficient statistic" for quantitative purposes.
    The main empirical finding was a form delayed over-shooting in expectations: following any shock,
forecasts appear to under-react for the first few quarters but over-shoot later on. The main lesson for
theory was that, at least with the class of models considered, the data require the combination of a sizable
informational friction and a behavioral tendency to over-extrapolate the macroeconomic dynamics.
    Theories that emphasize under-extrapolation or closely related mechanisms, such as cognitive dis-
counting and level-K thinking, were shown to be at odds not only with the new fact documented here
but also with the individual-level evidence on expectations documented in Bordalo, Gennaioli, Ma, and
Shleifer (2018). At the same time, we echoed Angeletos and Huo's (2019) point that such individual-level
evidence may not be strictly needed for the purpose of quantifying the overall effect on the macroeco-
nomic dynamics: in the class of models considered, our evidence about average forecasts served as "suffi-
cient statistics" for the counterfactuals of interest.
    We conclude with few notes on future research that would further solidify our understanding of macro
belief dynamics and further the research program outlined in this article.
 41 The BGMS evidence was nevertheless useful in corroborating the case for over-extrapolation and, conversely, in ruling out

theories that resemble under-extrapolation. In this sense, it remains useful for selecting the "right" model of beliefs. But it could
be dispensed with in our counterfactuals.



                                                                 33
Learning foundations. A question we have not tried to answer, at any point in this article, is where
agents' subjective model of the world comes from. More specifically, why would agents think that business
cycle shocks to demand or marginal costs have a higher persistence than they really do?
    Our analysis simplifies the matter greatly by having agents put a dogmatic belief that the true persis-
tence is ^ . One might hypothesize that standard results on the learning foundations of rational expecta-
tions equilibria, extended to our setting, would rule out convergence of beliefs to ^ =  given a reasonable
(non-degenerate) prior on ^ (Marcet and Sargent, 1989; Evans and Honkapohja, 2001). That said, if we ex-
tended the model to make the one-dimensional, AR(1) representation of fundamentals only an imperfect
approximation of a richer truth underlying truth, we may observe convergence to ^ =  (Molavi, 2019).
    A variant story involves rational confusion between transitory and permanent shocks. Such confusion
may cause agents to respond to the transitory shock as if they incorrectly perceive its persistence to be
higher than the true. That is, such confusion can produce a rational form of over-extrapolation. But it also
predicts that agents ought to under-extrapolate the effects of the permanent shock. Of course an auxiliary
prediction is that agents underreact to the permanent changes. We found no support for this prediction
when we looked at the dynamic responses of forecasts to a technology shock identified as in Galí (1999).
But a more thorough quantitative analysis along these lines is an interesting angle for future work.

Non-stationary environments . Agents may also be using the wrong model because the underlying struc-
ture of the economy is changing underneath them. Two examples of this stick out.
    The first involves the long-run changes in the behavior of US inflation, especially after the 1970s and
early 1980s. The empirical findings in Section 3 suggest more severe over-extrapolation for inflation in the
modern period, in which inflation itself is less persistent. This could be consistent with agents' perceiving
some "shadow" of the more ferocious shocks and/or timid policy response of the earlier period.42
    A second important event in our sample is the extended stint at the Zero Lower Bound during the Great
Recession. A number of authors have postulated that this unfamiliar and extreme event may have caused
agents to "throw out" their conventional models, justifying more dramatic departures from rational expec-
tations (Angeletos and Sastry, 2020; Farhi and Werning, 2019; Gabaix, 2020; Garcia-Schmidt and Woodford,
2019; Iovino and Sergeyev, 2017). We are sympathetic to this view and not insistent that our conclusions
need to apply for expectations at the ZLB. There is more work to be done in investigating exactly for what
counterfactuals and policy changes our empirical findings may provide good guidance.

The "right" expectations data. This paper, like much of the related empirical literature, has relied pri-
marily on surveys of professional forecasters and analysts, because of data availability and quality. We
provided corroborating evidence from the University of Michigan Consumer Sentiment survey, but the
imprecise measure of the relevant expectations in that survey precluded an equally sharp exercise as that
based on SPF and Blue Chip data. The ideal implementation of our approach, which we leave for the
 42 This explanation relates to a rich literature looking for statistical break points in volatility and/or policy in modern history

(Sargent, 2001; Primiceri, 2005; Sargent, Williams, and Zha, 2006; Sims and Zha, 2006). It is also natural within the GE theory
presented here and in Angeletos and Huo (2019): in this context, the information-driven persistence in inflation is modulated by
policy and, more specifically, decreased by a steeper Taylor rule.



                                                                34
future, requires sufficiently long time series of the expectations of consumers and firms, not only about
macroeconomic outcomes, but also about the objects that matter more directly to their behavior, such as
consumers' own income and firms' own sales.

Applications to finance. The co-existence of under-reaction and over-extrapolation is a classic fact for
many asset prices (De Bondt and Thaler, 1985; Cutler, Poterba, and Summers, 1991; Lakonishok, Shleifer,
and Vishny, 1994). Our findings thus represent a step toward unifying our understanding of imperfect
expectations in both macroeconomics and finance. An interesting possibility for future work is to replicate
our impulse response evidence with dividends or earnings and expectations thereof, to determine if a
similar structural interpretation (noise plus over-reaction) holds true in this domain and also provides
useful predictions for stock price dynamics.




References

Adam, Klaus and Michael Woodford. 2012. "Robustly optimal monetary policy in a microfounded New
  Keynesian model." Journal of Monetary Economics 59 (5):468 ­ 487.

Afrouzi, Hassan and Choongryul Yang. 2019. "Dynamic Rational Inattention and the Phillips Curve."
  mimeo.

Andrade, Philippe and Hervé Le Bihan. 2013. "Inattentive professional forecasters." Journal of Monetary
  Economics 60 (8):967­982.

Angeletos, George-Marios, Fabrice Collard, and Harris Dellas. 2018. "Quantifying Confidence." Economet-
  rica 86 (5):1689­1726.

------. 2019. "Business Cycle Anatomy." American Economic Review conditionallyaccepted.

Angeletos, George-Marios and Zhen Huo. 2019. "Myopia and Anchoring." MIT mimeo .

Angeletos, George-Marios and Jennifer La'O. 2020. "Optimal Monetary Policy with Informational Fric-
  tions." Journal of Political Economy 128 (3).

Angeletos, George-Marios and Chen Lian. 2016. "Incomplete Information in Macroeconomics: Accom-
  modating Frictions in Coordination." Handbook of Macroeconomics 2:1065­1240.

------. 2018. "Forward Guidance without Common Knowledge." American Economic Review 108 (9):2477­
  2512.



                                                    35
Angeletos, George-Marios and Karthik A. Sastry. 2020. "Managing Expectations: Instruments vs. Targets."
  MIT mimeo .

Baker, Scott R., Nicholas Bloom, and Steven J. Davis. 2016. "Measuring Economic Policy Uncertainty."
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 131 (4):1593­1636.

Barberis, Nicholas, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. 1998. "A model of investor sentiment." Journal of
  Financial Economics 49 (3):307 ­ 343.

Barsky, Robert B. and Eric R. Sims. 2011. "News shocks and business cycles." Journal of Monetary Eco-
  nomics 58 (3):273 ­ 289.

Bhandari, Anmol, Jaroslav Borovicka, and Paul Ho. 2019. "Survey Data and Subjective Beliefs in Business
  Cycle Models." University of Minnesota, New York University and Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond.

Bloom, Nicholas. 2009a. "The impact of uncertainty shocks." Econometrica 77 (3):623­685.

------. 2009b. "The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks." Econometrica 77 (3):623­685.

Bloom, Nicholas, Max Floetotto, Nir Jaimovich, Itay Saporta-Eksten, and Stephen J. Terry. 2018. "Really
  Uncertain Business Cycles." Econometrica forthcoming.

Bordalo, Pedro, Nicola Gennaioli, Yueran Ma, and Andrei Shleifer. 2018. "Over-reaction in Macroeconomic
  Expectations." NBER Working Paper No. 24932 .

Bordalo, Pedro, Nicola Gennaioli, and Andrei Shleifer. 2017. "Diagnostic Expectations and Credit Cycles."
  The Journal of Finance 73 (1):199­227.

Bordalo, Pedro, Nicola Gennaioli, Andrei Shleifer, and Stephen J. Terry. 2019. "Real Credit Cycles." mimeo .

Brunnermeier, Markus K. and Jonathan A. Parker. 2005. "Optimal Expectations." American Economic Re-
  view 95 (4):1092­1118.

Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo. 2016. "Understanding Booms and Busts in Hous-
  ing Markets." Journal of Political Economy 124 (4):1088­1147.

Caballero, Ricardo and Alp Simsek. 2017. "A Risk-centric Model of Demand Recessions and Macropruden-
  tial Policy." miméo, MIT.

Caballero, Ricardo J. and Alp Simsek. 2019. "Monetary Policy with Opinionated Markets." miméo, MIT.

Caplin, Andrew and John V Leahy. 2019. "Wishful Thinking." Working Paper 25707, National Bureau of
  Economic Research.

Carroll, Christopher D. 2001. "The Epidemiology of Macroeconomic Expectations." Working Paper 8695,
  National Bureau of Economic Research.


                                                    36
Carroll, Christopher D. 2003. "Macroeconomic Expectations of Households and Professional Forecasters."
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (1):269­298.

Christiano, Lawrence J., Roberto Motto, and Massimo Rostagno. 2014. "Risk Shocks." American Economic
  Review 104 (1):27­65.

Coibion, Olivier and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. 2012. "What Can Survey Forecasts Tell Us about Information
  Rigidities?" Journal of Political Economy 120 (1):116­159.

------. 2015. "Information Rigidity and the Expectations Formation Process: A Simple Framework and
  New Facts." American Economic Review 105 (8):2644­78.

Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Saten Kumar. 2018. "How Do Firms Form Their Expectations?
  New Survey Evidence." American Economic Review 108 (9):2671­2713.

Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Saten Kumar, and Jane Ryngaert. 2018. "Do You Know That I Know
  That You Know...? Higher-Order Beliefs in Survey Data." NBER Working Paper No. 24987 .

Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Tiziano Ropele. 2019. "Inflation Expectations and Firm Deci-
  sions: New Causal Evidence*." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 135 (1):165­219.

Cutler, David M., James M. Poterba, and Lawrence H. Summers. 1991. "Speculative Dynamics." The Review
  of Economic Studies 58 (3):529­546.

D'Acunto, Francesco, Ulrike Malmendier, Juan Ospina, and Michael Weber. 2019. "Exposure to Daily Price
  Changes and Inflation Expectations." Working Paper 26237, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Daniel, Kent, David Hirshleifer, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam. 1998. "Investor Psychology and Security
  Market Under- and Overreactions." The Journal of Finance 53 (6):1839­1885.

Das, Sreyoshi, Camelia M Kuhnen, and Stefan Nagel. 2020. "Socioeconomic status and macroeconomic
  expectations." The Review of Financial Studies 33 (1):395­432.

De Bondt, Werner FM and Richard Thaler. 1985. "Does the stock market overreact?" The Journal of Finance
  40 (3):793­805.

Dean, Mark and Nate Leigh Neligh. 2017. "Experimental tests of rational inattention." .

Del Negro, Marco, Marc P Giannoni, and Christina Patterson. 2015. "The Forward Guidance Puzzle." FRB
  of New York mimeo .

Eusepi, Stefano and Bruce Preston. 2011. "Expectations, Learning, and Business Cycle Fluctuations."
  American Economic Review 101 (6):2844­72.

Evans, George W and Seppo Honkapohja. 2001. Learning and expectations in macroeconomics. Princeton
  University Press.


                                                    37
Farhi, Emmanuel and Iván Werning. 2019. "Monetary Policy, Bounded Rationality, and Incomplete Mar-
  kets." American Economic Review 109 (11):3887­3928.

Fuhrer, Jeffrey C. 2018. "Intrinsic expectations persistence: evidence from professional and household
  survey expectations." Working Papers 18-9, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston.

Fuster, Andreas, David Laibson, and Brock Mendel. 2010. "Natural Expectations and Macroeconomic Fluc-
  tuations." Journal of Economic Perspectives 24 (4):67­84.

Gabaix, Xavier. 2016. "Behavioral Macroeconomics Via Sparse Dynamic Programming." NBER Working
  Paper No. 21848 .

------. 2019. "Behavioral inattention." In Handbook of Behavioral Economics: Foundations and Appli-
  cations, vol. 2, edited by B. Douglas Bernheim, Stefano DellaVigna, and David Laibson, chap. 4. North-
  Holland, 261 ­ 343.

------. 2020. "A Behavioral New Keynesian Model." American Economic Review forthcoming.

Galí, Jordi. 1999. "Technology, Employment, and the Business Cycle: Do Technology Shocks Explain Ag-
  gregate Fluctuations?" American Economic Review 89 (1):249­271.

Garcia-Schmidt, Mariana and Michael Woodford. 2019. "Are Low Interest Rates Deflationary? A Paradox of
  Perfect-Foresight Analysis." American Economic Review 109 (1):86­120.

Geanakoplos, John. 2010. "The leverage cycle." In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2009, Volume 24. Uni-
  versity of Chicago Press, 1­65.

Gennaioli, Nicola, Yueran Ma, and Andrei Shleifer. 2015. "Expectations and investment." In NBER Macroe-
  conomics Annual 2015, Volume 30. University of Chicago Press.

Greenwood, Robin and Andrei Shleifer. 2014. "Expectations of returns and expected returns." Review of
  Financial Studies 27 (3):714­746.

Guo, Hongye and Jessica A Wachter. 2019. "'Superstitious' Investors." Working Paper 25603, National
  Bureau of Economic Research.

Hamilton, James D. 1996. "This is what happened to the oil price-macroeconomy relationship." Journal of
  Monetary Economics 38 (2):215­220.

Hansen, Lars Peter and Thomas J. Sargent. 2012. "Three Types of Ambiguity." Journal of Monetary Eco-
  nomics 59 (5):422­445.

Hong, Harrison and Jeremy C. Stein. 1999. "A Unified Theory of Underreaction, Momentum Trading, and
  Overreaction in Asset Markets." The Journal of Finance 54 (6):2143­2184.

Ilut, Cosmin L and Martin Schneider. 2014. "Ambiguous Business Cycles." American Economic Review
  104 (8):2368­2399.

                                                   38
Iovino, Luigi and Dmitriy Sergeyev. 2017. "Quantitative Easing without Rational Expectations." Work in
  progress .

Jordà, Òscar. 2005. "Estimation and Inference of Impulse Responses by Local Projections." American Eco-
  nomic Review 95 (1):161­182.

Justiniano, Alejandro, Giorgio E. Primiceri, and Andrea Tambalotti. 2010. "Investment Shocks and Business
  Cycles." Journal of Monetary Economics 57 (2):132­145.

Kiley, Michael T. 2007. "A Quantitative Comparison of Sticky-Price and Sticky-Information Models of Price
  Setting." Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 39 (s1):101­125.

Kleibergen, Frank and Richard Paap. 2006. "Generalized reduced rank tests using the singular value de-
  composition." Journal of econometrics 133 (1):97­126.

Kohlhas, Alexandre and Tobias Broer. 2019. "Forecaster (Mis-)Behavior." IIES miméo .

Kohlhas, Alexandre and Ansgar Walther. 2018. "Asymmetric Attention." IIES miméo .

Lakonishok, Josef, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny. 1994. "Contrarian Investment, Extrapolation, and
  Risk." The Journal of Finance 49 (5):1541­1578.

Landier, Augustin, Yueran Ma, and David Thesmar. 2019. "Biases in expectations: Experimental evidence."
  Available at SSRN 3046955 .

Lorenzoni, G. 2010. "Optimal Monetary Policy with Uncertain Fundamentals and Dispersed Information."
  The Review of Economic Studies 77 (1):305­338.

Lucas, Robert E. Jr. 1972. "Expectations and the Neutrality of Money." Journal of Economic Theory
  4 (2):103­124.

Mackowiak, Bartosz and Mirko Wiederholt. 2009. "Optimal Sticky Prices under Rational Inattention."
  American Economic Review 99 (3):769­803.

Ma´
  ckowiak, Bartosz and Mirko Wiederholt. 2015. "Business Cycle Dynamics under Rational Inattention."
  The Review of Economic Studies 82 (4):1502­1532.

Malmendier, Ulrike and Stefan Nagel. 2016. "Learning from inflation experiences." The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics 131 (1):53­87.

Mankiw, N Gregory and Ricardo Reis. 2002. "Sticky Information versus Sticky Prices: A Proposal to Replace
  the New Keynesian Phillips Curve." Quarterly Journal of Economics :1295­1328.

------. 2007. "Sticky information in general equilibrium." Journal of the European Economic Association
  5 (2-3):603­613.



                                                    39
Mankiw, N Gregory, Ricardo Reis, and Justin Wolfers. 2004. "Disagreement about inflation expectations."
  In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2003, Volume 18. The MIT Press, 209­270.

Marcet, Albert and Thomas J Sargent. 1989. "Convergence of least squares learning mechanisms in self-
  referential linear stochastic models." Journal of Economic theory 48 (2):337­368.

Matejka, Filip. 2015. "Rationally inattentive seller: Sales and discrete pricing." The Review of Economic
  Studies forthcoming.

Melosi, Leonardo. 2016. "Signalling effects of monetary policy." The Review of Economic Studies 84 (2):853­
  884.

Molavi, Pooya. 2019. "Macroeconomics with Learning and Misspecification: A General Theory and Appli-
  cations." miméo, MIT.

Moore, Don A and Paul J Healy. 2008. "The trouble with overconfidence." Psychological review 115 (2):502.

Morris, Stephen and Hyun Song Shin. 2002. "Social Value of Public Information." American Economic
  Review 92 (5):1521­1534.

------. 2006. "Inertia of Forward-looking Expectations." The American Economic Review :152­157.

Nagel, Rosemarie. 1995. "Unraveling in Guessing Games: An Experimental Study." The American Economic
  Review 85 (5):1313­1326.

Nimark, Kristoffer. 2008. "Dynamic Pricing and Imperfect Common Knowledge." Journal of Monetary
  Economics 55 (2):365­382.

Paciello, Luigi and Mirko Wiederholt. 2014. "Exogenous Information, Endogenous Information, and Opti-
  mal Monetary Policy." Review of Economic Studies 81 (1):356­388.

Piergallini, Alessandro. 2007. "Real Balance Effects and Monetary Policy." Economic Inquiry 44 (3):497­511.

Primiceri, Giorgio E. 2005. "Time Varying Structural Vector Autoregressions and Monetary Policy." The
  Review of Economic Studies 72 (3):821­852.

Romer, Christina D. and David H. Romer. 2004. "A New Measure of Monetary Shocks: Derivation and
  Implications." American Economic Review 94 (4):1055­1084.

Sargent, Thomas, Noah Williams, and Tao Zha. 2006. "Shocks and Government Beliefs: The Rise and Fall
  of American Inflation." American Economic Review 96 (4):1193­1224.

Sargent, Thomas J. 2001. The conquest of American inflation. Princeton University Press.

Sims, Christopher A. 1980. "Macroeconomics and Reality." Econometrica 48 (1):1­48.




                                                    40
Sims, Christopher A. 2003.   "Implications of Rational Inattention."   Journal of Monetary Economics
  50 (3):665­690.

------. 2010. "Rational Inattention and Monetary Economics." Handbook of Monetary Economics 3:155­
  181.

Sims, Christopher A. and Tao Zha. 2006. "Were There Regime Switches in U.S. Monetary Policy?" American
  Economic Review 96 (1):54­81.

Stock, James H. and Motohiro Yogo. 2005. Testing for weak instruments in Linear Iv regression. United
  Kingdom: Cambridge University Press, 80­108.

Uhlig, Harald. 2003. "What Moves Real GNP?" mimeo.

Woodford, Michael. 2003. "Imperfect Common Knowledge and the Effects of Monetary Policy." Knowledge,
  Information, and Expectations in Modern Macroeconomics: In Honor of Edmund S. Phelps .

------. 2018. "Monetary Policy Analysis When Planning Horizons Are Finite." In NBER Macroeconomics
  Annual 2018, Volume 33. University of Chicago Press.




                                                  41
                                                            Appendices
A Extra Tables and Figures


                              Table A.1: Regression (1), Robustness to Data Choices and Horizons

                                                                         Unemployment                          Inflation
                       Sample                horizon =             1          2       3               1            2          3

                                          Revisiont (K CG )      0.384         0.606      0.741      0.649      1.048        1.528
                                                                (0.128)       (0.178)    (0.232)    (0.290)    (0.337)      (0.418)
                 Full, Vintage, SPF
                                                 R2              0.111         0.143      0.111      0.122      0.200        0.278
                                                 N                196           196        191        195        195          190

                                          Revisiont (K CG )      0.385         0.657      0.809     -0.100      0.160        0.292
                                                                (0.203)       (0.255)    (0.305)    (0.159)    (0.174)      (0.191)
                1984-, Vintage, SPF
                                                 R2              0.116         0.195      0.159      0.002      0.005        0.016
                                                 N                136           136        136        135        135          135

                                          Revisiont (K CG )      0.411         0.612      0.731      0.578      0.991        1.403
                                                                (0.127)       (0.180)    (0.233)    (0.215)    (0.261)      (0.334)
                   Full, Final, SPF
                                                 R2              0.135         0.147      0.108      0.104      0.200        0.249
                                                 N                199           198        192        199        198          192

                                          Revisiont (K CG )      0.310         0.544      0.804      0.024      0.378        0.618
                                                                (0.129)       (0.213)    (0.231)    (0.204)    (0.188)      (0.205)
                 1980-, Vintage, BC
                                                 R2              0.091         0.132      0.149      0.000      0.033        0.067
                                                 N                151           151        150        150        150          149

       Notes: All regressions include a constant. Standard errors are HAC-robust, with a Bartlett kernel and lag length equal to 4 quarters.




                              Table A.2: Regression (2), Robustness to Data Choices and Horizons

                                                                         Unemployment                           Inflation
                    Sample                  horizon =                1        2       3                 1           2           3

                                      Revisioni ,t (K BGMS )      0.186         0.300      0.321     -0.100       0.024       0.143
                                                                 (0.077)       (0.094)    (0.107)    (0.084)     (0.098)     (0.123)
               Full, Vintage, SPF
                                                R2                0.029         0.042      0.028      0.004       0.000       0.005
                                                N                 5,808         5,699      5,383      5,496       5,458       5,147

                                      Revisioni ,t (K BGMS )      0.200         0.296      0.321     -0.100       0.056       0.179
                                                                 (0.075)       (0.090)    (0.106)    (0.075)     (0.091)     (0.122)
                Full, Final, SPF
                                                R2                0.035         0.042      0.028      0.004       0.001       0.006
                                                N                 5,831         5,728      5,419      5,571       5,520       5,226

Notes: All regressions include a constant. Standard errors are clustered two-way by forecaster ID and time period. Both errors and revisions are
winsorized over the sample to restrict to 4 times the inter-quartile range away from the median.




                                                                         42
                                        Table A.3: Regression (3), Robustness to Data Choices

                                                                                      Forecast Error
                                                                              Unemployment         Inflation
                                    Sample            data for error =       vintage  final   vintage      final

                                                          x t (K KW )            ­0.061     -0.061          0.111      0.097
                                                                                 (0.056)    (0.056)        (0.075)    (0.066)
                              Full, Vintage, SPF
                                                               R2                 0.016      0.016          0.058      0.047
                                                               N                   194        195            193        195

                                                          x t (K KW )            -0.058     -0.058          0.117      0.115
                                                                                 (0.056)    (0.056)        (0.078)    (0.069)
                               Full, Final, SPF
                                                               R2                 0.014      0.009          0.062      0.063
                                                               N                   194        195            192        194

       Notes: All regressions include a constant. Standard errors are HAC-robust, with a Bartlett kernel and lag length equal to 4 quarters.




                                         Table A.4: Calibrating with Unconditional Moments

                                                      Unemployment                            Inflation
                                                   1968-2017 1984-2017                 1968-2017 1984-2017

                                                               0.91                                 0.89
                                        K CG           0.741             0.809             1.528            0.292
                                       K BGMS          0.321             0.398             0.143            -0.263
                                        K KW          -0.061            -0.036             0.111            -0.068

                                           ^          0.972             0.966              0.893            0.947
                                           ^          0.449             0.418              0.335            1.850
                                                      2.028             2.231              0.464            0.693

                       Notes: The persistence valeus come from band-pass filtered data on final outcomes over our sample.




                                                      Table A.5: First-stage F Statistics

                                                                  Unemployment                          Inflation
                                                               Outcomes Forecasts                  Outcomes Forecasts

                                           N                                188                               188
                                           F                        1.686           2.941           2.077            2.381

                               endogenous regressors                         3                                 3
                                   instruments                               8                                 8

Notes: The F values are a (multivariate extension of) the Kleibergen and Paap (2006) r k statistic and can be compared with critical values reported
in Stock and Yogo (2005) for given levels of tolerated bias.




                                                                            43
                                                                           Figure A.1: The Dynamic Response of Unemployment and Inflation, Robustness

                                    SPF, Modern Data, 1968-2017                                                                   SPF, Modern Data, 1984-2017                                                               Blue Chip, Modern Data, 1980-2017
                                            Outcomes and Forecasts                                                                        Outcomes and Forecasts                                                                        Outcomes and Forecasts
                                            D                                  S                                                          D                                  S                                                          D                                  S
                                            t                                  t                                                          t                                  t                                                          t                                  t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.75
                          0.4                        outcome                                                           0.50                        outcome                                                                                       outcome
                                                     forecast                                                                                      forecast                                                          0.50                        forecast
                          0.2                                                                                          0.25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.25
                          0.0                                                                                          0.00




         Unemp. (3Q)
                                                                                                  Unemp. (3Q)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.00




                                                                                                                                                                                                Unemp. (3Q)
                                                                                                                       0.25
                          0.2                                                                                                                                                                                        0.25
                                                                                                                        0.4
                          0.4                                                                                                                                                                                         0.5
                                                                                                                        0.2
                          0.2
                                                                                                                        0.0                                                                                           0.0
                          0.0




                                                                                                  Inflation (3Q)




         Inflation (3Q)
                                                                                                                                                                                                Inflation (3Q)
                                                                                                                        0.2
                          0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.5
                                0   4   8       12     16       20 0   4   8       12   16   20                               0   4   8       12     16       20 0   4   8       12   16   20                               0   4   8       12     16       20 0   4   8       12   16   20

                                                     Forecast Errors                                                                               Forecast Errors                                                                               Forecast Errors
                                            D                                  S                                                          D                                  S                                                          D                                  S
                                            t                                  t                                                          t                                  t                                                          t                                  t
                          0.4                                                                                                                                                                                         0.4
                                                                                                                        0.4
                          0.2                                                                                           0.2                                                                                           0.2




44
                          0.0                                                                                           0.0                                                                                           0.0




         Unemp. (3Q)
                                                                                                      Unemp. (3Q)
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Unemp. (3Q)




                          0.2                                                                                           0.2                                                                                           0.2

                          0.4
                                                                                                                        0.2                                                                                           0.2
                          0.2
                          0.0                                                                                           0.0                                                                                           0.0




         Inflation (3Q)
                                                                                                      Inflation (3Q)
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Inflation (3Q)




                          0.2                                                                                           0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.2
                                0   4   8       12     16       20 0   4   8       12   16   20                               0   4   8       12     16       20 0   4   8       12   16   20                               0   4   8       12     16       20 0   4   8       12   16   20

     Notes: The sample period is Q4 1968 to Q4 2017. The shaded areas are 68% confidence intervals based on HAC standard errors with a Bartlett kernel and 4 lags. In the first row of each panel the outcome
     is u t and the forecast is E
                                ¯ t -3 [u t ]; in the second row the outcome is t ,t -4 , or annual inflation, and the forecast is E
                                                                                                                                   ¯ t -3 [t ,t -4 ].
                                           Figure A.2: Dynamic Responses in the Michigan Survey


                                             Unemployment up                                          Price changes, annual
                            0.1                                                                                             outcome
                                                                                       0.50                                 forecast
                            0.0                                                        0.25

                            0.1                                                        0.00

                                   0       4        8        12         16       20           0       4       8        12   16         20

Notes: The sample period is Q1 1968 to Q4 2017. The shaded areas are 68% confidence intervals based on HAC standard errors with a Bartlett
                                                                                       ¯ t -4 [UnempUpt ,t -4 ]; in the second plot the outcome is
kernel and 4 lags. In the first plot the outcome is UnempUpt ,t -4 and the forecast is E
                                                   ¯ t -4 [t ,t -4 ].
t ,t -4 , or annual inflation, and the forecast is E




                                                Figure A.3: Responses to Other Structural Shocks

                                                           Gali (1999): Technology Inflation
                                         Outcome                     Forecast         Forecast Error
                             0.5
                                                                                                                                 ARMA-IV
                             0.0                                                                                                 Proj. (± 1 SE)

                             0.5
                                   0        8         16          0          8        16          0       8       16
                                                              Hamilton (1996): Oil Inflation
                                         Outcome                     Forecast           Forecast Error
                             10                                                                                                  ARMA-IV
                              0                                                                                                  Proj. (± 1 SE)
                             10
                                   0        8         16          0          8        16          0       8       16
                          Justiniano, Primiceri, and Tambalotti (2010): Investment Shock Unemployment
                                     Outcome               Forecast            Forecast Error
                             0.2                                                                                                 ARMA-IV
                             0.0                                                                                                 Proj. (± 1 SE)

                             0.2
                                   0        8         16          0          8        16          0       8       16
Notes: The sample period is Q4 1968 to Q4 2017. The x-axis denotes quarters from the shock (starting at 0). The shaded areas are 68% confidence
intervals based on HAC standard errors with a Bartlett kernel and 4 lags. The first shock is a technology shock à la (Galí, 1999), as obtained from
Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2012) and normalized to be inflationary and contractionary. The second is an oil shock à la Hamilton (1996), again
obtained from Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2012). The third is the investment-specific shock of Justiniano, Primiceri, and Tambalotti (2010),
updated to cover the full sample until 2017. See Appendix B for details.




                                                                                  45
             Figure A.4: Dynamic Responses in the Angeletos, Collard, and Dellas (2019) SVAR, All Responses

                            Unemployment shock                                                                           Inflation shock
          0.4                                                                                      0.2                                0.1
                                              0.3

          0.2                                                                                                                        0.05
                                              0.2                                                  0.1

            0                                 0.1                                                                                       0
                                                                                                     0
         -0.2                                         0                                                                              -0.05


         -0.4                                -0.1                                                  -0.1
                 0        10           20                     0                10           20            0        10           20           0   10   20
          0.1                                                                                      0.6
                                              0.1
                                                                                                                                      0.4
            0                               0.05                                                   0.4
                                                      0
          -0.1                                                                                     0.2                                0.2
                                            -0.05
                                             -0.1                                                    0
          -0.2
                                            -0.15                                                                                       0

          -0.3                                                                                     -0.2
                 0        10           20                     0                10           20            0       10            20           0   10   20
         0.05                                                                                      0.3
                                            0.04                                                                                     0.25
                                            0.02                                                   0.2                                0.2
            0                                         0                                                                              0.15
                                            -0.02                                                  0.1
                                                                                                                                      0.1
        -0.05                               -0.04                                                                                    0.05
                                                                                                     0
                                            -0.06
                                                                                                                                        0
                                            -0.08                                                  -0.1
          -0.1
                 0        10           20                     0                10           20            0       10            20           0   10   20


Notes: The sample period is Q4 1968 to Q4 2017. The x-axis denotes quarters from the shock (starting at 0). The shaded areas are 68% high-
                                                                                                                                  ¯ t -3 [u t ]; in
posterior-density regions and the point estimate is the posterior median. In the first row the outcome is u t and the forecast is E
                                                                                 ¯ t -3 [t ,t -4 ]; and in the last row, the outcome is t ,t -1 , or one-
the second row the outcome is t ,t -4 , or annual inflation, and the forecast is E
                                       ¯ t -3 [t ,t -1 ]. The first column shows the response to a shock that maximizes the business-cycle variation in
quarter inflation, and the forecast is E
unemployment; the second for a shock that maximizes the business-cycle variation in GDP deflator inflation.




                                                       Figure A.5: Dynamic Response of Dispersion

                                                                                      Forecast Dispersion (IQR)
                                                                                      D                            S
                                                                                      t                            t
                                                                  0.050
                                             Unemp. (3Q)




                                                                  0.025
                                                                  0.000
                                                                  0.025


                                                                   0.05
                                             Inflation (3Q)




                                                                   0.00
                                                                   0.05
                                                                          0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20


Notes: The sample period is Q4 1968 to Q4 2017. The x-axis denotes quarters from the shock (starting at 0). The shaded areas are 68% confidence
intervals based on HAC standard errors with a Bartlett kernel and 4 lags. The outcome variable is the cross-sectional interquartile range of
forecasts in the SPF.




                                                                                              46
B Conditional vs. Unconditional Dynamics

Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2012) test models of expectations inertia by estimating the dynamic response of out-
comes, forecasts, and forecast errors to shocks, just like this paper does in Section 5. But, while this paper and
Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2012) agree about the initial under-reaction of professional forecasters to economic
shocks, only the present paper finds robust evidence of the "over-shooting" that we characterize as Fact 4. What
explains the differences in results, given that our analyses study similar data over a similar time period?
    In this Appendix, we will show that a major difference is estimation methodology--and we will argue that our
approach is preferable.
    To this goal, we will focus on one main result from Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2012): that inflation expecta-
tions respond sluggishly to an inflationary negative supply shock. We will recreate this fact using the data directly
provided in that paper for the strongest comparability, although these data are of course essentially identical to those
used in our own main analysis.43
    To identify a technology shock, the authors run a four-lag, three-variable VAR with labor productivity, the change
in labor hours, and the (one-quarter-ahead) GDP deflator inflation and apply the long-run restrictions introduced
by Galí (1999).44 Finally, to make the shock inflationary like our main example shock is, we take the negative shock
which corresponds to a technological contraction.

Their method. To estimate impulse responses, Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2012) apply the following method due
to Romer and Romer (2004). For a given variable z t (e.g., forecast errors), they estimate the empirical ARMA process
via Ordinary Least Squares (OLS):

                                                       P                     K
                                            zt =  +          p · z t -p +          k · t -k + u t                                (22)
                                                      p =1                  k =0

where the (t -k )K
                 k =0
                      are the identified shocks. The authors use information criteria to pick an optimal lag length
combination (P, K ). In the empirical application, for estimating the response of inflation, forecasts, and forecast
errors to the technology shocks, they find that K = 1 and P = 1 uniformly fits the data the best subject to their chosen
penalty for extra parameters.
    But now note that P = 1 effectively imposes that the IRF of forecast errors cannot switch signs. Indeed, abstract-
ing from MA term (which after all turns out to be small in their estimation), their method effectively imposes that
the IRF of the average forecast error to the technology shock is that of the AR(1) process that best describes the
unconditional dynamics of the average forecast errors.

Our method. The approach we take in Section 5 has two key differences. First, we fix a larger value of P (in our
preferred specification, P = 3), in anticipation of the fact that the model may demand more complex dynamics than
an AR(1). Second, we instrument for lagged values of z t using past shocks. Intuitively, this isolates the possibility
that dynamics may be "shock-specific" and not informed entirely by the unconditional auto-covariance patterns in
z t . This is to be expected if the data-generating process does in fact involve multiple shocks and/or variables, so
thinking of the model as exactly a single-shock ARMA could be very inaccurate.
 43 There are only three salient differences. The first is that Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2012) use forecast means rather than

medians as a measure of the aggregate. The second is that Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2012) measure expected annual inflation
with the forecast of the 4-quarter-ahead price level relative to the now-cast of the (unreleased) current-quarter price level; whereas
our main analysis uses three-quarters-ahead relative to the previous quarter. And the third is that their sample period runs from
Q4 of 1974 to Q4 of 2007.
 44 The estimation period they use for this VAR covers Q2 1952 to Q3 2007.




                                                                    47
    For comparability with (22), we will estimate the following system of equations with two-stage least squares. The
reduced-form equation is exactly (22) with K = 1 and P = 3 (to capture higher-order dynamics):
                                                          3                  1
                                             zt =  +           p z t -p +          k t -k + u t                                (23)
                                                        p =1                k =0

The first-stage relates the lags of z t with shocks before t - 1. In vector form,

                                                        Z t -1 =  + E t -2  + e t                                              (24)

with Z t -1 = [z t -1 , z t -2 , z t -3 ] and E t -2 = [t - j ] J
                                                                j =2
                                                                     . Like in the main text, we have J = 9, which means there are 8
instruments. Armed with these IV estimates of the  and  coefficients, we can calculate an alternative impulse
response.

Local projections. Finally, we can also run the following local projection regression separately for each horizon h :

                                              z t +h = h + h ,d · t +  Wt + u t +h                                             (25)

For controls Wt we will use the four lags each of labor productivity, the change in labor hours, and inflation that en-
tered the original VAR. This is necessary, in the smaller sample, to make the estimated shock series truly orthogonal
to lagged macro conditions.

Results. Figure A.6 compares the results, extended out to 28 quarters. Plotted in the blue dotted line, with a shaded
68% confidence interval, is the projection estimate of impulse responses for outcomes (left), forecasts (middle), and
forecast errors. Plotted in green is the point estimate of the Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2012) method, or the
estimate that comes from (22). Plotted in orange are the estimates from the IV method, or the combination of (23)
and (24). And plotted in the orange dashed line is the difference between the orange lines for outcomes and forecasts,
which is a different estimator for the response of forecast errors.

                       Figure A.6: Comparison of IRF Methods for Response to Technology Shock

                                Gali (Constructed by CG12): Technology Inflation
                               Outcome         Forecast   Forecast Error
                     0.6
                     0.4                                                                          CG (RR)
                                                                                                  ARMA-IV: Direct
                     0.2                                                                          ARMA-IV: Diff.
                     0.0                                                                          Projection (± 1 SE)
                     0.2
                     0.4
                           0    8   16 24      0    8     16 24          0         8   16 24


    The green lines in all cases are much more persistent than the projection responses. In the first and third case,
in particular, the green lines smoothly and slowly converge back to zero. The unrestricted projection estimator,
however, suggests that the response of inflation eventually turns negative (slightly, but not completely, offsetting the
effects on the price level) and that the response of forecast errors also turns negative.
    The ARMA-IV estimator, compared to the Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2012) method, gives a very similar re-
sponse of forecast errors but a much less persistent response of the outcome. This estimation of the outcome IRF
more closely matches the projection estimates. As such the "difference" estimator, or the dashed orange line in the
third panel, shows evidence of over-extrapolation in the point estimate at moderate (>10 quarter) horizons. The
ARMA-IV estimator directly applied to forecast errors, on the other hand, shows only modest evidence of over-
shooting.


                                                                    48
Bottom line. A method that imposes uniform dynamics as if the data-generating process involved only one shock,
like that introduced by Romer and Romer (2004) and adopted by Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2012), may provide
a distorted picture of the conditional dynamics. The possible solutions include the "shock-specific" IV approach
introduced here, a flexible local-projection, or a more structured multi-variate model. The trade-offs between these
models involve robustness and small-sample efficiency.


C Noise and a Hybrid Regression

Proposition 1 underscored that, away from rational expectations, the CG regression coefficient is no more a measure
of the informational friction alone: it is "contaminated" by the departure from the rationality. But the BGMS coeffi-
cient isolates the role of the latter. This suggests that the gap between the two coefficients ought to say something
about the actual level of noise.
    We next show how one can arrive at essentially the same answer with a "hybrid" of the CG and BGMS regressions.
Let (Vind , Vagg ) respectively denote the variances of the idiosyncratic and aggregate forecast revisions.

Lemma. The following regression holds in the theory:

                                                                             Vagg
                              Errori ,t ,k = K CG · Revisiont ,k - K noise · V      · Revisioni ,t ,k + u i ,t ,k              (26)
                                                                             idio


where Revisioni ,t ,k  Revisioni ,t ,k - Revisiont ,k and

                                                                   V
                                                                  ind
                                                 K noise  K CG - Vagg K BGMS = 1 -1                                            (27)

    From the perspective of this regression, K CG measures the predictability in individual forecast errors attributed
to the common component of the lagged forecast revisions, and K noise the one attributed to the purely idiosyncratic
components of the lagged forecast revisions. As already explained, the former confounds the effects of misspecifica-
tion and information. The latter, which is again the gap between K CG and K BGMS appropriately rescaled, isolates the
effect of the idiosyncratic noise.45
    Table A.6 shows results from estimating the hybrid regression over the full and restricted samples for all horizons
of forecast. Across these margins, the estimated value of K noise is positive (and statistically different from zero). This
is lines up with the following observation: if we go back to the results presented in Section 3 and the Appendix
regarding Facts 1 and 2, we can readily verify that K BGMS was consistently lower that K CG , even in specifications
where both were positive.46
    Of course, as evident from the previous discussion, the hybrid regression does not provide independent infor-
mation compared to Facts 1 and 2. The coefficients of the hybrid regression can be inferred from the original CG and
BGMS regressions, and vice versa, up to small-sample differences between some moments.47 What this regression
however accomplishes is to combine Facts 1 and 2 in way that more clearly illustrates how the gap between K CG and
K BGMS , or more precisely the object K noise described above, provides the needed "correction" of the original CG co-
efficient. With rational expectations, K noise coincides with K CG . Away from that benchmark, K noise partials out from
K CG the component due to irrationality. In both cases, K noise isolates the effect of idiosyncratic noise.48
 45 To the best of our knowledge, the particular regression we propose here and the offered structural interpretation are novel.

However, Fuhrer (2018) and Kohlhas and Broer (2019) contain a few empirical specifications that have a similar spirit, namely the
separately test the extent to which aggregate-level and ind individual-level variables help predict forecast errors.
  46 The same seems to be true for almost all the specifications considered in Bordalo et al. (2018), including those regarding a

variety of interest rates and spreads.
  47 To be precise, one also needs to compute V
                                               idio and Vagg , the variances of, respectively, the individual and aggregate forecast



                                                                    49
                                                    Table A.6: The Hybrid Regression (26)

                                                                             Unemployment                               Inflation
                  Sample                                                1         2       3                     1           2           3

                                  Revisioni ,t ,k (-K noise )         -0.183       -0.189    -0.166          -0.422        -0.427     -0.346
                                                                      (0.035)      (0.043)   (0.043)         (0.047)       (0.036)    (0.042)
                                     Revisiont ,k (K agg )             0.441       0.6421     0.745           0.675         1.108      1.550
                    Full
                                                                      (0.114)      (0.138)   (0.173)         (0.209)       (0.245)    (0.278)
                                               R2                      0.120        0.147     0.103           0.168         0.194      0.211
                                               N                       5,808        5,699     5,383           5,496         5,458      5,147

                                  Revisioni ,t ,k (-K noise )         -0.217       -0.264    -0.162          -0.517        -0.481     -0.410
                                                                      (0.039)      (0.043)   (0.053)         (0.034)       (0.035)    (0.041)
                                     Revisiont ,k (K agg )             0.462        0.722     0.841          -0.070         0.179      0.412
                 Post 1984
                                                                      (0.159)      (0.183)   (0.210)         (0.185)       (0.178)    (0.180)
                                               R2                      0.136        0.195     0.152           0.106         0.085      0.072
                                               N                       3,986        3,918     3,769           3,779         3,745      3,643

Notes: The observation is a forecaster by quarter between Q4-1968 and Q4-2017. Standard errors are clustered two- way by
forecaster ID and time period. Both errors and revisions are winsorized over the sample to restrict to 4 times the inter-quartile
range away from the median. The data used for outcomes are first-release ("vintage").




D Proofs

The following lemma, which is proved below, will help in proving the results in the main text:

Lemma 1. The one-step-ahead forecasts obey

                                                                 ^)     1                   ^)     1        1      1
                           Ei ,t [x t +1 ] = ^ Ei ,t [x t ] = (^-               s i ,t = (^-                   + - 2 u i , t
                                                                      1-^L                       1-  ^ L 1 - L t
The corresponding forecast errors obey
                                                                                   1-^L                      ^- ^   1
                                  Errori ,t = x t +1 - Ei ,t [x t +1 ] =                          t +1 -          - 2 u i , t
                                                                            (1 -  L )(1 - ^ L)              1- ^L

And finally the forecast revisions obey
                                                                               (^- ^ )(1 -  ^L)     (^- ^ )(1 - ^L) - 1
                     Revisioni ,t = Ei ,t [x t +1 ] - Ei ,t -1 [x t +1 ] =                      t +                 2 u i ,t
                                                                                            ^
                                                                              (1 -  L )(1 - L )        1 - L^

    Proof. The perceived signal process can be represented as

                                                            t                                         1             1
                                          s i ,t = M(L)           ,         with       M (L ) =     1- ^L     ^- 2 .
                                                           u i ,t

Let B (L) denote the fundamental representation of the perceived signal process,49 which is given by

                                                ^ 1-
                                                    ^L                       1+ ^                                   1+ ^   2
                                                                      ^=1 
                                           1
                              B (L) = ^- 2             ,        where     ^+      +                         ^+
                                                                                                                               -4 .
                                                 1-
                                                ^   ^L                  2     ^                                      ^

revisions. But these variances are already implicit in the calculation of K BGMS and K CG .
  48 The following caveat applies to the adopted interpretation of K
                                                                          noise . In the model we work with in this paper, idiosyncratic
noise is the sole source of heterogeneity in beliefs: irrationality is a (possibly time-varying) fixed effect in the cross-section of the
population. Without this restriction, K noise may confound the effects of "rational" noise (due to idiosyncratic information) and
"irrational" noise (due to idiosyncratic misspecification).
  49 B (L) satisfies the requirement B (L)B (L-1 ) = M (L)M (L-1 ) and B (L) is invertible.



                                                                                50
It is useful to note that ^ <^ , and ^ is decreasing in ^. By the Wiener-Hopf prediction formula, the individual forecast
about x t is

                                                  1                                                            ^
                                                                                                                   1
                               Ei ,t [x t ] =          M (L-1 )B (L-1 )-1               B (L)-1 s i ,t = 1 -            s .
                                                1-  ^L                              +                          ^ 1-  ^ L i ,t

Alternatively, this forecast rule can be written as

                                                    Ei ,t [x t ] = (1 - g
                                                                        ^ )^ Ei ,t -1 [x t -1 ] + g
                                                                                                  ^ s i ,t ,

which is a weighted average of the prior  Ei t -1 [x t -1 ] and the new signal s i ,t , where the weight on the signal is the
                           ^
            ^ = 1- 
Kalman gain g      ^ . In the equations above, note that only perceived 
                   
                                                                        ^ and ^ matter for how agents use their
signals. The actual  and  matter for how the signal s i ,t evolves overtime.

Proof. Accordingly, the one-period ahead forecast is

                                                              ^)      1                  ^)        1     1          1
                        Ei ,t [x t +1 ] = ^ Ei ,t [x t ] = (^-              s i , t = (^-                     t + - 2 u i , t .
                                                                   1-^L                         1 - L 1 -  L
                                                                                                    ^

The individual forecast error and revision are then straightforward to obtain:

                                                                          1-^L                   ^-  ^   1
                         Errori ,t = x t +1 - Ei ,t [x t +1 ] =                         t +1 -         - 2 u i , t ,
                                                                                    ^
                                                                    (1 -  L )(1 - L )               ^
                                                                                                1 - L
                                                                               (    ^
                                                                                ^ - )(1 -   ^L)       (^- ^ )(1 -    ^L) - 1
                     Revisioni ,t    = Ei ,t [x t +1 ] - Ei ,t -1 [x t +1 ] =                   t +                      2 u i ,t .
                                                                                            ^
                                                                              (1 -  L )(1 - L )          1 - L ^




Proof of Proposition 1

Let Vind denote the variance of Revisioni ,t and Vagg denote the variance of Revisiont . First consider the calculation of
K CG . We have

                                                              1-^L                         (^- ^ )(1 -  ^L)
                Cov(Errort , Revisiont ) =Cov                                    t +1 ,                     
                                                        (1 -  L )(1 - ^ L)                (1 -  L )(1 - ^ L) t
                                                               ^
                                                                                    (1 + ^ 2 )(1 -  2 ) + ( ^ +  )( - ^)
                                                =(^-^)               + ( - ^)
                                                          1-   ^2                       (1 -   ^ 2 )(1 -  2 )(1 - ^ )

                                                       (^-^ ) (1 - 
                                                             2     ^                                ^2       2    ^
                                                =^-1
                                                                    ^)
                                                                               + ( - ^ )(^-^ ) (1 +  )(1 -  ) + ( +  )( -  ^)
                                                                                                                              ,
                                                            1-^2                                   (1 - ^ )(1 -  )(1 - 
                                                                                                         2      2      ^ )

which leads to
                                                             KCG = 1 ^-1 - 2 (^ -  ),

where
                                 1 ( ^-^ )2 (1 - ^^)                       1                (1 + ^ 2 )(1 -  2 ) + ( ^ +  )( - ^)
                         1 =                         ,            2 =            (^-^)                                           .
                                Vagg   1-    ^2                           Vagg                  (1 -   ^ 2 )(1 -  2 )(1 - ^ )

As 1 > ^>^ > 0, 1 > 0. To show that 2 > 0, it is equivalent to show that (1 + ^ 2 )(1 -  2 ) + (^ +  )( - ^ ) > 0. Given
that ^ < 1, it follows that

               (1 + ^ 2 )(1 -  2 ) + (^ +  )( - ^ ) > (1 + ^ 2 )(1 -  2 ) + (^ +  )( - 1) = (1 -  )(1 - ^ +^ 2 (1 +  )) > 0.




                                                                               51
    Now turn to the calculation of K BGMS . We have

             Cov(Errori ,t , Revisioni ,t )
                            1-^L      (^-   ^ )(1 -  ^ L)                  ^-   ^   1           (^- ^ )(1 - ^ L) - 1
           =Cov                        t +1 ,              t + Cov -              - 2 u i , t ,                  2 u i ,t
                               ^
                 (1 -  L)(1 - L)     (1 -  L)(1 - L)  ^                  1 - L ^                   1 - L^
                         ^                                 ^2         2     ^
           = - (^- ^)          ^-
                               
                                  + ( - ^ )(^-   ^ ) (1 +  )(1 -  ) + ( +  )( -         ^)
                                                                                              .
                     (1 -  ^ 2)                           (1 - ^ 2 )(1 -  2 )(1 - ^ )

It follows that
                                                K BGMS = -5 (-1 - ^-1 ) + 6 ( - ^ ),

where 5 and 6 are

                              1                 ^                  1             (1 + ^ 2 )(1 -  2 ) + (^ +  )( - ^)
                      5 =           (^-^)               ,   6 =          (^-^)                                       .
                             Vind           (1 - ^ 2)             Vind                      ^
                                                                                     (1 -  )(1 -  )(1 -  )
                                                                                              2       2      ^

    Lastly, we look at K KW . We have

                                                1-^L                      1      ^-1 (
                                                                                      ^-^ )(1 -  ^^ )(1 -  2 ) +  - ^
              Cov(Errort , x t ) = Cov                        t +1 ,         t =                                      ,
                                         (1 -  L)(1 - ^ L)             1 - L                   ^
                                                                                         (1 -  )(1 -  )   2


which leads to
                                                        K KW = 3 ^-1 - 4 (^ -  ),

where 3 and 4 are
                                                       ^- ^                      1
                                                3 =         ,     4 =                       .
                                                      1 - 2                    ^
                                                                          (1 -  )(1 -  2 )2

Proof of Corollary 1

As ^ =  and ^ =  , we have
                                                                             (^-^ )2 (1 - ^^)
                                        Cov(Errort , Revisiont ) = ^-1                        >0
                                                                                1-    ^ 2

                        Cov(Errori ,t , Revisioni ,t ) = 0        and        Cov(Errort , x t ) = ^-1 (^-^ ) > 0,

which together imply

                                       K CG = 1 ^-1 > 0,        K BGMS = 0,       K KW = 3 ^-1 > 0.

As  = ^  , ^  0 and it follows that

                    ^2
                                     1    1 - ^                 ^                     1                           1    1 - ^
            1           ,    2 =        ^
                                                ,       3          ,        4 =              ,   5  0,     6 =       ^
                                                                                                                     
                   Vagg             Vagg 1 -  2              1 - 2                (1 -  2 )2                     Vagg 1 -  2

As a result, the signs of the three regression coefficients are the same as the sign of  - ^.


Proof of Corollary 2

With ^   , K KW > 0, and therefore ^ >  is necessary to make K KW < 0. With ^ =  and ^ >  , both K CG < 0 and
K KW < 0. Therefore, it is necessary to have both ^ <  and ^ >  to allow K CG > 0 and K KW < 0. The sufficiency part
is established by the numerical example and a standard continuity argument.




                                                                       52
Proof of Proposition 2

The law of motion of the average forecast error is given by

                                             1-^L                         - ^ 1     ^-^ 1
                             Errort =                         t +1 =              +            .
                                        (1 -  L)(1 - ^ L)                 -  1 - L  - 
                                                                            ^         ^ 1-^ L t +1

Suppose  > ^ , then  > ^ . The coefficients of the two AR(1) terms are both positive, and the responses are therefore
all positive.
    Suppose  < ^ . Consider the following continuous time version of the response

                                                                     -^ t  ^-^
                                                         g (t ) =        +     ^t,
                                                                               
                                                                     -^     -^

and g (t ) = k when t = k  {0, 1, . . .}. Note that: (1) g (t ) is negative when t is large enough (no matter  > ^ or  < ^ );
(2) when t = 0, g (0) = 1 > 0; (3) there is at most one root of g (t ). As a result, {k }k =1
                                                                                              eventually stay negative, but they
might be positive or negative for k small enough.
    The root of g (t ) is
                                                               log ^ -  - log  ^-^
                                                    k IRF =                        .
                                                                        ^
                                                                    log  - log 
To have {k }     switch signs, it is necessary that g (1) > 0 and ^ >  , which correspond to g (1) =  + ^ -^ > 0 and
            k =1
^ >  , or
                                                          ^ >
                                                             ^-         and ^ > .

Finally, note that k I RF is decreasing in ^ for given ^ , which verifies the claim in the main text that the magnitude of
k I RF reveals information about the relative importance of the two mechanisms.50
      When   ^ >  but ^ > ^ -  , g (1) < 0 and the sequences {k } stay negative all the time.
                                                                              k =1


Proof of Corollary 3

Follows directly from Proposition 2.


Proof of Proposition 3

Aggregate consumption satisfies the fixed point restriction
                                                                                  
                                          ct =          k Et [t +k ] + (1 - )           k Et [c t +k +1 ],
                                                 k =0                            k =0

where we have used the market clearing condition y t = c t , and the assumption that agents observe y t but do not
extract information from it. This aggregate outcome is the outcome of the following beauty-contest game

                                         c i ,t = Ei ,t [t ] + Ei ,t [c i ,t +1 ] + (1 - )Ei ,t [c t +1 ].
 50 On a more technical level, note that, as written, k
                                                        IRF need not be an integer. It is indeed obtained from the continuous-
time limit of the ARMA process that describes the average forecast error. But the result, as stated, holds for the true, discrete-time
process. Also, a small caveat is that in the model with over-extrapolation (^ >  ) but no noise (^  ), right after t = 0, the forecast
error switches sign from positive (by construction, given that the data was hit by an unpredictable innovation) to negative (as a
result of flawed reasoning). That is, 0 = 1 always, but we can have limh 0 h < 0. In the data, given that we properly observe
some average of forecast errors between t = 0 and t = 1 as the "observation" at t = 0, we would expect to see impulse responses of
uniform sign.


                                                                       53
Denote the agent's equilibrium policy function as

                                                                          c i , t = h (L ) s i , t

for some lag polynomial h (L). The actual law of motion of aggregate outcome can then be expressed as follows

                                                                                           h (L)
                                                                   c t = h (L ) t =              t .
                                                                                          1 - L

However, the perceived law of motion by consumers is

                                                                                   h (L)
                                                                          ct =            t .
                                                                                  1-   ^L

As in the case where the outcome is given by the exogenous AR(1) process, the forecast about the fundamental is

                                                                            ^
                                                                                1
                                                     Ei ,t [t ] = 1 -                s  G 1 (L ) s i , t .
                                                                            ^ 1-  ^ L i ,t

Consider the forecast of the future own and average actions. The perceived law of motion of c i ,t +1 and c t +1 are

                                                 h (L)               t                                        1   h (L)    t
                                  c t +1 =    L (1-  ^ L)    0             , c i ,t +1 - c t +1 = 0        ^- 2     L
                                                                                                                                 ,
                                                                    u i ,t                                                u i ,t

and the forecasts are
                                                                           ^
                                                                                  h (L )        h ( ^ )(1 - ^ L)
                     Ei ,t [c t +1 ] = G 2 (L)s i ,t ,       G 2 (L)         ^             -                          ,
                                                                                  ^      ^
                                                                           ^ (1 - L)(L - ) (1 - 
                                                                                                  ^       ^
                                                                                                ^ )(L - )(1 -    ^ L)

                                                                                  ^ h (L)(L - ^ ) h ( ^ )(^ - ^)  ^ h (0) 1 - ^L
                Ei ,t c i ,t +1 - c t +1 = G 3 (L)s i ,t ,           G 3 (L )                    -              -
                                                                                  ^   L(L - ^)       ^ (L - ^)    ^ L     1-  ^L

Recall that fixed point problem that characterizes the equilibrium is

                                                c i ,t = Ei ,t [t ] + Ei ,t [c i ,t +1 ] + (1 - )Ei ,t [c t +1 ].

We can replace the left-hand side with h (L)s i ,t . Using the results derived above, on the other hand, we can replace
the right-hand side with G 1 (L) + G 2 (L) + G 3 (L) s i ,t . It follows that in equilibrium

                                                            h (L) = G 1 (L) + G 2 (L) + G 3 (L).

Equivalently, we need to find an analytic function h (z ) that solves

                                      ^   1       1    ^        h (z )         h ( ^ )(1 - ^z)
                           h (z ) =     ^             +  ^                -
                                      ^ 1-
                                              ^
                                            ^  1 - z^  ^
                                                                ^       ^
                                                           (1 - z )(z - ) (1 -   ^       ^
                                                                               ^ )(z - )(1 -   ^ z)

                                        ^ h (z )(z - ^ ) h ( ^ )(^ - ^)  ^ h (0) 1 - ^z
                                   +                    -              -                ,
                                        ^   z (z - ^)       ^ (z - ^)    ^ z
                                                                                 1-  ^z

which can be transformed as
                                                                 ~ ( z )h ( z ) = d ( z ; h (
                                                                 C                           ^ ), h (0))

where

                                                      ^
                        ~ (z )  z (1 - 
                        C              ^ z )(z - ^) -   ( z - ^ )(1 - ^z) + ^z
                                                      ^
                                   ^                           ^
           d ( z ; h (^ ), h (0))    ^
                                       1
                                            z (z - ^) - 1 ^
                                                              
                                                                    +  ( ^ - ^ ) z (1 - ^ z )h (^ ) - ( z - ^ )(1 - ^ z )h (0)
                                   ^ 1-  ^^             ^ 1-
                                                                 ^^


                                                                                    54
Note that C~ (z ) is a cubic equation and therefore contains with three roots. We will verify later that there are two
inside roots and one outside root. To make sure that h (z ) is an analytic function, we choose h (0) and h (^ ) so that the
two roots of d (z ; h (^ ), h (0)) are the same as the two inside roots of C
                                                                           ~ (z ). This pins down the constants {h (0), h (^ )},
and therefore the policy function h (L) is
                                                                          1      1
                                                        h (L ) = 1 -                ,
                                                                       ^ 1- ^ 1 - L
where -1 is the root of C~ (z ) outside the unit circle.
   Now we verify that C ~ (z ) has two inside roots and one outside root. C
                                                                          ~ (z ) can be rewritten as ^ C (z ) where

                                   1 1                       1     1
                   C (z ) = -z 3 +  + 
                                   ^+  ^ +  z2 - 1 +     ^+      +   ^ z + ,
                                   ^ ^                        ^    ^
                                   1 1                                      1   1
                        = -z 3 + ^+ +  ^ + 1 - mpc z 2 - 1 + (1 - mpc)   ^+    +  ^ z + 1 - mpc.
                                   ^ ^                                       ^  ^
With the assumption that 1 > mpc > 0, it is straightforward to verify that the following properties hold:

                         C (0) = 1 - mpc > 0,         C (^ ) = -mpc ^
                                                                      < 0,      C (1) = mpc
                                                                                              1
                                                                                                +^ - 2 > 0.
                                                                    ^                         ^

Therefore, the three roots are all real, two of them are between 0 and 1, and the third one -1 is larger than 1.
    To show that  is less than ^ , it is sufficient to show that
                                                                1   ^(1 -  ^)
                                                           C      =           > 0.
                                                                ^      ^ 3


Since C (-1 ) = 0, it has to be that -1 is larger than     ^ -1 , or  < ^.
    Similarly, to show that  is larger than   ^ , it is sufficient to show that

                                                          1    ^(1 - mpc)mpc
                                                    C       =-               < 0.
                                                          ^
                                                                     ^^2

Therefore, it has to be that  > ^ . In the proof the properties of the expectations, we will utilize the fact that   (^,^ ).
    In Angeletos and Huo (2019), the equilibrium policy rule is derived under  = ^ and  = ^. In the derivation
above, note that h (L) does not depend on  nor . The actual law of motion of y t = c t will depend on  :
                                                           1           1     1
                                                   yt =        1-                t .
                                                          1- ^    ^ 1 - L 1 -  L
On the other hand, the frictionless case is given by

                                                                      1     1
                                                            yt =               t .
                                                                    1 -  1 - L
Combining these two leads to
                                                                         ^-       1
                                                  yt = 1 -          1+               y .
                                                               ^         1-^   1 - L t
    Turn to the forecast of the future outcome. By the Wiener-Hopf prediction formula, the individual forecast is
                                               1           1     1
                         Ei ,t [ y t +1 ] =        1-                M (L-1 )B (L-1 )-1             B (L)-1 s i ,t ,
                                              1- ^    ^ 1 - L 1 -  L                            +
                                               1                    ^
                                                                         1  ^ +  - ^ (L +  ^)
                                        =          1-          1-                             s ,
                                              1- ^    ^             ^ 1 - ^ (1 - L)(1 - ^ L) i , t

and the average forecast is

                                                   ^
                                                        1  ^ +  - ^ (L +  ^)                    ^- 
                             Et [ y t +1 ] = 1 -                             1-            1+       y
                                                   ^ 1 - ^ (1 - L)(1 - ^ L)     ^
                                                                                                1-^ t

                                                                         55
Proof of Proposition 4
                             ^ -
Denote   1 - ^
                       1+    1- ^
                                     1
                                    1- .
                                                           1
                                            If c t =  (1-L )(1 - L) t is the perfect-information outcome, it has to be that


                                         c t =t +  f Et [c t +1 ] + b c t -1
                                                  1          +  -  L                 L
                                           =         + f                  + b 
                                               1 - L      (1 - L)(1 -  L)      (1 - L)(1 -  L)

where the right-hand side is simply the perfect information expectation of the behavioral equilibrium. This leads to

                                               ^2 - 
                                                                                      ( (^ - ) +   ^ (1 - ^ ))
                                    f =                            and         b =                             .
                                            ( +  )(^ - )                                 ( +  )( ^ - )

In the absence of informational friction (^  ), we have  = 0 and therefore b = 0 and  f = ^ / . In its presence
(^ < ), we have that  > 0 and b > 0 necessarily. When ^ <  , we have

                                                   ^2 - 
                                                                 ^2 - 
                                                                                ^ 2 - 2
                                         f =                 <              <               = 1.
                                                ( +  )(^ -  ) ( + ^ )(^ -  ) ( +  ^ )(^ - )

Note that  is decreasing in ^. With a very level of high informational friction (^  0), we have  = ^ . Particularly,
when   (^2 , ^ ),  f is negative. Therefore, in order to show that  f < 1when ^ is small, it is sufficient to show that
 f is decreasing in . Note that
                                                       f         (^2 - ^ ) - 2 -  ^ 3 + 2^2 
                                                            =                                ,
                                                                     ( +  )2 ( ^ -  )2
                                                                                        f
where the numerator is linear in  with a negative slope. To verify                          < 0,we only need to show that the numerator
is negative when  = 0, or g ()  -2 - ^ 3 + 2^ 2  < 0. Note that g () is maximized at  = ^ 2 , and g (^2 ) = ^4 - ^ 3 < 0,
which completes the proof.


Proof of Proposition 5

Properties of Average Forecast Errors. The average forecast error is given by

                                          1           1          1                               ^
                                                                                                      1  ^ +  - ^ (L +  ^)
              y t +1 - Et [ y t +1 ] =        1-         t +1 -      1-                     1-                             
                                         1- ^    ^ 1 - L        1- ^    ^                        ^ 1 - ^ (1 - L)(1 - ^ L) t
                                          1                 1     2      3
                                    =         1-               +      +         ,
                                         1- ^    ^        1 - L 1 -  L 1 - ^ L t +1

where
                            ^ (
                                ^ - )(1 - ^ )                      ( -  ^ )(^ (1 -   ^) + ^ ( - ))
                 1 =                                        2 =                                    ,      3 = 1 - 1 - 2 .
                               ^      ^
                         ^ ( - )(1 - )( - )                                   ^     ^
                                                                      ^ ( - )(1 - )( - )
We use {k }k =0
                to denote the IRF. The following properties hold:

   1. When  > ^ , k > 0 for all k  0.
        Note that if  > ^ , it is also the case that  > ^>>^ . As a result, 1 > 0 and 2 > 0. Also note that k =
           k
        1  + 2  + 3 k     ^ . It follows that
                            k



                                               k > (1 + 2 )k + 3 ^ k = (1 + 2 )(k - ^k) + ^ k > 0.


   2. When  < ^ , k < 0 for k large enough.
        When k large enough, that the sign of k will be the same as the sign of 1 if  >  , and it will be the same as
        the sign of 2 if  <  . If  >  , 1 < 0. If  <  , 2 < 0. Therefore, the forecast error is negative in the long run.


                                                                         56
   3. When  < ^ , there exists a threshold  such that only if ^ > , 1 > 0. That is, the forecast error does not
        immediately switches to negative only if learning is slow enough.
        A straightforward calculation yields

                                              D (^)                               ^ 2 + (^ 2  - ^ 2 -             ^ -^2 + 
             1 =1  + 2  + 3 ^=                        ,       where D (^ ) = (-^ )                       ^ +^ +  )        ^
                                                                                                                            .
                                           ^ (1 - ^ )                                                   ^
                                                                                                 ^ (1 - )

        The sign of 1 is the same as the numerator D (       ^ ). Since D (0) = ^ ( - ^ ) < 0, and D (^) = ^ ( + )(1 - ^ ) > 0,
        there exists   (0, ^ ) such that D (^ ) > 0 only if ^ > .

Regression Coefficients. We now study the theoretical counterparts of K CG , K BGMS and K KW .

Case 1:  = ^ and  = ^ . We have already proved that the IRF of the forecast error is always positive. Because the
IRF of the outcome is always positive, K KW has to positive. By individual rationality, K BG M S has to be zero. What
remains is to prove that KCG is positive.
    As the outcome follows an AR(2) process, the individual forecast error and forecast revision are given by
                                                                          1                               u
                                          y t +1 - Ei ,t [ y t +1 ] =       1-             g1 (L)t +1 + g 1 (L)u i ,t ,
                                                                         1-    
                                                                          1                            u
                                Ei ,t [ y t +1 ] - Ei ,t -1 [ y t +1 ] =    1-             g2 (L)t + g 2 (L )u i , t ,
                                                                         1-    
where
                                1              ^
                                                   1        +  - (L +     ^)
                
               g1 (L) =                   - 1-                                  L,
                          (1 - L)(1 -  L)       1 -  ^ (1 - L)(1 - ^ L)(1 -  L)
                               ^
                                   1        +  - (L +     ^)                         (1 -       ^ L)
                
               g2 (L) = 1 -                                     (1 - ( +  )L) +                          L ,
                                1 -  ^ (1 - L)(1 - ^ L)(1 -  L)                 (1 - L)(1 - ^ L)(1 -  L)
                                 ^
                                     1  +  - (L +    ^)
                u
               g1 (L) = - 1 -                           -1 ,
                                  1 -  (1 - L)(1 - L)
                                      ^            ^
                               ^
                                   1    +  - (L +  ^)                  (1 -      ^ L)
                u
               g2 (L) = 1 -                           (1 - ( +  )L) +                  L -1 .
                                1 -  (1 - L)(1 - L)
                                     ^           ^                    (1 - L)(1 - ^ L)

The covariance between individual forecast error and individual forecast revision is
                                                                    2
                                                1                                                          u               u
          Cov Errori ,t , Revisioni ,t =          1-                    Cov g 1 (L)t +1 , g 2 (L)t + Cov g 1 (L)u i ,t , g 2 (L)u i ,t   ,
                                               1-    
and a long but straightforward calculation yields the following expression:
                                                                                                    2
                                                                                  ^
                                                                                      1                      1 - ^
                                  u                 u
                            Cov(g 1 (L )u i , t , g 2 (L)u i ,t ) = --1      1-                                         ,
                                                                                   1 -  ^                    ^
                                                                                                        (1 - )(1 - ^ 2)

where
                       3 ^ 1-^ 2 - 3 ^ 1 - ^ + 1 - 2  2 - 3 1 - ^ 2 +  3 ^ - 2  + 2 .

    With  = ^ and  = ^ , agents are rational and K BGMS = 0. That is, Cov Errori ,t , Revisioni ,t = 0. Let us assume
momentarily that  > 0. It follows that
                                                                                  2
                                                                1                                         
                          Cov (Errort , Revisiont ) =             1-                  Cov g 1 (L)t +1 , g 2 (L ) t
                                                               1-    
                                                                                      2
                                                                   1                            u               u
                                                          =-         1-                   Cov g 1 (L)u i ,t , g 2 (L)u i ,t > 0,
                                                                  1-    
which implies that K CG > 0.
    The argument is completed by the lemma below, which verifies that  > 0 by mapping  to x ,  to y , and  to z .


                                                                           57
Lemma. When x , y , z  (0, 1), the following inequality holds

                         y 3 z 1 - z2 - 3y z 1 - y z + 1 - y 2 x2 - y 3 1 - z2 + y 3y z - 2 x + y 2 > 0

Proof. Recast the left hand side of the above inequality as a quadratic in x :

                    C (x )  y 3 z 1 - z 2 - 3 y z 1 - y z + 1 - y 2 x 2 - y 3 1 - z 2 + y 3 y z - 2 x + y 2 .

This has two real roots, x = x 1 and x = x 2 , given by
                                               y                                               y
                                    x1 = -                   and          x2 = -                            .
                                             1- yz                                  y 2 z2 - 2y z - y 2 + 1

Clearly, given the assumption that y , z  (0, 1) , x 1 is negative and C (0) = y 2 > 0. If x 2 is negative, then C (x ) is positive
when x  (0, 1). If x 2 is positive, to guarantee that C (x ) is positive when x  (0, 1), we need to show that x 2 > 1, which
is equivalent to show that
                                                      y 2 z2 - 2y z + y - y 2 + 1 > 0

Define the following quadratic equation in z :

                                                  D (z ) = y 2 z 2 - 2 y z + y - y 2 + 1 .

Its discriminant is -4 y 3 1 - y , which is negative given that y  (0, 1). Therefore, D (z ) is always positive, which in
turn verifies x 2 > 1.

Case 2:  = ^ =  and  = ^ . If ^ =  = , then ^ =  = 0. In this case, all agents receive the same signal, and there
is no distinction between Ei ,t [·] and Et [·]. It follows that K CG = K BGMS .
    To derive the K BGMS , note that
                                                                                 1
                                                 y t +1 - Ei ,t [ y t +1 ] =         (t +1 + ( -       ^) y t )
                                                                                1- ^
                                                                                 1
                                       Ei ,t [ y t +1 ] - Ei ,t -1 [ y t +1 ] =       ^( y t - ^ y t -1 )
                                                                                1- ^

It follows that
                                                                      ^ (1 -    ^ )( - ^)
                                                       K BGMS =
                                                                     ( ^2 +  ^ 4 - 2  ^3 )
Clearly, the sign of K BGMS is the same as the sign of  - ^.
    The sequence of the forecast error IRF {k }k =1
                                                    is given by

                                                                  1
                                                          k =          k -1 ( - ^ ),
                                                                 1- ^

which are either all positive or all negative. Since the IRF of the outcome is always positive, the sign of K KW is the
same as  - ^.

Case 3: 0 < ^ <  and ^ >  > 0. With ^ = , the signs of K CG > 0 and K KW < 0 are always the same as  - ^.
Therefore, 0 < ^ <  is necessary to allow K CG > 0 and K KW < 0.
    With ^   , the average forecast error is always positive, the IRF of the forecast error is always positive. Together
with the fact that the IRF of the outcome is always positive, we have K KW > 0. Therefore, ^ >  is necessary to allow
K KW < 0.




                                                                         58
Proofs of Proposition 6 and Corollary 4

We first consider the case with "higher-order doubts". The recursive formulation of individual consumer i 's con-
sumption choice is
                                                c i ,t = Et [t ] + Et [c i ,t +1 ] + (1 - )Et [c t +1 ]

As t is perfectly observed by consumer i , we guess the policy function is

                                                                      c i ,t = a t ,

for some constant a .
    Under the assumption that agent i believes that other agents observe the fundamental shock with probability q ,
it follows that

             Ei ,t [c i ,t +1 ] = Ei ,t [a t +1 ] = a t      Ei ,t [Et [t ]] = q t ,          Ei ,t [c t +1 ] = Ei ,t [Et [a t +1 ]] = aq t .

Substituting these expectations into consumers' optimal response leads to

                                                      a t = t + a t + (1 - )aq t ,

which further verifies our guess by setting the constant a as

                                                                  1             1
                                                      a=                     <     .
                                                           1 - ( + (1 - )q  ) 1 - 

In the economy without higher-order doubts but with mis-perceived ^ , the aggregate outcome is

                                                                            1
                                                                    ct =        t .
                                                                           1- ^

The outcomes in the two economies are observationally equivalent iff

                                   1          1
                                      =                                              ^ =  - (1 - ) (1 - q ) < 
                                  1- ^ 1 - ( + (1 - )q  )

In terms of forecasts, in the economy with higher-order doubts,

                                                      Ei ,t [c t +1 ] = Et [c t +1 ] = q Et [c t +1 ].


where Et [·] is the perfect-information rational expectation operator.
    Next, we consider the level-k thinking. The agents are assumed to observe the fundamental and to have the
correct prior about its process but a mis-specified prior about the behavior of others: they are "level-k thinkers" for
                                                                     0
some finite integer k  0. Level 0 agents are assumed to play c t = c t  0, for all t and for all t . Level 1 agents believe
                                                           1           1
that other agents are level 0. They therefore play c t = c t , where c t is given by the solution to

                                                                 1               1
                                                                ct =  t + E t [c t +1 ]

                                                                                    2           2
Level 2 agents believe that other agents are level 1. They therefore choose c t = c t , where c t is given by the solution to

                                                     2                2                    1
                                                    ct =  t +  E t [c t +1 ] + (1 - )Et [c t +1 ].


Similarly, the aggregate outcome for level-k agent when k > 0 satisfies

                                                    k                k                    k -1
                                                   ct =  t +  E t [c t +1 ] + (1 - )Et [c t +1 ].


                                                                            59
                                                          k
We proceed by a guess-and-verify approach. Suppose that c t = a k t . Then for k > 0, a k has the following recursive
structure
                                                   a k = 1 +  a k + (1 - ) a k -1 .

Using the fact g 0 = 0, we have for k > 0,
                                                                                         k
                                                              1    (1 - )
                                                      ak =      1-                               ,
                                                             1-     1 - 
which has proved the conjecture.
    Compared with the economy with mis-perceived ^ , the aggregate outcomes are equivalent iff

                                                                                             k
                                                  1    1    (1 - )
                                                     =   1-                                          .
                                                 1- ^ 1-     1 - 

                 (1-) k
Since 1 -         1-      < 1, we have ^ < .
    In terms of the forecast, in the level-k economy,
                                                                                      a k -1 
                                       Ei ,t [c t +1 ] = Et [c t +1 ] = a k -1 t =          E [c t +1 ],
                                                                                       ak t
        a k -1
where    ak      < 1.
    Lastly, consider the cognitive discounting economy. We still proceed by a guess-and-verify approach. Suppose
that the actual law of motion of c t is
                                                              c t = Rc t -1 + D t ,

and the perceived law of motion is
                                                             c t = mRc t -1 + D t .

Meanwhile, the perceived law of motion of t is

                                                              t = m t - + t .

Recall that the aggregate outcome is given by
                                                                                
                                        ct =          k Et [t +k ] + (1 - )           k Et [c t +k +1 ].
                                               k =0                            k =0

Using the mis-specified priors, we have

                                                          1                mR
                                               ct =          t + (1 - )        ct ,
                                                      1 - m             1 - mR

which leads to the actual law of motion of c t as

                                                                   1 - mR      1
                                                c t =  c t -1 +                   t .
                                                                    1 - mR 1 - m 

To be consistent with our guess, we have

                                                                               1
                                                          R = ,      D=           .
                                                                            1 - m

Compared with the economy with mis-perceived ^ , the aggregate outcomes are equivalent iff

                                                1      1
                                                   =      ,                    ^ = m < .
                                               1- ^ 1 - m


                                                                       60
In terms of the forecast, in the cognitive-discounting economy,

                                                 Ei ,t [c t +1 ] = Et [c t +1 ] = m Et [c t +1 ].


    In all the three economies (higher-order doubts, level-k, cognitive discounting), the individual forecast is the
same as the average forecast about the aggregate outcome , and it follows that K CG = K BGMS . In addition, in all the
three economies,

                                         c t = t ,     and Et [c t +1 ] = Et [c t +1 ] = t ,


for some constant  and   (0, 1). Therefore, we have

                                                                                                                       1 -  2
               Cov(Errort , Revisiont ) = Cov(t +1 - t , t - 2  2 t -1 ) = 2  2 (1 - )                                        ,
                                                                                                                       1 - 2

which implies K CG = K BGMS > 0.
    In addition, the law of motion of the forecast error is
                                                   1 -  L                   1
                                      Errort =            t +1 =  (1 - )       +  t +1 ,
                                                   1 - L                 1 - L

and the corresponding IRF is always positive given   (0, 1).
    Given that in all these economies the IRF of the outcomes are always positive and that the IRF of the forecast
error is always positive, we know that K KW in all of these economies have to be positive as well.


Proof of Lemma in Appendix C

We consider the case with k = 1. Note that average revision, Revisiont , and the idiosyncratic component of individual
revision, (Revisioni ,t - Revisiont ), are independent of each other. Therefore, the regression coefficient on the average
forecast revision remains to be K CG .
    The covariance between individual forecast error and idiosyncratic revision component is

                                                                              ^- ^           ^- ^    1              1
               Cov(Errori ,t , Revisioni ,t - Revisioni ,t ) = Cov -               u i ,t ,       (- 2 u i ,t - ^ - 2 u i ,t -1 )
                                                                             1- ^L          1- ^L

                                                                            (^-^ )2 (1 - ^^)
                                                               = --1
                                                                               1-    ^ 2

                                                               = -1 Vagg -1 .

Denote the regression coefficient on (Revisioni ,t - Revisiont ) as . It follows that

                  Cov(Errori ,t , Revisioni ,t - Revisiont )         Cov(Errori ,t , Revisioni ,t ) - Cov(Errort , Revisiont )
            =                                                    =
                                    Vidio                                                           Vidio
                  Vind            Vagg
              =         K BGMS -       K CG ,
                  Vidio          Vidio

and hence
                                                               Vidio          Vind
                                                K noise = -          = K CG -      K BGMS
                                                               Vagg           Vagg

Using the definitions of K CG and K BGMS , we then also have K noise = 1 -1 . Because 1 are independent of , K noise is
decreasing in , and vanishes when   .



                                                                       61
