                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      THE LONG-RUN EFFECTS OF SCHOOL RACIAL DIVERSITY ON POLITICAL
                                IDENTITY

                                       Stephen B. Billings
                                           Eric Chyn
                                        Kareem Haggag

                                       Working Paper 27302
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27302


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2020




We are grateful to Erzo Luttmer and Dean Karlan for helpful comments and suggestions. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Stephen B. Billings, Eric Chyn, and Kareem Haggag. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Long-Run Effects of School Racial Diversity on Political Identity
Stephen B. Billings, Eric Chyn, and Kareem Haggag
NBER Working Paper No. 27302
June 2020
JEL No. D72,I20,J15

                                           ABSTRACT

How do early-life experiences shape political identity? In this paper, we study how a shock to the
social lives of youth affected their party affiliation in adulthood. Specifically, we examine the end
of race-based busing in Charlotte-Mecklenburg schools (CMS), an event that led to large changes
in school racial composition. Using linked administrative data, we compare party affiliation for
students who had lived on opposite sides of newly drawn school boundaries. We find that a 10-
percentage point increase in the share of minorities in a student's assigned school decreased their
likelihood of registering as a Republican by 8.8 percent. Consistent with the contact hypothesis,
this impact is entirely driven by white students (a 12 percent decrease). This effect size is roughly
16 percent of the correlation between parents and their children's party affiliations. Finally,
consistent with this change reflecting underlying partisan identity, we find no significant effect on
voter registration likelihood. Together these results suggest that schools in childhood play an
important role in shaping partisanship.

Stephen B. Billings                               Kareem Haggag
University of Colorado                            Social and Decision Sciences
Department of Finance                             Carnegie Mellon University
Leeds School of Business                          Porter Hall 208-H
Boulder, CO 80309                                 5000 Forbes Avenue
stephen.billings@colorado.edu                     Pittsburgh, PA 15213
                                                  kareem.haggag@cmu.edu
Eric Chyn
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
6106 Rockefeller Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
eric.t.chyn@dartmouth.edu
1   Introduction

    Political partisanship shapes the way individuals see and interact with the world. In the U.S.

context, partisanship strongly predicts a range of political opinions and economic perceptions (Bar-

tels, 2000; Gerber and Huber, 2010; Lenz, 2012; Achen and Bartels, 2016). Moreover, recent studies

have provided evidence that partisan identity has causal effects on both political behavior and

attitudes (Gerber et al., 2010; McConnell et al., 2017; Barber and Pope, 2019).

    What are the origins of partisanship? Leading theories posit that childhood experiences play

a key role in determining political identity and behavior. Numerous descriptive analyses provide

evidence consistent with this hypothesis (Campbell et al., 1960; Hess and Torney, 1967; Jennings

and Niemi, 1968; Green et al., 2004; Jennings et al., 2009; Stoker and Bass, 2011). Yet, a lingering

concern is that correlational evidence of a link between partisanship and childhood circumstances

may largely reflect the influence of omitted variables. For example, exposure to minorities or peers

from a different social class during one's youth could reflect unmeasured attitudes or preferences

that affect later-life political identity.

    In this paper, we use a natural experiment to study the effects of a sudden and important shock

to the social lives of youth on their subsequent partisan identities in adulthood. In 2002, Charlotte-

Mecklenburg Schools (CMS) ended race-based busing and redrew existing school boundaries. This

reform generated large changes in the racial composition of schools. Motivated by a large literature

on how exposure and contact with racial out-groups can shape attitudes (Key, 1949; Allport, 1954)

and work on the link between racial attitudes and political affiliation (Sears and Kinder, 1971), we

ask whether this change to racial context in childhood can affect one's political party affiliation

more than a decade later in life.

    To identify causal impacts, we compare students who lived in the same neighborhoods and

had pre-reform addresses that placed them on different sides of a newly-drawn school boundary.

Our approach follows prior work studying schooling and arrest outcomes in this context (Billings

et al., 2014) and estimates the effect of being assigned to a school with a higher share of minority

students after conditioning on fixed effects for small geographic areas (i.e., Census block groups).

This approach reveals causal effects if children on either side of the new boundary are similar prior

to the redrawing. Institutional features of our setting support the plausibility of this assumption,

                                                  1
and we provide statistical evidence showing no evidence of systematic sorting within neighborhoods

based on the new school boundaries.

    Our analysis of long-run political preferences relies on student-level administrative records linked

to statewide voting records from North Carolina. Because children may move from North Carolina

later in life, we also link our sample to voting records from Virginia and South Carolina. Our

sample consists of 35,988 elementary and middle school students who were enrolled in CMS prior

to school reassignments. All voting records are current as of 2018, when the average student in our

sample was 28 years old. We present estimate for all students, and separately for white and for

racial minority students.

    We find that being assigned to schools with higher shares of minorities significantly impacts

later-life political preferences for white students, with no impacts on minority students. Specifically,

we find that a 10-percentage point increase in the share of minorities in a white student's assigned

school decreases their likelihood of being a registered as a Republican by 2 percentage points (a

12 percent decrease relative to the 16.4 percent Republican registration rate).1 , 2 These effects are

not driven by detectable changes in voting registration.3 We find suggestive evidence that white

students are more likely to be registered as a Democratic or as an unaffiliated voter. For minority

students, we find small and statistically insignificant impacts on party affiliation.

    To provide a sense of magnitude, we compare the estimated effects of school minority exposure

to the correlation of partisan identities of parent with that of their children. A large literature on

political socialization has posited parental transmission as the central driver of partisan identity

(Campbell et al., 1960; Hess and Torney, 1967). For example, Jennings et al. (2009) find a self-

reported party identification correlation of 0.37 between parents and children in their mid-20s. We

provide a novel estimate of this intergenerational relationship (previously documented in surveys)
   1
      The omitted category in this specification is composed of students that remained unregistered (43 percent of
white students overall), registered as Democrat (14 percent of white students overall), registered as Unaffiliated (26
percent), or as another one of the three officially recognized parties (less than 1 percent). We refer to the latter two
categories (Unaffiliated or third party) as "Other" in our analysis.
    2
      While our results are robust to conditioning on voter registration status, we do not condition on registration in
our primary specification, since this measure is a post-treatment outcome, and thus conditioning on it could create
significant bias (Angrist and Pischke, 2009; Nyhan et al., 2017; Montgomery et al., 2018).
    3
      We find that a 10-percentage point increase in the share of minorities in a white students' assigned school
decreases their likelihood of being registered to vote by a statistically insignificant 0.75 percentage points (p-value
= 0.39). If we assume that these unregistered voters had similar underlying partisan identities to white students
who were registered voters (i.e. 29 percent Republican, 24 percent Democrat and 48 percent Unaffiliated or another
party), then we would expect 11 percent of the 2 percentage point decrease in likelihood of being a Republican would
be due to the decrease in registration.

                                                           2
by focusing on the subsample of children who can be matched to a parent as recorded in birth

records and then matching these parents to their voting records. In this subsample, we find that

having a parent registered as a Republican is associated with a 15.6 percentage point increase in

the likelihood that their child is registered as a Republican. This implies that a 10-percentage point

increase in the share of minorities in one's assigned school has an impact on Republican partisan

identity that is roughly 16 percent of the intergenerational transmission correlation.

   While intergroup exposure is a leading mechanism in our context, there is at least one alternative

channel that may also be present. Specifically, prior research in our setting suggests that the effects

on partisanship could be mediated by the impact of re-zoning on academic achievement. Billings

et al. (2014) found that changes in school racial composition due to CMS re-zoning have statistically

significant impacts on college attendance for non-minority students. We replicate this analysis using

our sample of white students and find that a 10-percentage point increase in the share minority

reduces the likelihood of college attendance by 2.45 percentage points (p-value< 0.10). To assess

the relevance of this mediator for our partisanship analysis, we look to the existing literature

for guidance on the relationship between college attendance and partisanship. On the one hand,

the changes in social environment that occur with college enrollment could liberalize attitudes (Nie

et al., 1996; Dee, 2004). This case implies that our reduced form estimates understate any decrease in

Republican party affiliation due to changes in racial or social attitudes. On the other hand, education

may increase future income (Acemoglu and Angrist, 2001), thereby causing individuals to support

lower taxation (Meltzer and Richard, 1981; Mendelberg et al., 2017). For example, Marshall (2019)

finds that increases in high school education reduce support for the Democratic party; suggesting

that the negative effects we find could potentially be mediated through reductions in education.

However, a back of the envelope calculation based on this evidence suggests that at most 0.37

percentage points (19 percent) of our main estimates could be explained through changes in college

enrollment. Hence, we believe it's plausible that the impacts of increased minority exposure in our

setting largely operated by changing (unobserved) attitudes around race and social class.

   Overall, our analysis contributes to three main literatures. First, we contribute to studies of the

role of early-life and pre-adult factors in determining political behavior and party affiliation. The

bulk of this literature is largely based on descriptive studies on the importance social influences such

as parents or institutional influences such as schools (Campbell et al., 1960; Hess and Torney, 1967;
                                                   3
Jennings and Niemi, 1968; Green et al., 2004; Jennings et al., 2009; Stoker and Bass, 2011). Recent

work has innovated by placing greater emphasis on identification of causal impacts. For example,

several studies have employed quasi-experimental methods and found that changes in family income

(Akee et al., 2018) and neighborhood relocation (Chyn and Haggag, 2019) have important impacts

on later-life voting.4 Relatively fewer studies have produced credible estimates of causal impacts

of early-life conditions on partisanship. One exception is Healy and Malhotra (2013). They use an

approach based on random variation in sibling gender and find that young men who have sisters

(rather than brothers) are more likely to identify as Republicans. Our findings complement their

analysis by demonstrating that partisanship can also be shaped by factors outside of the household.

    Second, we contribute to studies of exposure to diversity and social behavior. While a link

between school segregation and black-white attitudes has long been suggested (Schofield, 1991),

there are relatively few studies that provide empirical evidence of a causal relationship. Recently,

Rao (2019) studied intergroup contact in Indian schools and found that increased contact across

castes generates short-run increases in tolerance and out-group friendship.5 In the U.S., Carrell et al.

(2019) provide evidence that intergroup contact reduces prejudice by showing that white students

who are randomly assigned a black roommate in their freshmen year are more likely to choose

a black roommate in subsequent years. This paper complements these findings by demonstrating

that a large-scale school policy change that affected intergroup contact can generate long-lasting

changes in political preferences.6

    Last, we contribute to an important literature studying the effects of segregation and school

integration policies. Prior studies have focused on estimating effects on student-level academic and

economic outcomes (Guryan, 2004; Ashenfelter et al., 2006; Reber, 2010; Johnson, 2011; Billings

et al., 2014; Tuttle, 2019; Bergman, 2020). To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to provide
   4
      Several recent studies have relied on randomized control trials to estimate the impact of childhood development
interventions. For example, Sondheimer and Green (2010) pooled results from three randomized education interven-
tions find that an increased graduation rates impacts voting outcomes. Holbein (2017) studies an experiment that
improved non-cognitive skills and finds impacts on long-run political participation. Our work is distinguished in that
the treatment we study does not directly target the skills of children.
    5
      Lowe (2019) finds similar impacts when studying caste-based intergroup contact for cricket players in India. He
further breaks down the type of contact, and finds, consistent with contact theory Allport (1954), that these positive
effects are limited to collaborative contact, with opposite effects produced by adversarial contact.
    6
      A few recent studies also examine intergroup contact outside of a schooling context. For example, Bazzi et al.
(2019) studied a population resettlement program in Indonesia and found evidence that intergroup contact shapes
nation-building. Brown et al. (2020) studied the impact of having a black neighbor during childhood and find impor-
tant impacts on long-run partisanship using an approach that relies on geographic fixed effects to address concern
over selection bias.

                                                          4
credible estimates of the impact of school segregation on political preferences.


2       Background

2.1      Charlotte-Mecklenburg Schools, New School Zones, and the End of Race-based Busing

      Since the Supreme Court's 1971 Swann v. Charlotte-Mecklenburg Schools decision, CMS had

operated under a racial desegregation order. Following the Court order, school zones in CMS were

redrawn to capture non-contiguous areas with different racial compositions. School officials aimed to

keep each school's percent black within 15 percentage points of the district average. Racial balance

was preserved by using "satellite" zones that bused students from inner-city neighborhoods with

high shares of minority students to schools located in suburban, highly white neighborhoods.

      For the 2002-2003 academic year, CMS drew new school boundaries and committed to ending

race-based busing. These changes stemmed from a series of court battles. In 1997, a CMS parent

sued because their child was denied entrance to a magnet program based on race. This case led to

a reopening of Swann in 1999, and the CMS desegregation plan was ultimately dismissed (United

States District Court, 1999). CMS drew new school boundaries for the 2002-2003 year as contiguous

areas around schools, and families were assigned to their neighborhood school by default. Although

neighborhood schools were set as the default, families could also apply to attend other schools in

the district.7 Enrollment was subject to capacity constraints, and schools that were oversubscribed

had lotteries to determine admission (Hastings and Weinstein, 2008; Deming, 2011).

      Figure 1 provides an illustration of the change in school boundaries as a result of the new

policy. The top and bottom panels show two school zones in the academic year before and after

the 2002 redrawing, respectively. The top panel shows that the zone for Northeast Middle School,

a 37 percent minority share school district, included satellites. The bottom panel shows that this

zone was changed in two ways for the 2002-2003 academic year: CMS eliminated the satellite zones

and redrew the boundary of neighboring Albemarle Road Middle School to reduce overcrowding.

Note that the decisions on boundaries were based on enrollment projections and did not rely on

natural geographic features. In addition, CMS did not redraw zones based on standard census

geographies. For example, the top panel of Figure 1 shows that the Census block group containing

    7
        This neighborhood-based school choice policy was known as the "Family Choice Plan" (FCP).

                                                         5
the Northeast Middle School was previously undivided. The bottom panel shows that the redrawing

led some students living in this block group to be reassigned to Albemarle Road Middle School.

      The new boundaries and end of busing led to a notable increase in segregation at CMS schools.

Figure 2 shows that the proportion of schools that have high share of minority students (over 85

percent) increased notably starting in the 2002-2003 academic year. Correspondingly, the proportion

of schools that have a relatively integrated student body ­ between 35 to 85 percent ­ decreased.

2.2     Expected Effects of CMS Re-Zoning and School Segregation on Political Preferences

      The rezoning of school boundaries and changes in racial composition at CMS schools could

impact later-life partisanship through the channel of intergroup contact. This section briefly reviews

prior research that sheds light on this hypothesized mechanism. We also discuss prior studies related

to other mediators that may operate in our setting.

      Three strands of literature provide strong evidence that exposure to diversity during child-

hood can have impacts on subsequent adult partisanship. First, recent studies have provided causal

evidence that circumstances and early-life events matter for political behavior.8 , 9 For example,

studies have shown long-run effects on voting due to education-related interventions (Sondheimer

and Green, 2010; Holbein, 2017), income transfers (Akee et al., 2018) and relocating to less dis-

advantaged neighborhoods (Chyn and Haggag, 2019).10 Second, a large literature has studied the

"contact hypothesis" (Allport, 1954) which posits that social contact with out-group members can

reduce discrimination.11 In a meta-analysis of 515 studies, Pettigrew and Tropp (2006) find that


    8
      A long prior literature has highlighted a key role for adolescence in the formation of social and political beliefs.
For example, one version of this folk wisdom is the "impressionable years hypothesis" which puts forward the idea that
the socializing influences experienced in youth have an enduring impact on thinking throughout one's life (Greenstein,
1965; Krosnick and Alwin, 1989). With respect to politics, there has been evidence consistent with this idea in showing
that interest in politics is relatively stable and resistant to intervention after late adolescence (Prior, 2010, 2018),
bolstering the claim that, "the more important a political orientation is in the behavior of adults, the earlier it will
be found in the learning of the child" (Greenstein, 1965).
    9
      More generally, prior research has shown that interventions and conditions during childhood have large causal
impacts on long-run educational, health and economic outcomes (Garces et al., 2002; Chetty et al., 2011; Heckman
et al., 2013; Chetty et al., 2016; Hoynes et al., 2016; Carrell et al., 2018; Chyn, 2018; Bald et al., 2019; Chyn et al.,
2019).
   10
      This credible causal evidence is more broadly consistent with correlational evidence that suggests a link between
early-life circumstances and political behavior (Campbell et al., 1960; Hess and Torney, 1967; Jennings and Niemi,
1968; Green et al., 2004; Jennings et al., 2009; Stoker and Bass, 2011).
   11
      While much of the literature on contact hypothesis has studied adults, the work on prejudice reduction interven-
tions has been focused on children. As Paluck et al. (2019) note, "What we know about prejudice reduction comes
largely from studies of children or young adults...no studies of ethnic or racial contact include participants over 25
years of age."

                                                            6
intergroup contact typically reduces measures of prejudice. Third, racial attitudes are tightly linked

to party identification in the American context, with self-reported racial attitudes being strongly

correlated with partisan identity (Valentino and Sears, 2005).12 , 13 For example, based on data from

the Cooperative Congressional Election Study's 2016 wave, Appendix Figure A1 shows that Re-

publicans are less likely to agree with the statement that whites have certain advantages because

of their skin color when compared to Democrats and Independent voters.

    Yet, while the literature suggests that exposure to diversity is likely to generate effects, it is

unclear whether we should expect positive or negative impacts on Republican party affiliation.

Notably, evidence for prejudice reduction--in line with the contact hypothesis--is strongest in

contexts in which cooperation is encouraged and there is a common goal supported by authorities

(Lowe, 2019). It is less obvious what effects exposure will have in a more general setting such as

schools where there may be both cooperative and adversarial contact between groups. Further,

the "racial threat" hypothesis (Key, 1949) posits that whites' proximity to black communities can

trigger hostile racial attitudes, as whites perceive their status as threatened. Several studies have

found evidence consistent with this threat hypothesis, including Enos (2014), Enos et al. (2019),

Condra and Linardi (2019), Hangartner et al. (2019). In a related vein, recent studies of the political

economy of immigration have found that influxes of immigrants tend to increase support for far-

right political groups (Halla et al., 2017; Dustmann et al., 2019; Tabellini, 2020).14

    Aside from the channel of intergroup contact, the CMS reforms that we study may also have

effects on partisanship driven by impacts on other student outcomes that mediate political be-

havior. Billings et al. (2014) found that the change in school racial composition at CMS schools

significantly reduced college attendance for non-minority students and increased arrest rates for

minority students. Prior studies have connected both education and criminal justice outcomes to
   12
      Studies within political science and economics have examined the historical connection between racial attitudes
and party affiliation. For example, one central topic of inquiry has been the historical exodus of white Southerners from
the Democratic party to the Republican party in the 1960s; with several papers using qualitative and quantitative
methods to establish the primacy of racial attitudes in that shift (Carmines and Stimson, 1989; Kousser, 2010;
Kuziemko and Washington, 2018).
   13
      As noted by Hutchings and Valentino (2004) in their review of the role of race in American politics, the "ensuing
debate over the impact of racial attitudes on policy preferences has been among the most contentious in all of public
opinion research." While there are concerns that such measures reflect distinct ideological commitments that would
exist regardless of race, it remains relatively uncontroversial that they predict partisan identity.
   14
      Some other recent papers have found more nuanced effects, for example Mayda et al. (2018) find that increases in
high-skilled (low-skilled) immigrants are associated with decreases (increases) in support for Republicans. Relatedly,
Steinmayr (2020) finds that exposure to refugees passing through border municipalities in Germany increases support
for the far-right party, but that sustained contact through hosting municipalities decreases support for the far-right.

                                                           7
political behavior. For the former, the literature has suggested that college could have negative

or positive impacts on conservative attitudes of students. On one hand, attending college could

liberalize attitudes due to a change in social environment (Nie et al., 1996; Dee, 2004). On the

other hand, the increase in income associated with higher education could cause individuals to sup-

port lower taxation (Meltzer and Richard, 1981; Mendelberg et al., 2017). Given these ambiguous

predictions, it is unclear whether we should expect the reduction in college enrollment to mediate

increases or decreases in Republican affiliation among the non-minority students in our setting.

For crime outcomes, recent studies provide credible evidence that arrests reduce the likelihood of

voting (Gerber et al., 2017; White, 2019), but to the best of our knowledge there are no studies

that shed light on a connection to party affiliation.

    Overall, prior research suggests impacts on partisanship are likely in our setting, but there is

little guidance on the direction of expected effects. Our reduced form analysis provides an estimate

of how partisanship is impacted by the combined forces of intergroup exposure and changes in other

student outcomes such as changes in education or criminal background. In Section 5, we conduct

several exercises to explore the extent to which our estimates reflect the impact of intergroup

exposure versus other mediators.


3   Data and Sample

    We use records from multiple administrative sources to analyze the impact of school segregation

on long-run voting outcomes. Specifically, we use records on all CMS students for the academic years

1998-1999 through 2010-2011 to create a sample of children affected by the 2002-2003 redrawing

of school zone boundaries. The data include information on student demographics (e.g., gender,

race) and measures of academic outcomes such as state test scores (grades 3-8), absences and

suspensions. The data also include information on home address in each academic year. We link

the sample of CMS students to voting records from North Carolina, Virginia and South Carolina

to obtain measures of political party affiliation and voting behavior. The remainder of this section

describes our sample, and Appendix B provides detailed discussion of the data construction.

    The sample for our analysis is restricted to CMS students in grades 3-8 who were enrolled in

the academic the baseline academic year 2001-2002, the period immediately before the change in


                                                  8
school zones and the end of busing.15 By focusing on the year preceding the changes, the sample

definition is unrelated to any changes in enrollment that resulted from the policy reform. We focus

on grades 3-8 since this restriction ensures that students have test scores in the academic year in the

baseline period. The sample is also defined by requiring that all students have name and address

information. The name information is necessary for linking to voting outcomes, while the address

information is necessary to assign students to schools before and after school boundaries changed.

Further, we also use the address information to assign pre-reform neighborhoods. Neighborhoods

are defined based on block groups within Mecklenburg County from the 2000 Census. Note that

we focus on the earliest recorded address to ensure that the assigned schools and neighborhoods

are not affected by the possibility that some families may respond to the boundary redrawing by

moving to new neighborhoods.16

    We matched the sample of students in the CMS records that meet our restrictions to voting

records from North Carolina, Virginia and South Carolina. Since CMS students may move from

North Carolina later in life, we match to Virginia and South Carolina records to guard against

out-of-state attrition. All matching is based on name (first, middle and last) and year of birth

information.17 , 18 The voter records for North Carolina were downloaded from the North Carolina

State Board of Elections website on July 27, 2019. This voter file contains turnout across various

elections, as well as self-reported party affiliation recorded from the voter registration application.

Registered voters may choose from one of five recognized political parties or they can choose to be

unaffiliated.19 The voting records from Virginia and South Carolina are from L2, Incorporated. The

Virginia and South Carolina records are current as of January 2019. Unlike North Carolina, both

Virginia and South Carolina do not register voters by party ­ instead L2 models party affiliation

by the most recent primary in which a voter cast a partisan ballot.

    In addition, we obtain information on the parents of students by matching the CMS sample to
   15
      Our sample definition differs from Billings et al. (2014) due to two main differences in the administrative data
provided by CMS. First, they had access to administrative records for a longer time period (1995-1996 to 2010-2011).
This implies that they observe baseline (before the policy change) test scores for more cohorts and grades of students.
Second, their data contain one additional variable (free and reduced price lunch status) that is no longer made
available to researchers.
   16
      The earliest address for the majority (80 percent) of students is from the 1999-2000 academic year, the first year
available in the CMS records.
   17
      Year of birth is available in the NC voting records, but day and month of birth are not available.
   18
      As detailed in Appendix B, we matched 61.4 percent of students to a voting record. Matches are unique in 99
percent of cases.
   19
      Appendix Figure B1 reproduces the NC voter registration form.

                                                           9
birth records (1990-2001) from North Carolina. Matching is done using information on name, date of

birth information and address information. We match any identified parent to voting records using

the same procedure that we used for children. This matched sample of children and parents permits

us to examine the intergenerational transmission of party affiliation. We use this supplemental

analysis to benchmark our main estimated impacts in Section 5.20

     Our main analysis sample consists of 35,988 CMS students that meet our sample criteria.

Appendix Table A1 provides summary statistics. In our sample, 48 percent of students are black,

and five percent of students are Hispanic. In terms of the CMS reforms, we see that these had

considerable impact, given that 47 percent of students in our sample were assigned to new schools

starting in the 2002-2003 academic year.

     More generally, the students in our sample are representative of students from large urban

school districts in the Southern United States. Just before the end of the school busing policy, CMS

was the 25th largest school district, which placed it just behind the Memphis City School District

and larger than Fulton County (Atlanta) (U.S. Department of Education, 2000). In terms of race,

the non-white share for our sample is broadly comparable to racial enrollment statistics for other

Southern school districts.


4        Empirical Strategy

     We study the effects of school segregation by relying on plausibly exogenous variation in expo-

sure to minorities generated by a CMS reform in the early 2000s. As discussed in Section 2, CMS

drew new school boundaries and ended race-based busing for the 2002-2003 academic year. Two

consequences of these reforms are key to our research design. First, school segregation increased

markedly (see Figure 2). Second, students who lived in the same neighborhoods often found them-

selves living on opposite sides of newly drawn boundaries for schools that had very different racial

compositions.21 To the extent that children and households on either side of the boundary were

comparable before the CMS reforms, the subsequent difference in student outcomes can be at-
    20
      See Appendix B for further details on matching students to birth records to obtain information on parents. In
our final sample of 35,988 CMS students, 46.32 percent are linked to a parent overall, and 47.4 percent of white
students are linked. We focus on white students for our benchmark exercise.
   21
      Appendix Figure A2 shows the distribution of changes in the percent minority students between each student's
new and old school zone address separately for white and minority students. These results show there was considerable
variation with some white and minority students being assigned to schools that have very different racial composition
relative to their prior attended school.

                                                         10
tributed to variation in the characteristics of the assigned school such as the fraction of minority

students.

    Formally, we follow Billings et al. (2014) by using the following neighborhood fixed effects

approach to study the impact of minority exposure in a student's newly assigned school:


                              yizj = 0 P ctM inorityizj + Xizj 1 + zj +           izj ,                          (1)


where yizj is an outcome (e.g., later-life political affiliation) for student i living in old school zone z

and neighborhood j is regressed on the student's new school zone percent minority (P ctM inorityizj ),

a set of covariates measured prior to CMS reforms (e.g., test scores) to improve precision, and an

old school-zone-by-neighborhood fixed effect (zj ). As discussed in Section 3, we define neighbor-

hoods based on block groups using the earliest pre-reform address in CMS records.22 We focus

on addresses recorded prior to the reform to ensure that the assigned school treatment variable is

unrelated to any possible sorting of households in the post-reform years. We cluster standard errors

at the old school-zone-by-neighborhood level.

    The key parameter from Equation 1 is the reduced-form parameter 0 , which captures the

impact of changes in school racial composition (and other factors correlated with this schooling

characteristic). Given the inclusion of old school-zone-by-neighborhood fixed effects, the effect of

racial composition is identified by comparing children who live on opposite sides of a newly drawn

boundary. In neighborhoods where there are no new school boundaries, P ctM inorityizj will have

the same value for all students and will not contribute to the estimation of 0 . Given that we focus

on narrowly defined neighborhoods ­ i.e., block groups ­ our design is similar to the boundary

discontinuity approaches utilized in Black (1999) and Bayer et al. (2007).

    As noted by Billings et al. (2014), there are a number of possible ways to characterize the "treat-

ment" of being assigned to a new school due to changes in school boundaries. Equation 1 defines the

treatment in terms of school racial composition because the policy reform ended the main policy

tool for maintaining racially-integrated schools (race-based busing). Given that minority students

tend to live in households with lower income and achievement, we could have conceptually defined

the treatment in terms of changes in school peer test scores or parental incomes. Billings et al. (2014)
  22
     This approach to assigning children to neighborhoods follows Billings et al. (2014). A majority (80 percent) of
students have an address recorded in the first year in the available CMS records (i.e., the 1999-2000 academic year).

                                                         11
demonstrate that results from models using these alternative measures of treatment are similar to

their preferred model that focuses on racial composition. In this sense, the research design embod-

ied in Equation 1 cannot separate the effect of changes in racial composition from other correlated

school characteristics. More generally, the mechanisms by which school racial environment impacts

partisan identity involve a number of social and institutional attributes that include but are not

limited to direct friendships, peer and teacher role models, teacher and administrator instruction

and discipline, as well as extracurricular activities and interaction outside school hours. We are also

unable to separately identify the role of these specific factors. This is a common feature of other

studies of school racial segregation (Guryan, 2004; Lutz, 2011; Johnson, 2011; Billings et al., 2014).

That said, our empirical strategy is policy-relevant given that school segregation reforms have often

relied on changing school boundaries.

      Estimates of 0 have a causal interpretation if the redrawing of school boundaries was unrelated

to student and household characteristics. The institutional background in our setting suggests this

assumption is plausible. As noted in Billings et al. (2014), CMS decisions about where to draw

boundaries were governed by school capacity constraints and enrollment projections. There was no

explicit consideration of resident preferences or characteristics. Further, while households in the

CMS system may have known of the segregation-related court proceedings in the late 1990s and

early 2000s, they were unlikely to be able to predict the location of a new school boundary within a

narrowly defined neighborhood in the years before the 2002-2003 academic year. Finally, the next

subsection provides empirical support for this assumption by showing that student characteristics

measured prior to the reform are uncorrelated with the share of minorities at one's assigned school.

4.1     Checks for Non-Random Sorting of Students

      The validity of our research design depends on whether students are systematically different

on either side of newly drawn school boundaries. To provide evidence on this assumption, we test

whether student observed characteristics such as race or prior test scores are correlated with the

independent variable of interest, the assigned school share of minorities. We do this by estimating a

model where the dependent variable is P ctM inorityizj and the independent variables in the model

include student characteristics and fixed effects for old school by neighborhood fixed effects.

      Table 1 shows that we find no evidence of sorting across newly drawn school boundaries. Col-

                                                  12
umn 1 reports results using the all students in our sample of CMS students. The point estimates

are not statistically significant and consistently small in magnitude. Columns 2-4 shows that we

obtain similar results in the subsamples of students who are registered voters, whites, or minorities,

respectively. Overall, we conclude that students living on either side of the school boundary in the

same small neighborhood are similar in terms of pre-reform characteristics.

4.2       Impacts of School Assignment on Attended School Characteristics and Enrollment

      The interpretation of our analysis depends on whether new school assignments affect the actual

characteristics of the schools attended by CMS students in our sample. Following Billings et al.

(2014), we present evidence of a "first stage" by analyzing the effect of the assigned school minority

share on the actual shares of schools attended by students in the 2002-2003 academic year (the

first academic year after re-zoning). Table 2 presents results for this outcome based on Equation 1.

Importantly, note that our main sample contains 35,988 students who are enrolled in CMS in 2001,

and the results in Table 2 are estimated using the sample of 35,272 (98 percent) students who

enrolled in the first year after the reforms.23

      While these results show evidence of a relevant first stage, it is worth noting that coefficients of

less than 1 indicates imperfect compliance with newly drawn school boundaries. This can occur in

two main ways. First, we use the earliest address in the CMS records to assign schools to mitigate

concerns over student sorting. At the same time, this practice implies that we have measurement

error in assigned schools because families move over time and may not be in the same residence by

the 2002-2003 school year. Second, while neighborhood-based schools were the default, CMS policy

allowed families to choose schools other than the one they were assigned.


5        Main Results

      In this section, we examine the effects of the school segregation natural experiment on partisan

identity 15 years later. Specifically, in line with Equation 1, Table 3 reports estimates of the effects

of increases in the assigned share of minorities in one's school in 2003 on one's political party



    23
      As shown in Appendix Table A2, there is no detectable relationship between our main treatment variable, the
share of minority students in one's assigned school, and the likelihood of enrolling in CMS in the 2002-2003 academic
year.

                                                         13
affiliation in 2018.24 We begin by examining our primary outcome in Columns 1-4; an indicator for

whether the individual is registered as a Republican in 2018. In Column 1, using the pooled sample

of all CMS students, we find that a 10-percentage point increase in the share minority causes a

0.70 point decrease in the likelihood of being a registered Republican (p-value< 0.01). Relative to

the Republican registration rate of 8 percent, this reflects an 8.8 percent increase. In Column 2,

we condition on the post-treatment variable of registration (an issue we will return to below) and

find a similar treatment effect of a 0.97 percentage point (a 7.5 percent increase relative to the

Republican registration rate in this registered subsample).25

    Both contact and racial threat theories suggest that the appropriate focus is on how one group's

attitudes or identity respond to a change in the presence of an out-group. We therefore make a fairly

coarse split of students into white versus minority racial groups. In line with this focus, we find no

effect of increasing the share minority on minority students (Column 4), and a much larger effect

on white students (Column 3) ­ a 10 percentage point increase in the percent minority causes a

1.95 percentage point decrease in the likelihood of being a registered Republican. Relative to the

16.4 percent Republican registration rate of the white student sample, this reflects a 12 percent

decrease.

    Our interpretation of the decrease in the Republican registration rate is that contact with more

minority students in school reduces the Republican partisan identity of white students. However,

the overall decrease comes from several potential margins. First, and perhaps most consistent with

our interpretation, in Columns 5 and 6 we see an increase in both the likelihood of registering as a

Democrat (0.68 percentage points) and as Unaffiliated (0.50 percentage points). While neither of

these estimates is statistically significant, they are directionally consistent with our hypothesis of

contact weakening Republican partisanship.

    One important threat to our interpretation lies in the fact that registration is optional in

the U.S., and thus the effects on party affiliation may partially reflect a decrease in registration

likelihood. While it's plausible that a reduction in registering itself reflects a reduction in the

strength of one's partisanship, it's also possible that it simply reflects a reduction in political

  24
      Appendix Table A3 reports results from a modified version of Equation 1 where we omit controls for pre-reform
student characteristics. These results are very similar to those that we obtain from our preferred specification.
   25
      Angrist and Pischke (2009) and Montgomery et al. (2018) discuss the bias induced by conditioning on post-
treatment outcomes.

                                                        14
participation while holding constant one's latent Republican partisan identity. To investigate this

possibility, in Table 4 we estimate the effects on Registration for white students. In Column 1 we see

that a 10-percentage point increase in the share minority has a statistically insignificant negative

impact on Registration of 0.76 percentage points. If we make the unrealistic assumption that all

of the individuals induced not to Register are latent Republicans, this would suggest that roughly

38.9 percent (i.e., 0.76/1.95) of the treatment effect could be explained by demobilization. Making

a more realistic assumption that the latent identities of these unregistered voters look similar to

the composition of the Registered sample (i.e. 29 percent Republican) would instead suggest that

demobilization only explains 11 percent of the treatment effect (i.e., (.29 × 0.76)/1.95). Columns 2-6

show a slight reduction in voting likelihoods of similar magnitude to the reduction in registration,

but all estimates are similarly statistically insignificant.

   To provide a sense of the magnitude of our findings in Table 3, we look at how it compares

to a one of the primary theorized determinants of party affiliation ­ the partisan identity of one's

parents (Campbell et al., 1960; Jennings and Niemi, 1968). For example, Jennings et al. (2009) use

a 7-point Party Identification survey measure and find a correlation of 0.37 between parents and

their children in their late 20s in 1997 (they also find a correlation of 0.33 in a binary self-report

of Presidential vote choice). While two recent studies estimate the intergenerational correlation in

voter turnout using voter files (Akee et al., 2018; Chyn and Haggag, 2019), to our knowledge, there

are no estimates of intergenerational partisan identity transmission using administrative data. As

described in Section 3, we matched children to a parent using North Carolina birth records. Column

1 shows that we were able to make this match for 47.4 percent of the white student sample, and

that the treatment variable (Percent Minority) does not significantly predict whether a student is

matched to a parent using their birth record. Of this sample, we were able to match 61.7 percent of

students' parents to the Voter File, and again Column 2 shows that treatment does not significant

predict this match. In Column 3, we look at whether the policy affected parents' partisanship, and

find that it does not, perhaps unsurprisingly suggesting that the policy's effects on students' later

life partisanship is not mediated through their parents (consistent with this, Column 6 shows that

controlling for this measure does not change our treatment effect estimate). Finally, Column 4-5

provide the parental transmission benchmarks. First, in Column 4, we re-estimate the effects of the

policy on this matched subsample, and find a similar effect to the full sample ­ a 10 percentage
                                                   15
point increase in the percent minority causes a 2.5 percentage point (vs. 1.9 percentage point in the

full sample) increase in the likelihood of registering as a Republican in adulthood. In Column 5, we

estimate that having a Republican parent is associated with a 15.6 percentage point increase in the

likelihood of registering as a Republican in adulthood ­ relative to the mean of 18.5 percent, this is

an 84 percent increase. Thus, the effect of a 10-percentage point increase in the percent minority in

one's school is roughly 16 percent of the size of the intergenerational party transmission correlation

estimated in the same sample.

5.1     Mechanisms

      As discussed in Section 2, a leading hypothesis is that the rezoning of school boundaries and

changes in segregation in CMS schools impacted party affiliation of white students through the

channel of intergroup contact. Yet, it is also possible that effects on partisanship are driven by the

impact that the CMS reforms had on other student outcomes that mediate political behavior. This

concern is further justified since previous work by Billings et al. (2014) found that segregation in

CMS schools affected schooling outcomes for non-minority students.

      To begin understanding the role of alternative mediators, Appendix Table A4 analyzes schooling

attainment and arrest outcomes for white students. While our sample differs slightly from Billings

et al. (2014) since we study slightly younger cohorts, we find similar results.26 The change in

minority share has no detectable effect on the crime outcomes of the white students (Column 3),

but we find some negative effects on educational outcomes; we find that a 10-percentage point

increase in the assigned minority share results in a 2.42 percentage point decrease (p-value< 0.10)

in college attendance (Column 11).

      These results suggest that we need to go further to fully evaluate the role of education as a

mediator for white student party affiliation. Specifically, it's necessary to know how their reductions

in education might translate into partisan identity. To our knowledge, there do not exist clean causal

estimates of the effects of college attendance on party affiliation. The predominant folk wisdom

dating back to at least Newcomb (1943) is that college can socialize liberal attitudes, which would

presumably translate into less support for the Republican party. Since the treatment in our setting

  26
     As discussed in Section 3, our sample differs from Billings et al. (2014) due to differences in the years covered
in the administrative data provided by CMS for this project. Specifically, our sample contains fewer cohorts for the
analysis.

                                                         16
reduces the likelihood of attending college, our effects would reflect a lower bound of the effects of

racial contact if college enrollment liberalizes political attitudes. However, it's quite possible the

received wisdom is wrong. For example, Mendelberg et al. (2017) find suggestive evidence that

attending an affluent college can increase support for conservative economic policies. Similarly,

Marshall (2019) uses state drop-out laws to instrument for schooling and finds that each additional

completed year of high school reduces Democratic party support by 15 percentage points. While

the effects of high school and college may be quite distinct, if we assume that college attendance

is equivalent to two additional years of high school attendance in expectation, then this would

suggest that up to 0.37 percentage points (19 percent) of the effect could be explained through

school changes (i.e., 0.37 = 15 × .024). While there remains uncertainty in how the decrease in

education may translate into voting outcomes, the small effects suggest they are unlikely to explain

much of the treatment effect we observe.


6   Conclusion

    This article provides evidence that a key shock to the social lives of youth ­ a shift in the racial

composition of their schools ­ caused changes in their long-run political identities. To do so, we

use the end of race-based busing in the Charlotte-Mecklenburg School (CMS) district to compare

neighboring students who were assigned to different schools upon the redrawing of existing school

boundaries in 2002. By linking school records to administrative voter files, we estimate the effects of

this natural experiment on students' eventual political party affiliations more than a decade later.

We find that a 10-percentage point increase in the share of minorities in a white student's assigned

school decreased their likelihood of being a registered as a Republican by 12 percent (2 percentage

points), and that this impact was not driven by detectable changes in voting registration. To provide

a sense of magnitude, we use the administrative data to link children to parents, providing us with

a novel administrative estimate of a key correlation previously reported in surveys. We estimate

that the effects of the racial composition shift (a 10 percentage point increase in share of minorities)

are roughly equivalent to 16 percent of the intergenerational party affiliation correlation.

    Our approach builds on the idea that intergroup racial contact can have profound effects on

the social attitudes of children (Allport, 1954; Pettigrew and Tropp, 2006; Paluck et al., 2019), and


                                                  17
the results are consistent with this idea. However, we also explore impacts of the end of race-based

busing on other outcomes that could mediate the effects on Republican party identification for

white students. In particular, as the policy affected college attendance, we perform a back-of-the-

envelope calculation based on existing studies of partisanship and school. Using these estimates,

the evidence suggests that, at most, 19 percent of our main estimates could be explained through

changes in college enrollment.

   Overall, these findings complement an emerging set of studies that provide causal evidence that

circumstance and events in early life affect political behavior. Recent studies have demonstrated

that family income, educational interventions and neighborhoods matter for voting (Sondheimer and

Green, 2010; Akee et al., 2018; Holbein, 2017; Chyn and Haggag, 2019). Our work is distinguished by

the fact that we find evidence of effects on partisanship rather than voter turnout. Our analysis also

builds on recent work providing causal field evidence for the contact hypothesis (Lowe, 2019; Mousa,

2019; Rao, 2019). Finally, our analysis may have implications beyond North Carolina. Hundreds of

school districts were released from court-ordered desegregation during the 1990s, 2000s, and 2010s,

a policy shift that has led to the gradual re-segregation of these districts (Reardon et al., 2012; Fiel

and Zhang, 2019). In addition to the adverse effects of school segregation on economic outcomes

(Billings et al., 2014), our estimates suggest that these policy changes could have led to important

shifts in the partisan identities of Americans.




                                                  18
References
Acemoglu, Daron and Angrist, Joshua. (2001), How Large are Human-Capital Externalities?
 Evidence from Compulsory-Schooling Laws, in Kenneth Rogoff., ed., `NBER Macroeconomics
 Annual 2000', Macroeconomics Annual Book Series, pp. 9­74.

Achen, Christopher and Bartels, Larry. (2016), Democracy for Realists.

Akee, Randall, Copeland, William, Costello, E. Jane, Holbein, John and Simeonova,
 Emilia. (2018), Family Income and the Intergenerational Transmission of Voting Behavior: Evi-
 dence from an Income Intervention, NBER Working Paper 24770, National Bureau of Economic
 Research, Cambridge, MA.

Allport, Gordon W. (1954), The Nature of Prejudice, Addison-Wesley, Oxford, England. Pages:
 xviii, 537.

                              orn-Steffen. (2009), Mostly Harmless Econometrics, Princeton
Angrist, Joshua and Pischke, J¨
 University Press.

Ashenfelter, Orley, Collins, William J. and Yoon, Albert. (2006). `Evaluating the Role of
 Brown v. Board of Education in School Equalization, Desegregation, and the Income of African
 Americans', American Law and Economics Review 8(2), 213­248. Publisher: Oxford Academic.

Baicker, Katherine and Finkelstein, Amy. (2018), The Impact of Medicaid Expansion on
 Voter Participation: Evidence from the Oregon Health Insurance Experiment, NBER Working
 Paper 25244, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bald, Anthony, Chyn, Eric, Hastings, Justine S and Machelett, Margarita. (2019), The
 Causal Impact of Removing Children from Abusive and Neglectful Homes, NBER Working Paper
 25419, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Barber, Michael and Pope, Jeremy C. (2019). `Does Party Trump Ideology? Disentangling
 Party and Ideology in America', American Political Science Review 113(1), 38­54. Publisher:
 Cambridge University Press.

Bartels, Larry M. (2000). `Partisanship and Voting Behavior, 1952-1996', American Journal of
 Political Science 44(1), 35.

Bayer, Patrick, Ferreira, Fernando and McMillan, Robert. (2007). `A Unified Frame-
 work for Measuring Preferences for Schools and Neighborhoods', Journal of Political Economy
 115(4), 588­638.

Bazzi, Samuel, Gaduh, Arya, Rothenberg, Alexander D. and Wong, Maisy. (2019).
 `Unity in Diversity? How Intergroup Contact Can Foster Nation Building', American Economic
 Review 109(11), 3978­4025.

Bergman, Peter. (2020), The Risks and Benefits of School Integration for Participating Students:
 Evidence from a Randomized Desegregation Program.

Billings, Stephen B., Deming, David J. and Rockoff, Jonah. (2014). `School Segre-
  gation, Educational Attainment, and Crime: Evidence from the End of Busing in Charlotte-
  Mecklenburg*', The Quarterly Journal of Economics 129(1), 435­476.

                                              19
Black, Sandra E. (1999). `Do Better Schools Matter? Parental Valuation of Elementary Educa-
  tion', The Quarterly Journal of Economics 114(2), 577­599.

Brown, Jacob R, Enos, Ryan D, Feigenbaum, James and Mazumder, Soumyajit. (2020),
 Long-Term Causes of Partisanship: Evidence from Linked Census and Voterfile Data.

Campbell, Angus, Converse, Philip, Miller, Warren and Stokes, Donald. (1960), The
 American Voter, University of Chicago Press, Chicago; London.

Carmines, Edward G. and Stimson, James A. (1989), Issue Evolution: Race and the Trans-
 formation of American Politics, Princeton University Press.

Carrell, Scott E., Hoekstra, Mark and Kuka, Elira. (2018). `The Long-Run Effects of
 Disruptive Peers', American Economic Review 108(11), 3377­3415.

Carrell, Scott E., Hoekstra, Mark and West, James E. (2019). `The Impact of College Diver-
 sity on Behavior toward Minorities', American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 11(4), 159­
 182.

Chetty, Raj, Friedman, John N., Hilger, Nathaniel, Saez, Emmanuel, Schanzen-
 bach, Diane Whitmore and Yagan, Danny. (2011). `How Does Your Kindergarten Class-
 room Affect Your Earnings? Evidence from Project Star', The Quarterly Journal of Economics
 126(4), 1593­1660.

Chetty, Raj, Hendren, Nathaniel and Katz, Lawrence F. (2016). `The Effects of Exposure to
 Better Neighborhoods on Children: New Evidence from the Moving to Opportunity Experiment',
 American Economic Review 106(4), 855­902.

Chyn, Eric. (2018). `Moved to Opportunity: The Long-Run Effects of Public Housing Demolition
 on Children', The American Economic Review 108(10), 3028­3056.

Chyn, Eric, Gold, Samantha and Hastings, Justine S. (2019), The Returns to Early-life
 Interventions for Very Low Birth Weight Children, NBER Working Paper 25753, National Bureau
 of Economic Research.

Chyn, Eric and Haggag, Kareem. (2019), Moved to Vote: The Long-Run Effects of Neigh-
 borhoods on Political Participation, NBER Working Paper 26515, National Bureau of Economic
 Research.

Condra, Luke N. and Linardi, Sera. (2019). `Casual Contact and Ethnic Bias: Experimental
 Evidence from Afghanistan', The Journal of Politics 81(3), 1028­1042.

Dee, Thomas S. (2004). `Are there civic returns to education?', Journal of Public Economics
 88(9), 1697­1720.

Deming, David J. (2011). `Better Schools, Less Crime?', The Quarterly Journal of Economics
 126(4), 2063­2115.

Dustmann, Christian, Vasiljeva, Kristine and Piil Damm, Anna. (2019). `Refugee Migra-
 tion and Electoral Outcomes', The Review of Economic Studies 86(5), 2035­2091.

Enamorado, Ted, Fifield, Benjamin and Imai, Kosuke. (2019). `Using a Probabilistic Model
 to Assist Merging of Large-Scale Administrative Records', p. 19.
                                            20
Enos, Ryan D. (2014). `Causal effect of intergroup contact on exclusionary attitudes', Proceedings
 of the National Academy of Sciences 111(10), 3699­3704.
Enos, Ryan D., Kaufman, Aaron R. and Sands, Melissa L. (2019). `Can Violent Protest
 Change Local Policy Support? Evidence from the Aftermath of the 1992 Los Angeles Riot',
 American Political Science Review 113(4), 1012­1028.
Fiel, Jeremy E. and Zhang, Yongjun. (2019). `With All Deliberate Speed: The Reversal of
  Court-Ordered School Desegregation, 1970­2013', American Journal of Sociology 124(6), 1685­
  1719.
Garces, Eliana, Thomas, Duncan and Currie, Janet. (2002). `Longer-Term Effects of Head
 Start', The American Economic Review 92(4), 999­1012.
Gerber, Alan S. and Huber, Gregory A. (2010). `Partisanship, Political Control, and Eco-
 nomic Assessments', American Journal of Political Science 54(1), 153­173.
Gerber, Alan S., Huber, Gregory A., Meredith, Marc, Biggers, Daniel R. and Hendry,
 David J. (2017). `Does Incarceration Reduce Voting? Evidence about the Political Consequences
 of Spending Time in Prison', The Journal of Politics 79(4), 1130­1146.
Gerber, Alan S., Huber, Gregory A. and Washington, Ebonya. (2010). `Party Affilia-
 tion, Partisanship, and Political Beliefs: A Field Experiment', American Political Science Review
 104(4), 720­744.
Green, Donald P., Palmquist, Bradley and Schickler, Eric. (2004), Partisan Hearts and
 Minds: Political Parties and the Social Identities of Voters, Yale University Press.
Greenstein, Fred. (1965), Children and Politics, Yale University Press, New Haven, CT.
Guryan, Jonathan. (2004). `Desegregation and Black Dropout Rates', American Economic Re-
 view 94(4), 30.
Halla, Martin, Wagner, Alexander F and Zweim¨          uller, Josef. (2017). `Immigration and
 Voting for the Far Right', Journal of the European Economic Association 15(6), 1341­1385.
Hangartner, Dominik, Dinas, Elias, Marbach, Moritz, Matakos, Konstantinos and Xef-
 teris, Dimitrios. (2019). `Does Exposure to the Refugee Crisis Make Natives More Hostile?',
 American Political Science Review 113(2), 442­455.
Hastings, Justine S. and Weinstein, Jeffrey M. (2008). `Information, School Choice, and
 Academic Achievement: Evidence from Two Experiments', The Quarterly Journal of Economics
 123(4), 1373­1414.
Healy, Andrew and Malhotra, Neil. (2013). `Childhood Socialization and Political Attitudes:
 Evidence from a Natural Experiment', The Journal of Politics 75(4), 1023­1037.
Heckman, James, Pinto, Rodrigo and Savelyev, Peter. (2013). `Understanding the Mecha-
 nisms Through Which an Influential Early Childhood Program Boosted Adult Outcomes', Amer-
 ican Economic Review 103(6), 2052­2086.
Hess, Robert D. and Torney, Judith V. (1967), The Development of Political Attitudes in
 Children, The development of political attitudes in children, AldineTransaction, New Brunswick,
 NJ, US. Pages: xxv, 288.
                                               21
Holbein, John B. (2017). `Childhood Skill Development and Adult Political Participation',
 American Political Science Review 111(3), 572­583.

Hoynes, Hilary, Schanzenbach, Diane Whitmore and Almond, Douglas. (2016). `Long-
 Run Impacts of Childhood Access to the Safety Net', American Economic Review 106(4), 903­
 934.

Hutchings, Vincent L. and Valentino, Nicholas A. (2004). `The Centrality of Race in Amer-
 ican Politics', Annual Review of Political Science 7(1), 383­408.

Jennings, M Kent and Niemi, Richard G. (1968). `The Transmission of Political Values from
  Parent to Child', American Political Science Review 62(1), 169­184.

Jennings, M. Kent, Stoker, Laura and Bowers, Jake. (2009). `Politics across Generations:
  Family Transmission Reexamined', The Journal of Politics 71(3), 782­799.

Johnson, Rucker. (2011), Long-run Impacts of School Desegregation & School Quality on Adult
  Attainments, Technical Report w16664, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

Key, Valdimer Orlando. (1949), Southern Politics in State and Nation, A. A. Knopf.

Kousser, J. Morgan. (2010). `The Immutability of Categories and the Reshaping of Southern
 Politics', Annual Review of Political Science 13(1), 365­383.

Krosnick, Jon A and Alwin, Duane E. (1989). `Aging and Susceptibility to Attitude Change',
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 57(3), 416­425.

Kuziemko, Ilyana and Washington, Ebonya. (2018). `Why Did the Democrats Lose the
 South? Bringing New Data to an Old Debate', American Economic Review 108(10), 2830­2867.

Lenz, Gabriel S. (2012), Follow the Leader?: How Voters Respond to Politicians' Policies and
  Performance, University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Lowe, Matt. (2019), Types of Contact: A Field Experiment on Collaborative and Adversarial
  Caste Integration.

Lutz, Byron. (2011). `The End of Court-Ordered Desegregation', American Economic Journal:
 Economic Policy 3(2), 130­168.

Marshall, John. (2019). `The Anti-Democrat Diploma: How High School Education Decreases
 Support for the Democratic Party', American Journal of Political Science 63(1), 67­83.

Mayda, Anna Maria, Peri, Giovanni and Steingress, Walter. (2018), The Political Impact
 of Immigration: Evidence from the United States, Technical Report w24510, National Bureau of
 Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

McConnell, Christopher, Margalit, Yotam, Malhotra, Neil and Levendusky, Matthew.
 (2017). `The Economic Consequences of Partisanship in a Polarized Era', American Journal of
 Political Science 62(1), 5­18.

Meltzer, Allan H. and Richard, Scott F. (1981). `A Rational Theory of the Size of Govern-
 ment', Journal of Political Economy 89(5), 914­927.


                                             22
Mendelberg, Tali, McCabe, Katherine T. and Thal, Adam. (2017). `College Socializa-
 tion and the Economic Views of Affluent Americans', American Journal of Political Science
 61(3), 606­623.

Montgomery, Jacob M., Nyhan, Brendan and Torres, Michelle. (2018). `How Condition-
 ing on Posttreatment Variables Can Ruin Your Experiment and What to Do about It: Stop
 Conditioning on Posttreatment Variables in Experiments', American Journal of Political Science
 62(3), 760­775.

Mousa, Salma. (2019), Creating Coexistence: Intergroup Contact and Soccer in Post-ISIS Iraq.

Newcomb, T. M. (1943), Personality and Social Change; Attitude Formation in a Student Com-
 munity, Personality and social change; attitude formation in a student community, Dryden Press,
 Ft Worth, TX, US. Pages: x, 225.

Nie, Norman H., Nie, Research Professor of Political Science and Director of the
 Institute for Quantitative Study of Society Norman H., Junn, Jane, Junn, Assistant
 Professor Jane and Stehlik-Barry, Kenneth. (1996), Education and Democratic Citizenship
 in America, University of Chicago Press.

Nyhan, Brendan, Skovron, Christopher and Titiunik, Roc´           io. (2017). `Differential Regis-
 tration Bias in Voter File Data: A Sensitivity Analysis Approach: Differential Registration Bias
 in Voter File Data', American Journal of Political Science 61(3), 744­760.

Paluck, Elizabeth Levy, Green, Seth A. and Green, Donald P. (2019). `The Contact
 Hypothesis Re-evaluated', Behavioural Public Policy 3(02), 129­158.

Pettigrew, Thomas F. and Tropp, Linda R. (2006). `A Meta-Analytic Test of Intergroup
 Contact Theory.', Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 90(5), 751­783.

Prior, Markus. (2010). `You've Either Got It or You Don't? The Stability of Political Interest
 over the Life Cycle', The Journal of Politics 72(3), 747­766.

Prior, Markus. (2018), Hooked: How Politics Captures People's Interest, Cambridge University
 Press.

Rao, Gautam. (2019). `Familiarity Does Not Breed Contempt: Generosity, Discrimination, and
 Diversity in Delhi Schools', American Economic Review 109(3), 774­809.

Reardon, Sean F., Grewal, Elena Tej, Kalogrides, Demetra and Greenberg, Erica.
 (2012). `Brown Fades: The End of Court-Ordered School Desegregation and the Resegregation of
 American Public Schools: Brown Fades', Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 31(4), 876­
 904.

Reber, Sarah J. (2010). `School Desegregation and Educational Attainment for Blacks', Journal
 of Human Resources 45(4), 893­914.

Schofield, Janet Ward. (1991). `Chapter 8: School Desegregation and Intergroup Relations: A
  Review of the Literature', Review of Research in Education 17(1), 335­409.

Sears, David O. and Kinder, Donald R. (1971), Racial Tensions and Voting in Los Angeles,
  in Werner Z. Hirsch., ed., `Los Angeles: Viability and Prospects for Metropolitan Leadership',
  University of California, Los Angeles, New York: Praeger.
                                               23
Sondheimer, Rachel Milstein and Green, Donald P. (2010). `Using Experiments to Estimate
  the Effects of Education on Voter Turnout', American Journal of Political Science 54(1), 174­189.

Steinmayr, Andreas. (2020). `Contact versus Exposure: Refugee Presence and Voting for the
  Far-Right', The Review of Economics and Statistics pp. 1­47.

Stoker, Laura and Bass, Jackie. (2011), Political Socialization, Oxford University Press.

Tabellini, Marco. (2020). `Gifts of the Immigrants, Woes of the Natives: Lessons from the Age
  of Mass Migration', The Review of Economic Studies 87(1), 454­486.

Tuttle, Cody. (2019), The Long-run Economic Effects of School Desegregation.

United States District Court, W.D. North Carolina, Charlotte Division. (1999), `Capac-
 chione v. Charlotte-Mecklenburg Schools'. 80 F. Supp. 2d.

U.S. Census. (2018), Table 4c. Reported Voting and Registration by Age, for States: November
 2018, Technical report.

U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, Common
 Core of Data. (2000), Public Elementary/Secondary School Universe Survey, Technical report.

Valentino, Nicholas A. and Sears, David O. (2005). `Old Times There Are Not Forgotten:
 Race and Partisan Realignment in the Contemporary South', American Journal of Political
 Science 49(3), 672­688.

Velez, Yamil Ricardo and Newman, Benjamin J. (2019). `Tuning In, Not Turning Out:
 Evaluating the Impact of Ethnic Television on Political Participation', American Journal of
 Political Science 63(4), 808­823.

White, Ariel. (2019). `Misdemeanor Disenfranchisement? The Demobilizing Effects of Brief Jail
 Spells on Potential Voters', American Political Science Review 113(2), 311­324.

Yoder, Jesse. (2019), Does Property Ownership Lead to Participation in Local Politics? Evidence
 from Property Records and Meeting Minutes.




                                                24
7   Figures and Tables

    Figure 1: School Rezoning Example: Before and After Boundaries for Two Middle Schools




Notes: This figure illustrates rezoning for two middle schools in the Charlotte-Mecklenburg schools (CMS) district.
The top panel shows the school zones in the 2001-2002 academic year, immediately before the end of school busing.
The bottom panel shows the school zones in the 2002-2003 academic year. Figure is reproduced from Billings et al.
(2014).




                                                        25
                          Figure 2: Effect of the 2002 Rezoning on the School-Level Minority Composition


                   0.80




                   0.60
Share of Schools




                   0.40




                   0.20




                   0.00
                          1999        2000             2001           2002        2003          2004           2005   2006

                                                                    School Year (Spring)

                                             Schools with over 85% minorities       Schools with 35%-85% minorities


Notes: This figure reports the annual share of CMS schools that have high shares of minority students (above 85
percent) or moderate shares of minority students (between 35 and 85 percent). All elementary, middle and high
schools are included in these statistics.




                                                                             26
                 Table 1: Assigned School Minority Share and Student Characteristics


                                                                  Y = Assigned Percent Minority
                                                                  (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)
                                                                 b/se      b/se      b/se      b/se
                    pre-policy, avg. math z-score                -0.001    -0.001    -0.001    -0.000
                                                                (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)
                    pre-policy, avg. read z-score                -0.001    -0.001    -0.001    -0.001
                                                                (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)
                    pre-policy, avg. absences                    0.000     0.000     -0.000    0.000
                                                                (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)
                    pre-policy, avg. suspension                  0.000     0.003     0.005     -0.000
                                                                (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.004)   (0.002)
                    =1 if minority                               0.002
                                                                (0.002)
                    N                                           35,988    22,022    15,383    20,374
                    R2                                           0.970     0.971     0.969     0.951
                    DepVarMean                                   0.621    0.629     0.449      0.751
                    All Students?                                 Yes       No        No        No
                    Registered Voters Only?                       No        Yes       No        No
                    White Students Only?                          No        No        Yes       No
                    Minority Students Only?                       No        No        No        Yes
                       p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01
Notes: This table reports balance test results which examine whether the assigned school minority share (i.e., the key
treatment variable of interest) is predicted by student characteristics measured in the academic years observed before
the end of school busing and school boundary rezoning. All regressions include pre-reform school zone by Census
block group fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the pre-reform school zone by Census block group level.




                                                                27
             Table 2: First-stage Effects of 2002 Rezoning on School Racial Composition

                                                         Y = Attended School Percent Minority
                                                               (1)     (2)        (3)         (4)
                                                              b/se    b/se       b/se        b/se
                  Assigned Percent Minority              0.250       0.250      0.303      0.220
                                                          (0.039)     (0.052)    (0.043)    (0.053)
                  N                                       35,272     21,611     15,030      20,011
                  R2                                       0.582      0.587     0.616       0.314
                  DepVarMean                               0.578      0.585     0.424       0.694
                  All Students?                             Yes        No         No          No
                  Registered Voters Only?                   No         Yes        No          No
                  White Students Only?                      No         No        Yes          No
                  Minority Students Only?                   No         No         No         Yes
                     p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01
Notes: This table reports point estimates and standard errors from estimating Equation 1 where the dependent
variable is the share of minority students in one's school during the 2002-2003 academic year (the first year after the
end of school busing and rezoning of school boundaries). All columns control for the student's pre-reform school's
    1




characteristics (average reading scores, math scores, absences, and suspensions), the student's demographics (race,
gender, and school grade in 2002), and pre-reform school zone by Census block group fixed effects. The sample for
this analysis is restricted to students who enrolled in a CMS school in the 2002-2003 academic year. The overall
enrollment rate for the main sample is 98 percent. Standard errors are clustered at the pre-reform school zone by
Census block group level.




                                                                28
                                    Table 3: Effects of 2002 Rezoning on Party Affiliation

                                                    Y = Registered as Republican            ...as Democrat   ...as Other
                                                   (1)      (2)           (3)       (4)          (5)             (6)
                                                  b/se     b/se          b/se      b/se         b/se            b/se
      Assigned Percent Minority              -0.070      -0.097      -0.195        0.002        0.068          0.050
                                              (0.025)     (0.040)     (0.071)     (0.020)      (0.048)        (0.076)
      N                                       35,988      22,022         15,383   20,374       15,383          15,383
      R2                                      0.119       0.213          0.077    0.067        0.086           0.085
      DepVarMean                               0.080      0.130           0.164    0.016        0.136           0.273
      All Students?                             Yes         No             No       No           No              No
      Registered Voters Only?                   No         Yes             No       No           No              No
      White Students Only?                      No          No             Yes      No           Yes             Yes
      Minority Students Only?                   No          No             No       Yes          No              No
         p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01
    Notes: This table reports point estimates and standard errors from estimating Equation 1 where the dependent
    variable is a measure of party affiliation obtained from voting records. In North Carolina, voters can register as
    Republican, Democratic, Unaffiliated, as one of the other three officially recognized parties, or those who remain
1




    unregistered. We refer to the latter two categories (Unaffiliated or third party) as "Other" in our analysis. Appendix
    Figure B1 reproduces the NC voter registration form. All columns control for the student's pre-reform school's
    characteristics (average reading scores, math scores, absences, and suspensions), the student's demographics (race,
    gender, and school grade in 2002), and pre-reform school zone by Census block group fixed effects. The sample for
    this analysis is restricted to students who enrolled in a CMS school in the 2002-2003 academic year. Standard errors
    are clustered at the pre-reform school zone by Census block group level.




                                                                    29
                                                      Table 4: Effects of 2002 Rezoning on Political Participation

                                                       Y = Registered     Y = Vote Ever         Y = Vote, 2014        Y = Vote, 2016        Y = Vote, 2018
                                                              (1)                (2)                   (3)                    (4)                   (5)
                                                             b/se               b/se                  b/se                   b/se                  b/se
                Assigned Percent Minority                    -0.076             -0.116                0.058                 -0.140                 -0.025
                                                            (0.088)            (0.083)               (0.064)               (0.091)                (0.072)
                N                                           15,383             15,383                15,383                 15,383                15,383
                R2                                          0.098               0.104                0.073                  0.089                 0.085
                DepVarMean                                   0.573              0.481                0.157                  0.347                  0.255
                All Students?                                 No                 No                    No                     No                    No
                Registered Voters Only?                       No                 No                    No                     No                    No
30




                White Students Only?                          Yes                Yes                  Yes                    Yes                    Yes
                Minority Students Only?                       No                 No                    No                     No                    No
                   p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01
     Notes: This table reports point estimates and standard errors from estimating Equation 1 where the dependent variable is a measure of political participation
     (voting) for various general election years, as recorded in the July 27, 2019 NCSEB voter file. The variable Vote Ever is a measure of voting in any general election
     from 2009-2018. All columns control for the student's pre-reform school's characteristics (average reading scores, math scores, absences, and suspensions), the
 1




     student's demographics (race, gender, and school grade in 2002), and pre-reform school zone by Census block group fixed effects. The sample for this analysis is
     restricted to students who enrolled in a CMS school in the 2002-2003 academic year. Standard errors are clustered at the pre-reform school zone by Census block
     group level.
                                              Table 5: Comparing Effects of 2002 Rezoning and Parent Party Affiliation

                                                            Y = Matched       Y = Parent          Y = Parent                     Y = Registered
                                                             Birth Rec.       Registered        Reg. Republican                  as Republican
                                                                 (1)                (2)                 (3)               (4)          (5)          (6)
                                                                b/se               b/se                b/se              b/se         b/se         b/se
                Assigned Percent Minority                       -0.030            -0.030               0.017           -0.251                    -0.253
                                                               (0.118)           (0.166)              (0.157)           (0.108)                   (0.108)
                Parent Registered as Republican                                                                                     0.156        0.156
                                                                                                                                     (0.012)      (0.012)
                N                                              15,383             7,155                7,155             7,155        7,155        7,155
                R2                                             0.228              0.222                0.147             0.121        0.151        0.152
31




                DepVarMean                                      0.474             0.617                0.338             0.185        0.185        0.185
                All Students?                                    No                No                   No                No           No           No
                Registered Voters Only?                          No                No                   No                No           No           No
                White Students Only?                             Yes               Yes                  Yes               Yes          Yes          Yes
                Minority Students Only?                          No                No                   No                No           No           No
                Matched to Parents Only?                         No                Yes                  Yes               Yes          Yes          Yes
 1




                   p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01
     Notes: Column 1 reports point estimates and standard errors from estimating Equation 1 where the dependent variable is an indicator for whether a child matched
     to a birth record with parent information. Columns 2-6 are restricted to students who matched to a birth record with parent information. Columns 2 and 3 report
     results from Equation 1 where the dependent variable is an indicator for whether one's parent is a registered voter or whether one's parent is registered as a
     Republican. Columns 4-6 report results from Equation 1 where the dependent variable is an indicator for whether the student is registered as a Republican. All
     columns control for the student's pre-reform school's characteristics (average reading scores, math scores, absences, and suspensions), the student's demographics
     (race, gender, and school grade in 2002), and pre-reform school zone by Census block group fixed effects. The sample for this analysis is restricted to students
     who enrolled in a CMS school in the 2002-2003 academic year. Standard errors are clustered at the pre-reform school zone by Census block group level.
                                                         Online Appendix
A                        Appendix Figures and Tables




                                               Figure A1: Racial Attitudes and Party Affiliation


                                                       2016 Party Affiliation and Racial Attitudes
                         .75
Percent of Respondents




                          .5




                         .25




                          0
                               (A) Agree: I am angry   (B) Agree: Whites have   (C) Disagree: I often   (D) Disagree: Racial problems
                                   racism exists.        certain advantages          find myself             in the U.S. are rare,
                                                           because of the         fearful of people           isolated situations.
                                                         color of their skin       of other races.

                                                               Non-Republican         Republican


Notes: This table presents an analysis of survey questions from the Cooperative Congressional Election Study's 2016
wave. In this survey, respondents are asked to report their agreement on a 1-5 scale with the statements (A) "I am
angry racism exists." and (B) " Whites have certain advantages because of the color of their skin." In the results
above, we report the fraction of the sample that has the highest agreement (1) with these statements. Respondents
are also asked to report their disagreement with the statements (C) "I often find myself fearful of people of other
races." and (D) "Racial Problems in the U.S., are rare, isolated situations. In the results above, we report the fraction
of the sample that has the highest disagreement (5) with these statements.




                                                                    Appendix - 1
           Figure A2: Distribution of the Change in School Minority Share After 2002 Rezoning


          6.000




          4.000
Density




          2.000




          0.000
                  -1                 -.5                      0                         .5                    1

                                Student-Level Change in Assigned School Share Minority

                                             White Students        Non-white Students


Notes: This figure displays densities for the change in school minority share for each student in our analysis sample.
For each student, we compute the change as the difference between the school assigned for the 2002-2003 academic
year and the school attended in the 2001-2002 academic year.




                                                   Appendix - 2
                                         Table A1: Summary Statistics


                                                                                    (1)
                                                                                  Avg.

                          White                                                  0.430
                          Non-white                                               0.570
                          Male                                                   0.496
                          Grade (in 2002)                                        5.466
                          Avg. Math Std. Scores (Pre-policy)                     -0.012
                          Avg. Read Std. Scores (Pre-policy)                     -0.015
                          Avg. Absences (Pre-policy)                              7.750
                          Avg. Suspended (Pre-policy)                            0.094
                          Enrolled in 2003                                       0.980
                          Reassigned in 2003                                     0.469
                          Registered Voter                                       0.614
                          Voted, General Elections 2009-2018                     0.499
                          # Voted, General Elections 2009-2018                   1.377
                          Voted, Primary Elections 2009-2018                      0.192
                          Voted, Any Elections 2009-2018                         0.505
                          # Voted, Any Elections 2009-2018                        1.713
                          Registered Republican                                  0.080
                          Registered Democrat                                    0.330
                          Registered Other                                        0.205
                          N                                                      35,988

Notes: This table reports descriptive statistics for the main analysis sample. Measures of schooling characteristics and
voting outcomes are based on administrative records from CMS and voting records, respectively. Note that registered
voters in North Carolina (NC) may choose from one of five recognized political parties or they can choose to be
unaffiliated. Appendix Figure B1 reproduces the NC voter registration form. We group unaffiliated voters and those
who register as a third party as "Other" for our analysis. See Section 3 for further details.




                                                   Appendix - 3
           Table A2: Effects of 2002 Rezoning on Enrollment in the Next Academic Year

                                                                  Y = Enrolled in 2002-2003
                                                               (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)
                                                              b/se      b/se      b/se      b/se
                      Assigned Percent Minority               0.003     0.017     0.008     0.009
                                                             (0.014)   (0.014)   (0.033)   (0.015)
                      N                                      35,988    22,022    15,383    20,374
                      R2                                     0.052      0.076     0.091    0.063
                      DepVarMean                             0.980      0.981     0.977     0.982
                      All Students?                           Yes        No        No        No
                      Registered Voters Only?                  No        Yes       No        No
                      White Students Only?                     No        No        Yes       No
                      Minority Students Only?                  No        No        No        Yes
                         p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01
Notes: This table reports point estimates and standard errors from estimating Equation 1 where the dependent
variable is an indicator for enrollment in a CMS school during the 2002-2003 academic year (the first year after the
end of school busing and rezoning of school boundaries). The control variables in the model are pre-reform averages
         1




measures for reading scores, math scores, absences, suspensions and controls for demographics. Standard errors are
clustered at the pre-reform school zone by Census block group level.




                                                        Appendix - 4
              Table A3: Effects of 2002 Rezoning on Party Affiliation, Robustness (No Controls)

                                                    Y = Registered as Republican         ...as Democrat    ...as Other
                                                   (1)      (2)        (3)       (4)          (5)               (6)
                                                  b/se     b/se       b/se      b/se         b/se              b/se
      Assigned Percent Minority              -0.086      -0.140     -0.183      0.003        0.054            0.026
                                              (0.028)     (0.046)    (0.072)   (0.020)      (0.048)          (0.076)
      N                                       35,988      22,022     15,383    20,374       15,383           15,383
      R2                                      0.091        0.155     0.071     0.066        0.080            0.075
      DepVarMean                               0.080       0.130      0.164     0.016        0.136            0.273
      All Students?                             Yes         No         No        No           No               No
      Registered Voters Only?                   No          Yes        No        No           No               No
      White Students Only?                      No          No         Yes       No           Yes              Yes
      Minority Students Only?                   No          No         No        Yes          No               No
         p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01
    Notes: This table reports point estimates and standard errors from estimating Equation 1 where the dependent
    variable is a measure of party affiliation obtained from voting records. In North Carolina, voters can register as
    Republican, Democratic, Unaffiliated, as one of the other three officially recognized parties, or those who remain
1




    unregistered. We refer to the latter two categories (Unaffiliated or third party) as "Other" in our analysis. Appendix
    Figure B1 reproduces the NC voter registration form. All columns control for the student's pre-reform school's
    characteristics (average reading scores, math scores, absences, and suspensions), the student's demographics (race,
    gender, and school grade in 2002), and pre-reform school zone by Census block group fixed effects. The sample for
    this analysis is restricted to students who enrolled in a CMS school in the 2002-2003 academic year. Standard errors
    are clustered at the pre-reform school zone by Census block group level.




                                                            Appendix - 5
                                                                 Table A4: Effects of 2002 Rezoning on Schooling and Criminal Outcomes

                                                                      Y = Ever Arrested                         Y = HS Grad                            Y = Attend College
                                                              (1)        (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)       (9)       (10)      (11)      (12)
                                                             b/se       b/se      b/se      b/se      b/se      b/se      b/se      b/se      b/se       b/se      b/se      b/se
                     Assigned Percent Minority               0.047      0.050     -0.017   0.102      -0.062    -0.105    -0.089    -0.083    -0.068     -0.090   -0.242     -0.027
                                                            (0.054)    (0.057)   (0.069)   (0.060)   (0.064)   (0.077)   (0.128)   (0.083)   (0.069)    (0.096)   (0.141)   (0.073)
    Appendix - 6




                     N                                      32,131     19,507    13,695    18,196    17,545    10,485    7,610     9,780     17,545     10,485    7,610     9,780
                     R2                                     0.186       0.190     0.134    0.186     0.274      0.291    0.285     0.276     0.296      0.307     0.310     0.285
                     DepVarMean                             0.183       0.171     0.094     0.250    0.460      0.465    0.530     0.404      0.343     0.359     0.439     0.268
                     All Students?                           Yes         No        No        No       Yes        No       No        No         Yes        No       No        No
                     Registered Voters Only?                  No         Yes       No        No        No        Yes      No        No         No        Yes       No        No
                     White Students Only?                     No         No        Yes       No        No        No       Yes       No         No         No       Yes       No
                     Minority Students Only?                  No         No        No        Yes       No        No       No        Yes        No         No       No        Yes
                        p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01

                   Notes: This table reports point estimates and standard errors from estimating Equation 1 where the dependent variable is an indicator for ever having an arrest,
                   high-school graduation or enrollment in a four year post-secondary institution. Standard errors are clustered at the pre-reform school zone by Census block group
                   level.
1
B     Appendix on Data Construction

    The analysis in this paper is based on a sample of students in the Charlotte Mecklenburg

School (CMS) district linked to voting records from North Carolina, South Carolina and Virginia.

The process for creating the sample consists of the following steps:


    1. Cleaning the sample of CMS students: The sample construction process begins with

      administrative records that track all CMS school students from 1998-99 to 2010-11. The

      data include information on student demographics (e.g., gender, race), home address in each

      academic year, and measures of academic outcomes such as state test scores (grades 3-8), ab-

      sences, and suspensions. We create an initial sample (prior to matching to voting records) of

      36,487 students in grades 3-8 who were enrolled in CMS in the academic year 2001-2002, the

      baseline year immediately before the change in busing regime, had address and name infor-

      mation (which is necessary for linking to voting outcomes), and had non-missing demographic

      and previous academic performance measures. We focus on grades 3-8 since this restriction

      ensures that included students will have test scores in the academic year before the change in

      busing regime. We use address information based on the 2001-2002 academic year to define

      the main independent variable of interest. The home address information allows us to identify

      a student's assigned school in the academic year 2002-2003, which was the first post-busing

      period. The main independent variable of interest for our analysis is the minority share of

      students based on one's post-busing assigned school in the 2002-2003 academic year. We also

      link each students home address in the pre-business academic year (2001-2002) to 2000 Cen-

      sus geographies. We use the block groups from the 2000 Census to define neighborhoods for

      each student.

    2. Linking students to voting records: We link the initial sample of 36,487 students to voting

      registration and history records from North Carolina (current as of July 2019), South Carolina

      (current as of January 2019), and Virginia (current as of January 2019). The voting records

      from North Carolina were downloaded from the North Carolina State Board of Elections

      (NCSBE) website in July 2019. The voting records for South Carolina and Virginia were

      obtained from L2, Incorporated. Voting data from L2 has been used in prior research (Velez

                                           Appendix - 7
       and Newman, 2019; Yoder, 2019; Enamorado et al., 2019; Chyn and Haggag, 2019). The

       NCSBE voting records include voter registration for the full state, as well as voter turnout

       in the 2009-2018 general and primary elections. The voting records from South Carolina and

       Virginia include voter registration for both states, as well as turnout in the 2000-2018 general

       and primary elections. The voting records from North Carolina contain self-reported party

       affiliation. Five political parties are recognized in North Carolina: Constitution, Democratic,

       Green, Libertarian and Republican. Registered voters may choose one of these political parties

       when completing a voter registration application, or they may choose not to register with

       any political party and be designated as unaffiliated. In the records from L2, there is an L2-

       modeled party affiliation variable.B1 To link the voting records to the sample of CMS children,

       we use first name, middle initial, last name, year of birth and geography. Prior studies have

       used name and date of birth information to link administrative and voting records.B2 Ideally,

       we would use birthday for record linking, but the North Carolina voting records only contain

       year of birth. We use geography in our linking process as follows. First, we link all CMS

       students to the North Carolina records based on first name, middle initial, last name and

       year of birth. Second, we match the remaining persons who fail to match to voting records

       from North Carolina to the records from South Carolina and Virginia. Based on the two-step

       linking, we retain all persons who uniquely matched to a voting record. Note that about

       1 percent of the sample of children match to more than one voting record. We remove all

       children who have duplicate matches in the voting records. The final sample that we study

       contains 35,988 children who attended 107 different schools in the 2002-2003 academic year.

       We matched 59 percent of students to a voting record in North Carolina. We can compare this

       statistic to Census statistics on voter registration. In 2018, the average child in the sample is

       about 28 years old. Based on the November 2018 election, 65.7 percent of age 25 to 34 citizens

       were registered voters in North Carolina (U.S. Census, 2018). While our match rate in North

       Carolina is lower than the statewide voter registration rate, it is important to note that we
  B1
      The voting records from Virginia and South Carolina are from L2, Incorporated. The Virginia and South Carolina
records are current as of January 2019. Unlike North Carolina, both Virginia and South Carolina do not register voters
by party ­ instead L2 models party affiliation by the most recent primary in which a voter cast a partisan ballot.
   B2
      For example, Baicker and Finkelstein (2018) use full name, date of birth and gender to link data from the Oregon
Health Experiment to voting records. Akee et al. (2018) use first name, last name and date of birth to link the Great
Smoky Mountains Study survey data to voting records. Holbein (2017) use first name, last name and birthday to
match individuals who participated in the Fast Track intervention to voter records.

                                                   Appendix - 8
       expect that some CMS children move out of North Carolina later in life. This possibility is

       the justification for matching the sample to voting records from Virginia and South Carolina

       as part of the second step in our matching process. We matched about 2 percent of the sample

       to a voting record in Virginia or South Carolina. Overall, we match 61.4 percent of students

       in our sample to a voting record.

   3. Linking students to birth records: We linked the final sample of 35,988 students to

       birth records from 1990 to 2001 obtained from the North Carolina State Center for Health

       Statistics. The birth records include information for the names of children and their parents,

       the student's date of birth, and address at the time of birth information. We link the final

       sample to birth records in two steps. First, we link children based on their name and date

       of birth information. We matched 13,678 students (38 percent) using this approach. Second,

       for the remaining children who were not matched to birth records, we matched to the birth

       records based on the last name and address information. This matching approach allows us to

       obtain information on parents for children who were born before 1990, the first year of birth

       records available to us.B3 This is because younger siblings (born 1990-2001) who share the

       same last name and home address will be identified in this approach, allowing us to identify

       parents. We matched 2,991 students (8.1 percent) using this approach.B4 Overall, we linked

       16,669 students (46.32 percent) to their parents as recorded in birth records.




  B3
       Approximately 38 percent of students in the final sample are born before 1990.
  B4
       Note that the results of our analysis of the intergenerational transmission of political preferences in Section 5
are robust to focusing only on the subset of students identified in birth records using full name and date of birth
(i.e., omitting any student linked to parents through last name and address information alone). Appendix Table B1
reports results for the subsample of children linked to parents only using the approach based on full name and date
of birth.

                                                   Appendix - 9
                                          Figure B1: North Carolina Voter Registration Form

NORTH CAROLINA VOTER REGISTRATION APPLICATION (fields in red text are required)                                                                               2020.02       06w
 1 Indicate whether you are qualified to vote or preregister to vote based on U.S. cizenship and age.
                                                     Are you a cizen of the United States of America?
       IF YOU CHECKED "NO" IN RESPONSE TO THIS CITIZENSHIP QUESTION, DO NOT SUBMIT THIS FORM. YOU ARE NOT QUALIFIED TO VOTE                                              Yes       No

                                               Will you be at least 18 years of age on or before elecon day?                                                             Yes       No

             Are you at least 16 years of age and understand that you must be 18 years of age on or before elecon day to vote?
                           IF YOU CHECKED "NO" IN RESPONSE TO BOTH OF THESE AGE QUESTIONS, DO NOT SUBMIT THIS FORM.                                                      Yes       No
                                           YOU ARE NOT QUALIFIED TO REGISTER OR PREREGISTER TO VOTE.
 2 Provide your full legal name.                                                            3 Provide your date of birth and idenficaon informaon.
Last Name                                                                      Suffix      Date of Birth (MM/DD/YYYY)                      State or Country of Birth

                                                                                                    /               /
First Name
                                                                                           NC Driver License or NC DMV ID Number Last 4 Digits of Social Security Number

Middle Name
                                                                                                Check if you do not have State Voter Registraon Number (Optional: To
                                                                                                a driver license or      locate, check "Voter Lookup" at www.NCSBE.gov.)
                                                                                                Social Security number.

 4 Provide  your residenal address - where you physically live.
   Do not enter a P.O. Box or a mail drop location.
                                                                                            5 Provide a mailing address.
Address Number            Street Name and Type                                             Do you receive           Mailing Address Line 1
                                                                                           mail at your
                                                                                           residenal
Address Line 2 (e.g., apartment, lot or unit number)                                       address?
                                                                                               Yes      No          Mailing Address Line 2
                                                                                           If "No", you are
City                                                      State      Zip Code              required to              Mailing Address Line 3
                                                                                           provide a mailing
                                                                                           address.

County                     Have you lived at this                 If "No", date moved?                              City                           State     Zip Code
                           address for 30 or more days?
                                 Yes          No

No Physical Address? If you do not have an address, use the space                                                                                                       NORTH
to the right to illustrate where you normally live or sleep. Write in
the names of the nearest crossroads (or streets). Draw an X on
the map to show where you live or usually sleep.
IMPORTANT: You should also provide a valid mailing address
above to permit the board of elecons to send you a voter card.
 6 Provide your demographic informaon (oponal).                                             7 Provide your choice for polical party affiliaon.
               Male                                   African American/Black                   Democratic Party             Libertarian Party          Other
Gender                                                                                                                                                 ___________________
               Female                                 American Indian/Alaska Native            Constitution Party           Republican Party
                                                                                                                                                   If you select a party that is
                                       Race           Asian         Multiracial                Green Party                  Unaffiliated
                                                                                                                                                   not recognized in North
               Not Hispanic/Latino
Ethnicity                                             Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander                                                             Carolina, you will be
               Hispanic/Latino                                                                                                                     registered as Unaffiliated.
                                                      White         Other

 8     Complete if you are currently registered to vote in another NC county or in another state.
       (This information will be used to cancel your previous voter registration in the other county or state.)
First Name Used in Last Registraon                 Middle Name Used in Last Registraon                  Last Name Used in Last Registration                               Suffix
                   Notes: This figure reproduces the North Carolina state voter registration form as of 2019.
Address Where You Were Last Registered                                         City/State/Zip Code of Last Registraon                      County of Last Registraon


 9 Provide your contact informaon (oponal).
       (This information is helpful if we need to contact you concerning your voter registration. Your contact information may be disclosed as a public record.)
Area Code      Phone Number                                       Email Address                                               Would you like to be contacted to be a poll worker?
                                                                                                                                                     Yes     No

10 Sign below to aest to your qualificaons to vote.
       FRAUDULENTLY OR FALSELY COMPLETING THIS FORM IS A CLASS I FELONY UNDER CHAPTER 163 OF THE NC GENERAL STATUTES.
                                                                          Appendix
 I aest, under penalty of perjury, that in addion to having read and understood            - 10 of this form, that: (1) I am a United States cizen, as indicated
                                                                                     the contents
 above; (2) I am at least 18 years of age, or will be by the date of the general elecon; or I am at least 16 years old and understand that I must be at least 18 years
 old on the day of the general elecon to vote; I shall have been a resident of North Carolina, this county, and precinct for 30 days before the date of the elecon in
 which I intend to vote; (3) I will not vote in any other county or state aer submission of this form and if I am registered elsewhere, I am canceling that registraon
 at this me; and (4) I have not been convicted of a felony, or if I have been convicted of a felony, I have completed my sentence, including any probaon.
 X
                                                   Signature Required                                                                                Date
                               Table B1: Comparing Effects of 2002 Rezoning and Parent Party Affiliation, Robustness (Alternative Sample)

                                                                              Y = Matched
                                                                               Birth Rec.   Y = Parent      Y = Parent                   Y = Registered
                                                                                  M1        Registered    Reg. Republican                as Republican
                                                                                  (1)           (2)               (3)             (4)         (5)          (6)
                                                                                 b/se          b/se              b/se            b/se        b/se         b/se
                                  Assigned Percent Minority                      0.077         -0.119            0.009         -0.240                  -0.241
                                                                                (0.104)       (0.145)           (0.165)         (0.120)                 (0.118)
                                  Parent Registered as Republican                                                                           0.171      0.171
                                                                                                                                             (0.013)    (0.013)
Appendix - 11




                                  N                                             15,383        5,774              5,774           5,774       5,774        5,774
                                  R2                                            0.280         0.212              0.152           0.128       0.167        0.168
                                  DepVarMean                                     0.379        0.751              0.414           0.189       0.189        0.189
                                  All Students?                                   No           No                 No              No          No           No
                                  Registered Voters Only?                         No           No                 No              No          No           No
                                  White Students Only?                            Yes          Yes                Yes             Yes         Yes          Yes
                                  Minority Students Only?                         No           No                 No              No          No           No
                                  Matched to Parents Using M1?                    No           Yes                Yes             Yes         Yes          Yes
                     1




                                     p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01

                Notes: Column 1 reports point estimates and standard errors from estimating Equation 1 where the dependent variable is an indicator for whether a child was
                matched to a birth record with parent information using name and date of birth information only (hereafter referred to as "M1"). Columns 2-6 are restricted to
                students who matched to a birth record with parent information using method M1. Columns 2 and 3 report results from Equation 1 where the dependent variable
                is an indicator for whether one's parent is a registered voter or whether one's parent is registered as a Republican. Columns 4-6 report results from Equation
                1 where the dependent variable is an indicator for whether the student is registered as a Republican. In all regressions, the control variables in the model are
                pre-reform averages measures for reading scores, math scores, absences, suspensions and controls for demographics. Standard errors are clustered at the pre-reform
                school zone by Census block group level.
