                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           RECIPROCITY VERSUS REELECTION

                                        Prateik Dalmia
                                         Allan Drazen
                                        Erkut Y. Ozbay

                                      Working Paper 27301
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27301


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2020




Drazen gratefully thanks the National Science Foundation (grant SES 1534132) and the Gaspard
Monge Visiting Professorship for financial support, as well as École Polytechnique for its
hospitality. Dalmia is grateful to the Institute for Humane Studies, as well as University of
Maryland for financial support. We thank Jonathon Bendor, Daniel Friedman, Ian Chadd, Alexey
Kushnir, seminar participants at École Polytechnique, Raboud University, and Stanford GSB, and
conference participants at IOEA 2018, Corsica, Fourth Taxation Theory Conference, Barcelona
GSE Summer Forum, Economic Science Association World Meetings, and Economic Science
Association North America Meetings, for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Prateik Dalmia, Allan Drazen, and Erkut Y. Ozbay. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Reciprocity versus Reelection
Prateik Dalmia, Allan Drazen, and Erkut Y. Ozbay
NBER Working Paper No. 27301
June 2020
JEL No. C91,D72,D78

                                           ABSTRACT

We study how reelection concerns affect reciprocity by elected leaders to the voters who elected
them. If showing kindness to past voters reduces the chances of reelection, will an elected leader
reduce or eliminate such intrinsic reciprocity? We present a signalling model of candidate
behavior, where we show that candidates may limit intrinsic reciprocity to past voters to signal
congruence with voters important for reelection, and selfish candidates may mimic reciprocal
behavior for instrumental purposes. We then present an experiment that tests these ideas in the
laboratory and finds support for the model. Both candidates and voters behave as the signalling
model predicts. Our key finding is that the desire to be reelected may limit intrinsic reciprocity of
an elected leader to the voters who put her in office, but does not eliminate it entirely.


Prateik Dalmia                                    Erkut Y. Ozbay
University of Maryland                            Department of Economics
3114 Tydings Hall                                 University of Maryland
7343 Preinkert Dr.                                College Park, MD 20742
College Park, MD 20742                            ozbay@umd.edu
prateikdalmia@gmail.com

Allan Drazen
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
drazen@econ.umd.edu




An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w27301
                                      I    INTRODUCTION

Incumbent politicians care strongly about being reelected and hence about strategies to help

their reelection chances. One such tool that incumbency allows them is the allocation of

resources to potential voters. This may be especially important when commitment to post-

election policies is seen as not fully credible, so that the distribution of resources before

an election may be used to indicate post-election intentions. Allocating resources to show

congruence with the policy preferences of key voting groups may therefore be an important

reelection strategy. Voters would use spending choices observed before an election to try to

infer an incumbent's policy priorities and hence her likely policy choices if reelected.1

    Such a strategy of course implies trade-offs when voting groups have different policy

preferences. By giving benefits to one group of voters to indicate that she shares their prefer-

ences, a candidate signals to a group with different preferences that the does not share theirs.

Hence, a candidate who uses distribution of benefits instrumentally to improve her reelection

prospects must weigh the net benefits of a distributional choice in gaining votes from one

group of potential voters while losing them from another.

    Groups whose turnout is expected to be low will have little weight in this instrumental

electoral calculus from a candidate whose goal is reelection, unless of course distribution of

benefits can induce higher turnout. This is a key argument in the debate of "who should

be targeted?" -- swing voters who might change the candidate for whom they vote versus

a candidate's "core" constituency, where a candidate's goal is to induce them to turn out to

vote.2

    Ideological considerations of course could also affect an incumbent's choice of policies

or distribution of benefits in the run-up to an election. A candidate who is motivated by

both reelection concerns and ideology may temper her purely instrumental choice of the

distribution of benefits if it conflicts too strongly with her underlying policy preferences. (As

we shall argue, "ideological limitations" on the distribution of benefits a candidate is willing

to choose is what may give them their signaling value about post-electoral policy.)


    1 The view that commitment to policy platforms is not credible has led to the "citizen-candidate" approach

(e.g., Besley and Coate (1997) or Osborne and Slivinski (1996)) where candidates follow their policy preferences
once elected, so that platform commitments in themselves carry no information. Key to his approach is that
these preferences are known to voters. The argument here is a variant of the citizen-candidate where candidate
preferences are not known ex-ante, and pre-electoral choices are use to signal these choices, as in Drazen and
Eslava (2006, 2010)).
    2 For example, see Cox (2010).



                                                       2
    Absent from the literature on instrumental or ideological motivations for choices made

by an incumbent facing reelection is another type of motivation entirely. Might a candidate's

choices be such as to show gratitude to those who put her in office, independent of any

instrumental benefits such a display might have? That is, will incumbent's display non-

instrumental reciprocity to the voters who elected her (for example, as in Sobel (2005))?3 To

the extent that resources are then distributed to individuals who are not central to reelection,

or to those whose turnout is expected to be exogenously low in the upcoming election, such

reciprocity (or even basic altruism) is potentially costly to reelection efforts. How might

reciprocity alter reelection-oriented behavior? This is the issue we explore in this paper, both

theoretically and experimentally.

    We consider a model in which an elected candidate attracts votes in her reelection bid by

trying to convince voters that she will enact policies favorable to them if reelected. She does

this by showing that her policy preferences are "congruent" with theirs. When her policy tool

is distribution of benefits before an election, she must give them enough benefits to signal her

congruent preferences. Doing so successfully will increase her chances of reelection.

    We demonstrate, however, that candidates with reciprocal preferences still show reciprocal

behavior when facing reelection, but that the conflict between reciprocity and reelection may

lead them to limit their reciprocity when voters have a sufficiently high cost of voting. This is

a key result, which we find confirmed in a laboratory experiment. We further find that (both

in the theory and the experimental results) when congruent candidates use distribution of

benefits to signal her policy preferences, a "non-congruent" candidate may mimic a congruent

one in order to be reelected. Voters respond to signalling by not voting for a candidate whom

they believe does not share their policy interests, a theoretical prediction of a signalling model

that is confirmed in the lab.

    A laboratory experiment allows us to isolate reciprocity to past voters from benefits to

prospective voters in a way that is difficult, if not impossible, in naturally occurring election

data. For example, one identification issue that may arise is that when the set of voters in past

and future elections significantly overlap, an incumbent giving benefits to past voters who

strongly supported her (or punishing voters who did not) may both reflect her attempting to

    3 "Intrinsic
               reciprocity is a property of preferences... It is more traditional to view reciprocity as the result of
optimizing actions of selfish agents. Responding to kindness with kindness in order to sustain a profitable long-
term relationship or to obtain a (profitable) reputation for being a reliable associate are examples of instrumental
reciprocity. Economics typically describes instrumental reciprocity using models of reputation and repeated
interaction" (Sobel, 2005, pp. 392-392).


                                                          3
influence their votes in the next election, and her reciprocity motives. By having a different set

of voters in sequential elections, our experimental design allows us to disentangle reciprocal

and reelection motives.

   The plan of the paper is as follows. In the next section, a brief review of the literature

is presented, and in section III we go over the basic conceptual set-up of our approach and

outline a model of candidates giving benefits to different voters to signal their preferences and

describe the equilibria of the election games. Section IV sets out the experimental design and

section V presents our experimental results and interprets them. The final section presents

conclusions. Appendix A presents a more formal treatment of the theory and the equilibria

described in the text.



                                    II   LITERATURE

Our paper relates to several literatures. One of course is the literature on reciprocity, with

the theoretical literature considering a range of questions such as whether there is reciprocity

to the actions, the intentions, or the motivations of the original actor. In the experimental

literature there is significant evidence of intrinsic reciprocity in gift-exchange, trust, public

goods, ultimatum and other games. Fehr and Schmidt (2006) present a fairly comprehensive

summary.

   We are interested in the specific question of how other goals affect reciprocal behavior.

There is a literature on how signalling motives may induce people with selfish preferences

to act as if they are kind -- "crowding in" of reciprocity ­ as in the work ofLevine (1998),

Bénabou and Tirole (2006), Camerer and Fehr (2006), and Malmendier et al. (2014) among

others. This may result from self-image concerns, social pressure, or the desire for reciprocity

from other agents. Mimicking of reciprocal types by selfish types is, in a sense, the opposite

of our main point, namely how the desire to signal that the candidate's selfish preferences

are congruent with those of the voter in the upcoming election induces less kind behavior by

the candidate.

   On "crowding out" of kind behavior, the literature considers how the perception that

intrinsic kindness may be seen as motivated by selfish desires may reduce kind actions (Frey

and Oberholzer-Gee, 1997; Gneezy and Rustichini, 2000; Bénabou and Tirole, 2006; Ariely

et al., 2009; Promberger and Marteau, 2013). For example, giving monetary incentives for



                                                4
blood donations or for contributing to a charity may reduce the donations (Mellström and

Johannesson, 2008; Niza et al., 2013). The reduction in intrinsically motivated behavior is

analogous to our finding, but the mechanism is conceptually rather different. In particular, in

these cases reciprocity is reduced because it aligns with other selfish motives, whereas in our

case reciprocity is reduced because it conflicts with other, perhaps selfish, reelection motives.

Limiting reciprocity because of "crowding out" would seem to be a not uncommon event, but

we are aware of no experimental work showing such "constrained reciprocity" that we study.

   In the political economy literature, the role of reciprocity in elections focuses on reciprocity

by voters, for example in the work of Finan and Schechter (2012) or Ozbay and Tonguc (2018),

which link successful vote buying by politicians to reciprocity by targeted voters, and Hahn

(2009). Of course, a trade of votes for politician favors is conceptually different than ex post

distribution of benefits by politicians to those who elected them due to intrinsic reciprocity.

   To the best of our knowledge, there are almost no papers in the literature examining the

intrinsic reciprocity of politicians to the voters who elected them. Drazen and Ozbay (2019)

studied a one-shot dictator game where they considered how the way in which the dictator

was chosen affected the degree of other-regarding behavior. In a laboratory experiment,

they found that leaders who are elected are significantly more likely to share than leaders

who are appointed, and that elected leaders tend to favor the voter who elected them rather

than the losing candidate, while appointed leaders show no such tendency. They argued

that the results provided support for the view that non-selfish behavior of leaders reflects

a reciprocity motive. Enemark et al. (2016) performs a laboratory experiment involving a

trust game, where the subjects are former political candidates, and finds that having held

office makes individuals subsequently more intrinsically reciprocal than politicians who ran

for office but were not elected. Empirical discussion of reciprocity of elected leaders to voters

tends to be more of an anecdotal nature (Schlesinger (1994, chapter 6), Inquirer (November 8,

2012)).

   By contrast, there are several papers that look at instrumental reciprocity of elected politi-

cians once in office to other politicians, especially in legislatures (Weingast, 1979; Binder, 1997;

Martorano, 2004; Kirkland and Williams, 2014).

   Our paper also relates to literature on the actions of candidates seeking reelection. More

precisely, there are a number of models in which an incumbent seeking reelection chooses

an expenditure other than her first best in order to improve her reelection chances. The


                                                 5
earliest models which considered this in a model of candidate signalling to rational voters

were Rogoff and Sibert (1988) and Rogoff (1990). A significant number of models followed,

of which Drazen and Eslava (2006, 2010), on which our model is based, is but one example.

These models all considered candidates who were motivated by a combination of their own

utility in getting reelected and social welfare, rather than by reciprocity to voters. However,

the conceptual motivation is the same. In the absence of reelection motives (or observability

of candidate expenditure behavior), candidates would simply maximize their own utility,

however defined. Reelection motives induce them to choose a different pattern of expenditure

to signal their type (competence, congruence with voting groups) in order to increase the

probability of reelection.

    Moreover, our paper relates to the experimental literature on reputation formation, and

the behavior of a long run player (the candidate) facing a sequence of short-term players (vot-

ers) who are unsure about her preferences and observe her previous choices. The literature

tends to focus on testing whether a particular refinement is a good predictor of behavior in

industrial organization or financial market games.4 While we find data consistent with the

intuitive criterion, rather than comparing refinements, we manipulate the observability of in-

formation about past behavior and focus on the effects of signalling itself, as in Grosskopf

and Sarin (2010) and Bolton et al. (2004). Furthermore, we distinguish ourselves by focusing

on the interaction of signalling motives with other-regarding preferences, two rich areas of

research, and also by allowing for a continuum rather than a finite number of types.



                  III    A MODEL OF CANDIDATE BEHAVIOR

                                             III.I   Overview

In this section, we present a game-theoretic model of a candidate running for election to rep-

resent the conflict she may face between intrinsic reciprocity to past voters and her reelection

prospects. The model also forms the basis of our experiment. After describing the model,

we informally summarize the equilibria and the main theoretical result, that is, the constraint

a high cost of voting and reelection concerns may impose on a candidate's reciprocity to

past voters. These predictions will inform our interpretation of the experimental data. Inter-

    4 Camerer and Weigelt (1988), Neral and Ochs (1992) and Brandts and Figueras (2003) study how well se-

quential equilibrium predicts behavior. Brandts and Figueras (2003) and Cadsby et al. (1998) explore whether the
intuitive criterion provides a plausible refinement.


                                                       6
ested readers can find a more formal treatment of the theory in Appendix A, establishing the

uniqueness of the equilibria described here.

   Central to our model is that policies chosen by an incumbent before an election may signal

her unobserved policy preferences ­ more specifically, whether or not they are congruent with

those of a voter -- and hence the choices she would make if reelected. That is, if an incumbent

wants to signal that she places a high priority on, let's say, environmental issues and will

continue to do so if reelected, she may devote resources to protecting the environment before

an election in a way that she would not do if she did not have that priority. Drazen and Eslava

(2006, 2010) model this idea formally, and we use this idea to represent how distribution of

benefits by the incumbent can be an effective reelection strategy.

   To consider the possible conflict between rewarding voters who voted in the previous

election and using benefits to gain votes in the next election, we assume that there are two

groups of non-overlapping voters -- those who voted in the last election and those who will

vote in the subsequent election ­ and consider benefits to voters who will vote in only one

of these elections. For example, consider a politician who faces a different constituency than

in a previous election (perhaps because of a significant redistricting), where, for example, the

previous constituency was weighted towards retirees -- who voted heavily for the candidate

and were crucial to her being elected -- whereas the new constituency she will face is much

more heavily weighted towards young workers. Helping enact a policy to raise Social Security

benefits via higher taxes on workers reciprocates to retirees for their votes, but may be seen

by the young as indicating the incumbent doesn't share their concerns and thus endanger her

reelection. She may thus need to limit her reciprocity in order to get reelected.


                                     III.II   Model Set-up

                            Elections and Distribution of Benefits

There are two sequential elections, two voters V1 and V2 and one candidate C who runs in the

first election and then, if she is elected in the first election, runs for reelection in the second.

Voter V1 either votes or abstains in the first election, while voter V2 votes or abstains in the

second election. In other words, there is only one voter in each election who is pivotal to C

being elected or not (when the relevant voter chooses not to vote). Hence a voter's actions are

equivalent to his intentions (whether to see the candidate elected or not). The cost of voting



                                                 7
in an election is k > 0, assumed identical for the two elections.

   If elected, C has X > 0 to distribute after the first election and, if reelected, Y to distribute

after the second election. The amount given to the two voters is x1 and x2 respectively (where

x1 + x2 = X ) after the first election (if C is elected) and y1 and y2 (where y1 + y2 = Y ) after

the second election (if C is reelected). One could think of x1 and y1 (x2 and y2 ) as choice of

policies favorable to V1 (V2 ) in the first election and second election respectively.
                                   X
   It is assumed that X > Y >      2   and Y > k. The first assumption is made because i) if Y

is too big, then all candidates would pool to be reelected and there would be no signalling

of preference congruence with V2 , and ii) if Y is too small, then candidates would not care

enough about reelection to try to signal preference congruence with V2 . The value of Y

relative to X could be motivated by thinking of election benefits as identical in each election,
                                                           1
but there being some common discount factor  with          2   <  < 1 applied to future benefits.
The second assumption is made because if Y < k, then V2 would always abstain in the second

election and there would likewise be no signalling motives.


                               Candidate and Voter Preferences

We say that C has a "policy preference",  = 1, 2, where her material payoff is equal to

the amount of benefits given to the voter of her policy type (V1 if  = 1 and V2 if  = 2).

For a  = 1 candidate, acting selfishly and giving benefits to V1 coincide, while for a for a

 = 2 candidate, acting selfishly and giving benefits to V2 coincide. This is a simple way of

representing candidate preferences over policies, and voter preferences over candidates based

on policies they would enact. C is also characterized by a "reciprocity parameter"  between

0 (a "selfish" candidate) and   0. Hence, a candidate's type is a function of her policy

preference and reciprocity parameter ( ,  ), where type is not directly observed by voters.

This is central to the model, as discussed in the next subsection.

   To model reciprocal preferences, we assume that C's utility depends not only on her own

payoff, but also the payoff of the voter electing her according to her reciprocity parameter

 . A selfish candidate cares only about her own material payoff, while a reciprocal elected

candidate may also care about the payoff of the voter who put her in office. That is, a

reciprocal C has a psychological payoff from giving to V1 if he voted for her in election 1 and

to V2 if he voted for her in election 2.

   We characterize C's utility function as follows. If r  { x1 , y2 } for "reciprocity" represents


                                                 8
the amount given to the voter who elected C in an election (x1 in election 1 and y2 in election

2), and s  { x1 , x2 , y2 , y2 } for "selfishness" is the amount C gives to the voter of her type (x1

or y1 if  = 1 and x2 or y2 if  = 2), then a simple way to represent C's utility in said election

is to use a Cobb-Douglas utility function, u = r  s1- , where the terms r and s depend on the

election and  of the candidate. This utility function is broadly consistent with the reciprocity

model of Cox et al. (2007).5 According to this utility function, a C with  = 0 is selfish, and

a C with  > 0 is reciprocal, with her reciprocity increasing in  . We assume   0.5 so that

candidates selfish motives are at great as large as their other-regarding motives, as in Fehr

and Schmidt (1999). Furthermore, we assume a candidate's  is identical in both elections.6

    For example, we represent first-period candidate utility as


                                                                  1- 
                                           u1
                                            (1, ) ( x1 , x2 ) = x1 x1                                         (1)
                                                                  1- 
                                           u1
                                            (2, ) ( x1 , x2 ) = x1 x2                                         (2)


Regardless of her  , a  = 1 candidate would clearly choose x1 = X if she were simply

maximizing first-period utility (her "first-best"), while a type (2,  ) candidate would choose

x1 =  X < X .

    Similarly, second-period candidate utility is represented as


                                                                  1- 
                                           u2
                                            (1, ) ( y1 , y2 ) = y2 y1                                         (3)
                                                                  1- 
                                           u2
                                            (2, ) ( y1 , y2 ) = y2 y2                                         (4)


where a type (1,  ) candidate's first-best is y2 =  Y < Y , and a  = 2 candidate's first-best is

y2 = Y .

    Finally, we assume voters are risk neutral and selfish. In other words, we assume voters

have  = 0 so their utility function is linear in their payoffs. Risk-neutrality is assumed for

simplicity of exposition. Voter selfishness allows us to focus on candidate rather than voter

reciprocity. We do not model reciprocity by voters to candidates.7 At the end of the section,

we explore the implications of incorporating candidate altruism into the model, allowing


   5 Cox  et al. (2007) also include an altruism parameter in their preferred parameterization. We show that the
model can be extended to include altruism at the end of the section.
    6 Our theoretical results would not be qualitatively affected by modifying this assumption, and might actually

be strengthened.
    7 See Hahn (2009) for an interesting exploration of the effect of voter reciprocity on elections.



                                                        9
candidates to also care about giving to a policy incongruent and non-voting voter in an

election.


                            Voters' Beliefs, Candidate's Dilemma

We assume that  = 1 and  = 2 are initially equally likely, and that  is independently dis-

tributed by a continuous distribution function F ( ) with support [0,  ], where this distribution

is assumed to be common knowledge. V1 has no information about C's type ( , ) when she

votes other than his priors over these two variables. In contrast, and this is the heart of both

the model and the experiment, since V2 votes after C chooses x1 and x2 , these may reveal

information about the C's type. The problem that a reciprocal  = 2 candidate faces is that

choosing too high a value of x1 out of her desire to be reciprocal to V1 may lead V2 to believe

she has policy preference  = 1. Hence, when voting is costly, V2 would choose to abstain and

C would not be reelected. Put differently, a reciprocal  = 2 candidate may choose to limit

her reciprocity to V1 after the first election in order to not be perceived as a  = 1 candidate

by V2 .

    In order to study constrained reciprocity, we compare what a reciprocal  = 2 candidate

-- that is, one whose  is positive -- would do if V2 had no information about x1 and x2

before voting to the case where she does. More precisely, we study two different set-ups,

following Grosskopf and Sarin (2010). The first is where V2 observes first election benefits

(x1 and x2 ) before deciding whether to vote. In this set-up, candidates are motivated to

signal policy preference congruence with V2 to be reelected. In the second set-up V2 does not

observe first election benefits (x1 and x2 ) before deciding whether to vote, so that C cannot

use distribution of benefits to signal type. This no-signalling set-up will serve as a useful

benchmark to understand how signalling for electoral purposes affects candidate reciprocity.

    We expect a  = 2 candidate's reciprocity to be unconstrained in the no information

game as a high value of x1 is unobserved by V2 and thus has no implications for reelection

prospects. By contrast, in the signalling game, the desire to get reelected may constrain C in

her choice of x1 in order not to harm her reelection chances.


                                     Electoral Equilibria

We can now summarize the equilibria in our two set-ups. Our basic result is that when

signalling is possible, a reciprocal  = 2 will in fact constrain her reciprocity when the cost

                                               10
of voting is high, but less so when it is low. The key driver of this result is that since the

policy preferences of a candidate are not known ex ante, a candidate with policy preference

 = 1 may choose to mimic the x1 choice that a reciprocal  = 2 candidate would make.

Pooling by  = 1 type candidates reduces the benefit V2 expects from voting to reelect C, and

the higher the cost of voting, the more likely V2 is to abstain. Reducing her reciprocity to V1

reduces the mass of  = 1 type candidates who pool while increasing the mass of  = 2 type

candidates who pool, thus increasing the expected benefit of voting, which, as indicated, is

more important when voting costs are high.

    To give more detail on the role of constrained reciprocity when benefits may signal a

candidate's policy preferences, we consider the cases where benefits are not observed -- the

"no-information" case where signalling is not possible -- and where they are, the "signalling

case." Under the latter, a  = 2 type candidate may face a trade-off between reciprocating to

V1 after the first election and signalling her congruence of policy preference with V2 .


                          Equilibria When V2 Does Not Observe x1 and x2

In this no-information case, C cannot signal her type, so she simply maximizes her single

period utility in each election (her first-best). Hence, a type (2,  ) candidate chooses x1 =  X

in the first election, her optimal balance between benefits to V1 and to herself. Furthermore,

she chooses y2 = Y if reelected since her self-interest and reciprocity motives align in dictating

the giving of second selection benefits to V2 . By contrast, a type (1,  ) candidate chooses

x1 = X in the first election, regardless of her reciprocity preference, and y2 =  Y if reelected,

her first-best in each election. The equilibrium in the first election is depicted in Figure 1,

where we note that there is complete separation of  = 1 and  = 2 candidates. V1 and V2

vote rather than abstain if the expected benefit from voting exceeds the cost.8




   8 Given   the chosen benefits of  = 1 and  = 2 candidates, for V2 , this is 1     1   
                                                                               2 Y + 2 Y 0  dF (  ) > k, where the
first two terms are his expected benefits from electing a  = 2 and  = 1 candidate respectively, weighted by their
probabilities.


                                                       11
                        Figure 1: No Information Game Equilibrium




                             Equilibria When V2 Observes x1 and x2

To better understand C's choices when x1 and x2 are observed before the second election,

suppose that all candidates are selfish, and it is common knowledge that there are only (1,0)

and (2,0) type candidates.

   Consider the first-best of a (2,0) candidate, x1 = 0. Clearly (2,0) will choose this if it

implies her reelection. If a type (2,0) candidate chose x1 = 0, a type (1,0) candidate would

not mimic as she receives a higher utility from choosing her first-best, x1 = X , and foregoing

reelection than mimicking when X > Y . Thus, in equilibrium, a type (2,0) chooses x1 =0 and

is reelected, while a type (1,0) chooses x1 = X and foregoes reelection, so that  = 1 and

 = 2 candidates locate at the extremes. This equilibrium is depicted in Figure 2.

                    Figure 2: Selfish Candidates Separating Equilibrium




   In contrast -- and this summarizes key results of the paper -- when candidates may be

reciprocal, but distribution of benefits is observed, we get a result "between" the cases of

reciprocal candidates without observation of x1 and x2 and observation of x1 and x2 without

reciprocal candidates. C's distribution of benefits will be interior but often not as much as

compared to reciprocal candidates in the no-information case.

   To see why, suppose that all (2,  ) incumbents played their first-best. In other words,

suppose that any given (2,  ) candidate plays x1 =  X , as in the no information case. Fur-


                                              12
thermore, consider the implications for the most reciprocal incumbent with policy preference

 = 2, that is, type (2,  ) choosing x1 =  X .

       If  is sufficiently large, then some  = 1 candidates would be willing to mimic choosing

 X to get reelected instead of their first-best X. The lower is the reciprocity  of a  = 1

candidate, the greater the benefit of mimicking (as utility after election 2 will be higher),9 so

that this would include  = 1 with sufficiently low  . With a positive mass of such  = 1

candidates relative to the mass of (2,  ), V2 would abstain if the voting cost is too high.10

Hence, x1 =  X would not be an equilibrium choice for (2,  ) as she would not be reelected.

       However, suppose (2,  ) constrains her reciprocity, that is choosing a lower value of x1 .

As (2,  ) decreases her choice of x1 , so too must all highly reciprocal  = 2 candidates with

first-best greater than that value of x1 which (2,  ) chooses. For a low enough value of x1 ,

the mass of reciprocal  = 2 candidates who choose to constrain themselves will imply just

enough mass of  = 2 candidates such that V2 votes even if with mimicking by some (low

reciprocity)  = 1 candidates. Note further the lower is x1 , the fewer = 1 candidates who

will want to mimic x1 so that the relative weight of  = 2 candidates would increase for two

reasons (though the expected benefit to V2 from voting if the date is a mimicker also falls as

more reciprocal = 1 drop out of the pool).

       Ultimately, in equilibrium, a  = 2 candidate face a reciprocity cut-off, based on the cost

of voting, 2 (k ). All  = 2 candidates with reciprocity greater than or equal to that reciprocity

cut-off   2 (k) will constrain their reciprocity and choose x1 2 (k ) X , and all  = 2 candidates

with reciprocity less than that cut-off choose their first-best x1 =  X . Similarly, there is a

reciprocity cut-off for  = 1 candidates, 1 (k ). All  = 1 candidates with reciprocity less than

that cut-off  < 1 (k ) mimic the highly reciprocal  = 2 candidates by choosing x1 = 2 (k ) X ,

while all other  = 1 candidates simply choose their first-best x1 = X .

       Figure 3a depicts this semi-separating equilibrium with constrained reciprocity by the

highly reciprocal  = 2 candidates and Figure 3b mimicking by the more selfish  = 1

candidates.




       9 Since       1
                 0   2,   second period utility of a (1,  ) candidate is monotonically decreasing in  from equation
(3).
   10 We assume F (0) > 0 following the observation of positive mass of selfish players in gift exchange games
(Fehr et al., 1993). This assumption is not necessary for this result, but simplifies the proofs in Appendix A.


                                                         13
                        Figure 3: No Information Game Equilibrium

                (a) Constrained Reciprocity by Highly Reciprocal  = 2 Candidates




                           (b) Mimicking by Selfish  = 1 Candidates




   Furthermore, since V2 is less willing to vote as the cost of voting rises,  = 2 candidates

further constrain themselves at a higher cost of voting to ensure their reelection. In other

words, the cut-off at which  = 2 candidates limit their reciprocity (x1 = 2 (k ) X ) is weakly

decreasing in the cost of voting. We view this as our central theoretical finding, and important

for interpreting our experimental results.

   We predict to see greater constrained reciprocity for a higher cost of voting, and might

not even be able to detect constrained reciprocity for a sufficiently low cost of voting. Before

continuing to the experimental results, a couple notes about how our theoretical results might

be affected by relaxing some of the simplifying assumptions.

   First, we assumed the distribution of reciprocity F () is independent of k. One might

suspect that F () is dependent on k, with candidates feeling greater reciprocity towards voters

when they pay a higher cost to vote. In this case, it might be that a greater number of highly

reciprocal  = 2 candidates constrain their reciprocity with a higher cost of voting, apart from

the amount they constrain as shown here. However, at the same time, the degree to which

 = 2 candidates constrain their reciprocity may be less because there is a higher ratio of

reciprocal  = 2 candidates to selfish  = 1 candidates. Which effect dominates depends

                                              14
strongly on the distributional assumptions imposed, and how that distribution is affected by

k. We leave a formal analysis out as this significantly increases the complexity of the model.

In this light, our model should be taken as a rule of thumb for the underlying strategic issues

at play.

   Additionally, for simplicity, we assumed voters are risk-neutral and there is no ambiguity

about the underlying reciprocity distribution F (). If voters are risk-averse and/or there is

ambiguity about F (), then this should strengthen the robustness of the constrained reciprocity

equilibrium as V2 would be less willing to reelect  = 1 candidates, and  = 2 candidates

would need to further constrain themselves to ensure reelection.

   Lastly, we focused on a candidate's reciprocal and policy preferences. Out of a desire to

be altruistic, candidates may also care about giving benefits to the non-voting citizen in an

election, even if this citizen's preferences are not those of the candidate. We summarize the

results below and present a more formal treatment in the Appendix A. The main intuition

driving constrained reciprocity, type 2 candidates' need to prevent type 1 mimicking to be

reelected, still holds when we incorporate altruism.


                     Constrained Reciprocity Equilibria with Altruism

In addition to a reciprocity parameter  and a policy preference  , here we assume that each

candidate is endowed with an altruism parameter . The altruism parameter represents the

weight a candidate places on giving to the non-voting voter in an election. We assume  is

distributed according to some continuous distribution function G () with support [0, ]. We

assume there is a positive mass of selfish candidates G (0) > 0, and candidates self-interest

is at least as large as their altruism  < 0.5. Furthermore, we assume G () and F () are

independently distributed, as candidates may have different definitions of what constitutes

kindness. Some candidates might believe kindness comes from reciprocating to kind actions,

others might believe it comes from distributing benefits to everyone, and others might believe

it comes from a combination of both. The utility function of each candidate in the first election

is as follows:


                                                    1-  -          1-  
                             u1
                              (1, ,) ( x1 , x2 ) = x1     x1 x2 = x1  x2                      (5)
                                                    1-  -           1- 
                             u1
                              (2, ,) ( x1 , x2 ) = x2     x1 x2 = x1 x2                       (6)




                                                 15
A (1,  , ) candidate would choose x1 = (1 - ) X if she were simply maximizing first-period

utility, while a type (2,  , ) candidate would choose x1 =  X .

    Similarly, second-period candidate utility is represented as


                                                       1-  -            - 
                                u2
                                 (1, ,) ( y1 , y2 ) = y1     y2 y1 = y1
                                                                      1 y2                          (7)
                                                       1-  -           1- 
                                u2
                                 (2, ,) ( y1 , y2 ) = y2     y2 y1 = y1 y2                          (8)


where a type (1,  , ) candidate's first-best is y2 =  Y , and a (2,  , ) candidate's first-best is

y 2 = ( 1 -  )Y .

    Consider the first election of the signaling game. As can be seen in equation (6), type 2

candidate first election motives are unchanged by the incorporation of altruism. Besides their

self-interest, the only other relevant first election motive of type 2 candidates is reciprocity.

However, as seen in equation (5), altruistic type 1 candidates may also care about giving to

V2 in the first election.

    Suppose all candidates played their first-bests in the first election. Type 1 candidates'

benefits to V1 would then be continuously distributed along the continuum [(1 - ) X , X ] with

a positive mass at x1 = X . As before, type 2 candidates' benefits to V1 would be continuously

distributed along the continuum [0,  X ] where  X < (1 - ) X . If the expected  of type 1

candidates is not too high, then V2 would not reelect them (see equation (7)). Thus, type 1

candidates would have an incentive to mimic the most reciprocal type 2 candidate at x1 =  X

to be reelected. Furthermore, altruistic type 1 candidates would have to deviate less to mimic,

giving them greater incentive to mimic. Additionally, type 1 candidates with low reciprocity

would have greater incentive to mimic because they would have more utility to gain from

reelection. There would then be a positive mass of mimicking type 1 candidates according to

their reciprocity and altruism parameters. The remaining non-mimicking type 1 candidates

would play their first-bests.

    However, V2 would not reelect where there is low mass of type 2 candidates and high

mass of mimicking and low reciprocity type 1 candidates. Type 2 candidates would then

have to constrain their x1 until they accrue just enough mass relative to the mimicking type

1 candidates that V2 still reelects. Incorporating altruism implies that type 2 candidates may
                                                        X -Y
have to constrain their reciprocity below x1 =            X    because altruistic type 1 candidates are

even more willing to mimic. In this light, incorporating altruism strengthens the robustness


                                                   16
of the theoretical results. Furthermore, the amount type 2 candidates have to constrain their

reciprocity is increasing in the cost of voting.

   The only differences between the equilibrium with altruism and without are that i) some

non-mimicking and altruistic type 1 candidates select x2 > 0 and ii) altruistic type 2 candi-

dates choose y1 > 0. Informed by these theoretical predictions, we turn to the experimental

results.



                          IV     EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN

The aim of our experiment is to investigate the interactive effect of intrinsic reciprocity and

reelection concerns on candidate behavior as suggested by the signalling model above. We

implemented four treatments in a 2 x 2 experimental design. Treatments differed in the cost

of voting, $1 in the "low cost of voting games" and $6 in the "high cost of voting games."

Additionally, as in the two election games in the model, treatments varied in whether V2

observed the distribution of first election benefits in the signalling games or did not observe

the distribution of first election benefits in the no information games before deciding whether

to vote. We label treatments as "SLC" (signalling low cost), "SHC" (signalling high cost),

"NILC" (no information low cost) or "NIHC" (no information high cost).

   The experiment was run in the Experimental Economics Lab at the University of Mary-

land. There were 300 participants, all undergraduate students at the University of Maryland.

We conducted five sessions for each treatment (15 participants per session, i.e. 75 participants

per treatment). No subject participated in more than one session. Participants were seated in

isolated booths. In each session, subjects were asked to sign a consent form first and given

written experimental instructions (provided in the Online Appendix), read to them by the

experimenter. The experiment was programmed in z-Tree (Fischbacher, 2007).

   At the beginning of each session, subjects were randomly assigned one of three roles:

"Voter 1" (V1 ), "Voter 2" (V2 ), or "Candidate" (C). The assigned roles stayed fixed for all

5 rounds (until the end of the experiment). At the beginning of each of the 5 rounds in a

session, participants were given a $6.00 endowment (each) and randomly sorted into groups

of 3 people, consisting of V1 , V2 , and C. In each round, C was independently and randomly

assigned a policy type, "Type 1" ( = 2) or "Type 2" ( = 2), with equal probability of being

assigned either type. Voters did not learn the candidate's type at any point, but knew the



                                                   17
initial probability associated with each type. No participant was ever grouped with any other

participant in more than one round. Thus, each round can be thought of as a one-shot game.

   Each round consisted of two sequential elections, with V1 voting in the first election and

V2 voting in the second election. In each election, the respective voter decided whether to vote

at a cost or abstain at zero cost. If a candidate was elected in election 1 (election 2), then the

candidate was given $15 ($10) to distribute between voter 1 and voter 2. The candidate could

divide the money in any penny amount. Furthermore, the candidate was given an additional

penny to keep for every penny distributed to the voter of her type. Thus, the candidate could

earn up to $15 ($10) in the first election (second election). If a voter abstained in an election,

then the candidate was not elected and the round immediately came to an end. Thus, if the

candidate was not elected in the first election, then the second election did not occur. A $6

cost of voting was chosen because it implies that constrained reciprocity should hold for a

very general set of distributions of reciprocity, as V2 would not even want to reelect the most

reciprocal type 1 candidate if  < 0.6 (given the $10 second election pie).11 The treatments

may be summarized as follows:


                                             Table 1: Treatments


                              Signalling      Voting        Election 1          Election 2
               Treatment
                                Game?          Cost      Distribution (X )   Distribution (Y )

               SLC                Yes           $1                $15              $10
               SHC                Yes           $6                $15              $10
               NILC                No           $1                $15              $10
               NIHC                No           $6                $15              $10


   Once all 5 rounds were finished, 1 round out of the 5 rounds was randomly picked, and

the earnings in that round were the participant's final earnings for the experiment in addition

to a $7 participation fee. Including the participation fee, subjects averaged a total of $23.62 in

earnings.



                         V     RESULTS AND INTERPRETATION


  11 Also,   note that these parameter choices imply 1 = 0.084.


                                                        18
                               V.I    Existence of Intrinsic Reciprocity

We begin by investigating whether candidates exhibit intrinsic reciprocity to the voters who

elected them when free from reelection motives? We focus on the no information games

where candidates are unable to signal their policy type to V2 , so that observed reciprocity

must be intrinsic rather than instrumental. We look at whether a type 1 candidate gives a

non-zero amount of money to V2 after the second election, and, analogously, whether a type

2 candidate gives a non-zero amount of money to V1 after the first election. In these cases

giving cannot be motivated by the candidate's self-interest and hence is evidence of intrinsic

reciprocity (and perhaps some altruism).12

    As seen in the histograms in Figure 4, while some candidates are selfish, many give a

substantial reward to the voter who elected her. Indeed, on average candidates give a positive

amount of money to the voter who elected them: type 1 candidates (type 2 candidates) give

$1.61 and $3.31 to V2 in the second election ($2.59 and $4.93 to V1 in the first election) of

treatments NILC and NIHC respectively.13




   12 One might argue that candidates are free from reelection concerns in the second election of treatments 1 and

2, so that if a type 1 candidate gives a non-zero amount of money to voter 2 in the second election, then this
would indicate intrinsic reciprocity. However, when signalling of type is possible after the first election, it may be
that observed candidate behavior after the second election behavior may be affected by signalling mechanism in
the first election, including selection of more selfish types in the semi-separating equilibrium as discussed in the
formal model.
   13 Furthermore, since there exists positive mass above x =$3.33 in Figure 4a and x =$5 in Figure 4b, it is clear
                                                              2                          1
that  > 3  1
             = XX-Y , an important condition for constrained reciprocity in the signalling games without altruism.



                                                         19
                                                                       Figure 4: Intrinsic Reciprocity

                                                                       (a) Type 1 Candidate Reciprocity

                                              Treatment NILC                                                                                                Treatment NIHC
        .8




                                                                                                                      .8
        .7




                                                                                                                      .7
        .6




                                                                                                                      .6
           .5




                                                                                                                         .5
   Density




                                                                                                                 Density
     .4




                                                                                                                   .4
        .3




                                                                                                                      .3
        .2




                                                                                                                      .2
        .1




                                                                                                                      .1
        0




                                                                                                                      0
                0       1       2         3       4       5       6        7        8         9        10                     0       1       2         3       4       5       6        7        8         9        10

                                    $ Benefit to Voter 2 in Second Election                                                                       $ Benefit to Voter 2 in Second Election



                                                                       (b) Type 2 Candidate Reciprocity

                                              Treatment NILC                                                                                                Treatment NIHC
        .8




                                                                                                                      .8
        .7




                                                                                                                      .7
        .6




                                                                                                                      .6
           .5




                                                                                                                         .5
   Density




                                                                                                                 Density
     .4




                                                                                                                   .4
        .3




                                                                                                                      .3
        .2




                                                                                                                      .2
        .1




                                                                                                                      .1
        0




                                                                                                                      0




                0   1       2   3     4       5   6   7       8   9   10       11   12   13       14   15                     0   1       2   3     4       5   6   7       8   9   10       11   12   13       14   15

                                     $ Benefit to Voter 1 in First Election                                                                        $ Benefit to Voter 1 in First Election




   We use a regression to estimate the average value of  and test whether it is statistically

different from zero. Table 2 shows an OLS regression of the percentage benefits given by a

type 2 (type 1) candidate to voter 1 in election one (voter 2 in election two) on a constant

term, dummies for each period (to account for possible learning effects) and clustered at the

candidate level (to account for serial correlation in a given candidate's choices). The coefficient

on the constant term can be interpreted as the expected value of  . We find that the constant

term is significant and positive in both treatments (NILC and NIHC), indicating that  is

statistically different from zero, and ranges from 12.3% to 31.8%. It is interesting to note that

the amount of intrinsic reciprocity is greater in the high voting cost game (NIHC) than the

low voting cost game (NILC). This might reflect candidates showing higher reciprocity when

voting costs are higher.




                                                                                                            20
                                  Table 2: OLS of Intrinsic Reciprocity

                                 Type 1 Candidate % Benefit          Type 2 Candidate % Benefit
                                 to V2 in Election 2                 to V1 in Election 1
                                     (1)             (2)                 (3)             (4)
                                 Treat NILC      Treat NIHC          Treat NILC      Treat NIHC

           Constant                0.293***          0.341***          0.121***           0.388***
                                   (0.0818)          (0.0967)          (0.0350)           (0.0733)
           Period Dummies             Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes

           Observations              61                 43                 55                58
           R-squared                0.068              0.027             0.000             0.015
              *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
              Robust standard errors in parentheses. Clustered at candidate level.



    Additionally, we observe evidence of altruism. Note that type 1 candidates give on av-

erage $1.39 and $3.12 to V2 in the first election of treatments NILC and NIHC respectively.

Similarly, type 2 candidates give a positive amount to V1 in the second election, averaging

$1.28 and $1.98 in treatments NILC and NIHC respectively. This is consistent with the model

incorporating altruism and a positive  for some candidates.


                    V.II    Type 2 Candidate (Un)Constrained Reciprocity

We turn to the main question of the experiment, how signaling motives influence candidate

reciprocity? We begin with type 2 candidates, as they face the main conflict between intrinsic

and instrumental motives.

    Let us first briefly restate the theoretical predictions borne out by the equilibria of the

signaling games. We expect type 2 candidates to constrain their reciprocity to V1 when the

cost of voting is high, but we do not necessarily expect to empirically detect constrained

reciprocity when it is low. Given either cost of voting, selfish type 1 candidates may mimic

type 2 candidates to be reelected, and V2 should use a cut-off rule -- voting when they receive

a sufficient quantity in the first election and abstaining otherwise.

    While some type 2 candidates are selfish, the majority display reciprocity towards V1 in

the first election, even with reelection motives.14 We focus on the motives of the reciprocal

type 2 candidates. Our primary experimental finding is that type 2 candidates who display

reciprocity limit the amount they give to V1 in the first election with a high cost of voting,


   14 In
       treatment SHC (treatment SLC), 31.88% (24.00%) of candidates give x1 = $0 to V1 in the first election, and
the remaining 68.12% (76.00%) select interior values of x1 .


                                                       21
deviating from their first-best in order to help their reelection chances. However, with a low

cost of voting, their behavior is unchanged by the presences of signaling motives. We regard

this as a key result, as it indicates that reelection concerns may limit reciprocity when voting

costs are sufficiently high.

    As shown in Table 3, when the cost of voting is high, type 2 candidates give on average

$2.11 more to V1 in the first election of the no information game than the signalling game

($4.93 in treatment NIHC and $2.82 in treatment SHC).15 However, when the cost of voting

is low, type 2 candidates give similar amounts to V1 with and without signaling motives. If

anything, they give a little more ($0.91) to V1 when distribution of benefits may signal type.

This is the opposite direction from what one would expect if the need to signal created a

conflict between intrinsic reciprocity and the desire to be reelected, as is the case with a high

cost of voting.


                                Table 3: Type 2 Candidate $ Benefit to V1

                                   High Cost of Voting                        Low Cost of Voting
                            First Election Second Election             First Election Second Election
     Signaling Game              2.82             0.82                      3.50            1.62
                                (2.97)           (1.39)                    (3.29)          (2.06)
     No Information              4.93             1.98                      2.59            1.28
     Game                       (3.60)           (1.82)                    (3.53)          (1.77)
     Observations                 117              86                        104             98
     P-values                   0.001            0.001                     0.180            0.381
     Mean, standard deviation in parentheses. P-values based on two-tailed t-test.



    This pattern can also be seen visually in the CDFs in Figure 5. When the cost of voting

is high (Figure 5a), the CDF of type 2 candidate giving to V1 in the first election of treatment

NIHC first-order stochastically dominates that in treatment SHC. We find the difference to be

statistically significant using the first order stochastic dominance test in Barrett and Donald

(2003).16 At the same time, there is no obvious difference between the CDFs in the low cost

of voting games (Figure 5b). Indeed, we find the CDFs to be equal in a first order stochastic
   15 The  same trend is found if restricting the data to type 2 candidates who select x1 >$0 and thus might be
labeled reciprocal ($6.35 in treatment NIHC and $4.50 in treatment SHC). Note in Table 3 that type 2 candidates
give on average $1.12 more to V1 in the second election of treatment NIHC than SHC. While our theory does not
account for this difference in type 2 second election behavior, we note that it is not very large.
    16 We use a bootstrap of size 1,000 to calculate p-values. The test consists of two steps. We first test the null

hypothesis that the treatment NIHC distribution either first order stochastically dominates or is equal to the
treatment SHC distribution in the $0 to $15 range. We cannot reject the null, with a corresponding p-value of
0.719. We then test the null hypothesis that the treatment SHC distribution first order stochastically dominates or
is equal to the treatment NIHC distribution (in the $0 to $15 range). We reject this null hypothesis in this case,
with a corresponding p-value of 0.077.


                                                         22
sense (Barrett and Donald, 2003).17

                                                     Figure 5: CDFs of Type 2 Candidate First Election Benefits

                                            (a) High Cost of Voting                                                                                        (b) Low Cost of Voting
                 1




                                                                                                                                1
                           .8




                                                                                                                                          .8
    Cumulative Probability




                                                                                                                   Cumulative Probability
                 .6




                                                                                                                                .6
        .4




                                                                                                                       .4
                 .2




                                                                                                                                .2
                 0




                                                                                                                                0
                                0   1   2    3   4    5    6    7     8    9    10   11   12   13   14   15                                    0   1   2    3   4   5     6    7     8    9    10   11   12   13   14   15

                                                 $ Benefit to Voter 1 in First Election                                                                         $ Benefit to Voter 1 in First Election


                                                      Treat SHC                Treat NIHC                                                                            Treat SLC                Treat NILC




    Finally, in Table 4 we check whether these results are robust to a regression analysis. We

use a two-limit Tobit regression to account for censoring from below ($0) and above ($15). The

coefficient on the Signaling Game dummy indicates whether the amount type 2 candidates

give to V1 in the first election is different in the signaling treatment than the no information

treatment. This dummy is negative and significant in the high cost of voting treatments, and

positive but insignificant in the low cost of voting treatments. This adds further evidence to

the finding that reelection motives constrain type 2 candidate reciprocity when the cost of

voting is, but not when it is low.




   17 We again use a bootstrap of size 1,000 to calculate p-values.
                                                                  We first test the null hypothesis that the treatment
NILC distribution either first order stochastically dominates or is equal to the treatment SLC distribution in the $0
to $15 range. We cannot reject the null, with a corresponding p-value of 0.637. We then test the null hypothesis that
the treatment SLC distribution first order stochastically dominates or is equal to the treatment NILC distribution
(in the $0 to $15 range). We again cannot reject the null hypothesis in this case, with a corresponding p-value of
0.629.


                                                                                                              23
          Table 4: Two-Limit Tobit, Type 2 Candidate First Election $ Benefits to V1

                                                (1)                        (2)
                                         High Cost of Voting        Low Cost of Voting

                  Signaling Game                 -2.944**                    1.241
                                                  (1.194)                   (1.224)
                  Constant                       5.655***                    0.550
                                                  (1.142)                   (1.148)
                  Period Dummies                    Yes                       Yes

                  Observations                     117                        104
            *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
            Robust standard errors in parentheses. Clustered at candidate level.
            Column (1) only includes treatments NIHC and SHC. Column (2) only includes treat-
            ments NILC and SLC. Signaling Game is a dummy equal to one in treatments SHC
            and SLC.



                              V.III    Type 1 Candidate Mimicking

Turning to type 1 candidates, we find that some play their first-best by giving everything or

almost everything (as in the model with altruism) to V1 in the first election, thus foregoing

reelection. However, many type 1 candidates pool with type 2 candidates in order to be

reelected. Moreover, the type 1 candidates who pool with type 2 candidates to be reelected

tend to be less reciprocal. These patterns hold for both a high and a low cost of voting.

   Table 5 shows that signalling motives lead type 1 candidates to mimic type 2 candidates to

help their reelection chances. With a high cost of voting (low cost of voting), Type 1 candidates

give on average $1.83 ($4.54) more to V2 in the first election if signalling of type is possible:

$4.95 in treatment SHC and $3.12 in treatment NIHC ($5.93 in treatment SLC and $1.39 in

treatment NILC).


                              Table 5: Type 1 Candidate $ Benefit to V2

                                 High Cost of Voting                      Low Cost of Voting
                          First Election Second Election           First Election Second Election
    Signaling Game             4.95             2.36                    5.93            1.39
                              (3.26)           (2.77)                  (2.21)          (1.87)
    No Information             3.12             3.31                    1.39            1.61
    Game                      (2.96)           (2.50)                  (2.16)          (1.96)
    Observations                111              65                      135             109
    P-values                  0.003            0.170                   0.000            0.554
    Mean, standard deviation in parentheses. P-values based on two-tailed t-test.



   This mimicking behavior may also be seen visually in the CDFs in Figure 6. With either

                                                     24
cost of voting, the CDF of type 1 candidate first election benefits to V2 in the signaling game

first-order stochastically dominates that in the no information game, and the dominance is

statistically significant (Barrett and Donald, 2003).18 Table 5 shows that these results are

robust to a regression analysis. Given either cost of voting, the Signaling Game dummy is

significant and positive, indicating that type 1 candidates give more first election benefits to

V2 with signaling motives than without.

                                                      Figure 6: CDFs of Type 1 Candidate First Election Benefits

                                             (a) High Cost of Voting                                                                                         (b) Low Cost of Voting
                 1




                                                                                                                                  1
                           .8




                                                                                                                                            .8
    Cumulative Probability




                                                                                                                     Cumulative Probability
                 .6




                                                                                                                                  .6
        .4




                                                                                                                         .4
                 .2




                                                                                                                                  .2
                 0




                                                                                                                                  0




                                0   1    2    3   4    5    6    7     8    9    10   11   12   13   14   15                                     0   1   2    3   4    5    6    7     8    9    10   11   12   13   14   15

                                                  $ Benefit to Voter 2 in First Election                                                                          $ Benefit to Voter 2 in First Election


                                                       Treat SHC                Treat NIHC                                                                             Treat SLC                Treat NILC




                                        Table 6: Two-Limit Tobit, Type 1 Candidate First Election $ Benefits to V2

                                                                                                  (1)                                                           (2)
                                                                                           High Cost of Voting                                           Low Cost of Voting

                                                  Signaling Game                                          2.407**                                                     5.453***
                                                                                                           (1.115)                                                    (0.709)
                                                  Constant                                                3.134***                                                     0.670
                                                                                                           (1.010)                                                    (0.843)
                                                  Period Dummies                                             Yes                                                        Yes

                                                  Observations                                                 111                                                         135
                                         *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                                         Robust standard errors in parentheses. Clustered at candidate level.
                                         Column (1) only includes treatments NIHC and SHC. Column (2) only includes treat-
                                         ments NILC and SLC. Signaling Game is a dummy equal to one in treatments SHC
                                         and SLC.


    While it is clear that mimicking is going on, an important next question is what kind of
   18 We  use a bootstrap of size 1,000 to calculate p-values. We first test the null hypothesis that the treatment
SHC (treatment SLC) distribution either first order stochastically dominates or is equal to the treatment NIHC
(treatment NILC) distribution in the $0 to $15 range. We fail to reject this null hypothesis, the corresponding
p-value is 0.664 (0.589). We then test the null hypothesis that the treatment NIHC (treatment NILC) distribution
first order stochastically dominates or is equal to the treatment SHC (SLC) distribution (in the $0 to $10 range).
We reject the null hypothesis in this case, with a corresponding p-value of 0.079 (0.000).


                                                                                                                25
type 1 candidates are mimicking? While both types are concerned about reelection, the model

predicts that the least reciprocal type 1 candidates earn the highest utility gain from reelection,

and are thus most likely to mimic. The scatter plots in Figure 7 provide suggestive evidence

that this is the case. For the type 1 candidates that are reelected, they show the distribution of

benefits to V2 in the first election (horizontal axis) and second election (vertical axis). The large

mass at the bottom left of the no information treatment graphs (rightmost graphs) disappear

in the signaling treatment graphs (leftmost graphs), and a new mass appears in the bottom

middle. This suggests that many of the mimickers are selfish, with a signalling motive leading

her to give near half of total dollar benefits to V2 in the first election but little in the second

election.19

    Indeed, while 82% (98%) of reelected type 1 candidates in treatment SHC (treatment SLC)

give at least a third of the first election pie to V2 , 55% (55%) give $0 to V2 in the second

election. By contrast, only 21% (34%) of reelected type 1 candidates give $0 to V2 in the

second election of treatment NIHC (treatment NILC). Mimicking increases these candidates

total payoff above the $15 they would receive if they gave everything to V1 in the first election,

as short-sighted selfishness and single-period optimization would dictate.




   19 Inboth treatments SHC and SLC, Exactly half the first election pie ($7.5) is the modal benefits given to V2 by
reelected type 1 candidates.


                                                        26
                                                                     Figure 7: Type 1 Candidate $ Benefit to V2 in the Two Elections

                                                                                                                           (a) High Cost of Voting

                                                                                       Treatment SHC                                                                                                                       Treatment NIHC
                                              9 10




                                                                                                                                                                                     9 10
    $ Benefit to Voter 2 in Second Election




                                                                                                                                           $ Benefit to Voter 2 in Second Election
                                              8




                                                                                                                                                                                     8
                                              7




                                                                                                                                                                                     7
                                              6




                                                                                                                                                                                     6
                                              5




                                                                                                                                                                                     5
                                              4




                                                                                                                                                                                     4
                                              3




                                                                                                                                                                                     3
                                              2




                                                                                                                                                                                     2
                                              1




                                                                                                                                                                                     1
                                              0




                                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                     0     1     2     3     4     5     6     7     8     9    10 11 12 13 14 15                                                           0     1     2     3     4     5     6     7     8     9    10 11 12 13 14 15

                                                                            $ Benefit to Voter 2 in First Election                                                                                                 $ Benefit to Voter 2 in First Election

                                                     Dots are weighted by the proportion of observations at that point.                                                                     Dots are weighted by the proportion of observations at that point.



                                                                                                                           (b) Low Cost of Voting

                                                                                       Treatment SLC                                                                                                                        Treatment NILC
                                              9 10




                                                                                                                                                                                     9 10
    $ Benefit to Voter 2 in Second Election




                                                                                                                                           $ Benefit to Voter 2 in Second Election
                                              8




                                                                                                                                                                                     8
                                              7




                                                                                                                                                                                     7
                                              6




                                                                                                                                                                                     6
                                              5




                                                                                                                                                                                     5
                                              4




                                                                                                                                                                                     4
                                              3




                                                                                                                                                                                     3
                                              2




                                                                                                                                                                                     2
                                              1




                                                                                                                                                                                     1
                                              0




                                                                                                                                                                                     0




                                                     0     1     2     3     4     5     6     7     8     9    10 11 12 13 14 15                                                           0     1     2     3     4     5     6     7     8     9    10 11 12 13 14 15

                                                                            $ Benefit to Voter 2 in First Election                                                                                                 $ Benefit to Voter 2 in First Election

                                                     Dots are weighted by the proportion of observations at that point.                                                                     Dots are weighted by the proportion of observations at that point.




                                                                                                      V.IV                Voter 2's Propensity to Vote

Is restricting x1 an effective reelection strategy for type 1 and type 2 candidates? To answer

this question, we consider the voting behavior of V2 in the signalling treatments. We show

that V2 is substantially more likely to vote the more money V2 receives in the first election

(the higher is x2 ) in the scatter plots in Figure 8. Note that data limitations prevent us from

analyzing the strategy of anyone single voter 2 for every possible amount received in the first

election. However, the aggregate data shown strongly suggests that V2 uses a cut-off strategy,

only voting when given at least $5-$8 in the first election.




                                                                                                                                     27
                                                                                              Figure 8: Voter 2 Cut-off Rule

                                          (a) High Cost of Voting                                                                                                       (b) Low Cost of Voting
               Vote




                                                                                                                                             Vote
   Voter Two




                                                                                                                                 Voter Two
               Abstain




                                                                                                                                             Abstain
                         0      1     2      3     4      5     6      7     8     9     10     11    12     13   14   15                              0      1     2      3     4      5     6      7     8     9     10     11    12     13   14   15

                                                  $ Benefit to Voter Two in First Election                                                                                      $ Benefit to Voter Two in First Election

                         Dots weighted by the proportion of votes for a given value of $ benefit to voter two.                                         Dots weighted by the proportion of votes for a given value of $ benefit to voter two.




   Even-though candidate type is not directly revealed in the signaling treatments, V2 's cut-

off rule turns out to be fairly effective in selecting candidates of their type. Figure 9 shows

that the probability of V2 encountering a type 2 candidate increases in the amount of money

V2 received in the first election. In treatment SHC (treatment SLC), V2 abstains only 13.6%

(2.0%) of the time when the candidate is in fact type 2. We might expect some subjects

to abstain due to high risk aversion and uncertainty about candidate type. This abstention

rate is similar and even sometimes lower than that of voters with no additional information

about candidate type: 12.8% (4.8%) abstention by V1 in treatment SHC (treatment SLC), and

34.5% (7.5%) abstention by V2 in treatment NIHC (treatment NILC). In contrast, when the

candidate is in fact type 1, V2 abstains 56% of the time in treatment SHC (31.4% of the time

in treatment SLC), much higher than the 13.6% abstention rate (2.0%) with a type 2 candidate

and the 34.5% (7.5%) abstention rate with no information. In Table 7, we show that this result

is robust to a probit regression, and V2 is significantly more likely to vote in the signaling

treatments if the candidate is type 2.




                                                                                                                            28
                                   Figure 9: Probability Type 2 Candidate by Amount V2 Received in First Election

                                                                        (a) High Cost of Voting                                                                                                                      (b) Low Cost of Voting
                                   1




                                                                                                                                                                                1
                                   .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9




                                                                                                                                                                                .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9
    Probability Type 2 Candidate




                                                                                                                                                 Probability Type 2 Candidate
                                   0




                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                [0,2)    [2,4)      [4,6)     [6,8)    [8,10)   [10,12) [12,14) [14,15]                                                                      [0,2)    [2,4)      [4,6)     [6,8)   [8,10)   [10,12) [12,14) [14,15]

                                                                                 $ Benefit to Voter Two in First Election                                                                                                     $ Benefit to Voter Two in First Election


                                                                                            95% Confidence Interval                                                                                                                      95% Confidence Interval




                                                                                                      Table 7: Probit, Likelihood Voter 2 Reelects

                                                                                                                                              (1)                                                                        (2)
                                                                                                                                          Treat SHC                                                                  Treat SLC
                                                                                                 Type 2 Candidate                          0.445                                                                      0.302
                                                                                                                                            (0.087)                                                                    (0.082)
                                                                                                 Period Dummies                               Yes                                                                        Yes

                                                                                                 Observations                                   109                                                                      119
                                                                                                 Baseline Probability                          0.669                                                                    0.807
                                                                                                 Pseudo R Squared                              0.201                                                                    0.219
                                                                                    *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                                                                                    Probit marginal effects reported (calculated at means of independent
                                                                                    variables). Dependent variable is a dummy equal to 1 if voter 2
                                                                                    voted. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Clustered at voter 2
                                                                                    level.



                                                                                             V.V            Interpreting Constrained Reciprocity

Put simply, our results indicate that the degree of reciprocity depends on the perceived con-

sequences for reelection. When gratitude is seen as posing little threat to reelection, we see

reciprocity to past voters. When gratitude is seen as potentially costly, that is, in sending "the

wrong message" to voters so that they do not vote to reelect, the candidate constrains her reci-

procity. Hence, reciprocity is not an absolute depending on simply underlying preferences,

but reflects the circumstances in which a candidate finds herself.

   This argument applies more generally. While reciprocity is a common human trait (see

Brown (1991, pp. 107-108)), the amount of reciprocity actually shown will depend on the

situation in which people find themselves. As discussed in the literature review, it has been


                                                                                                                                          29
argued that external factors such as social pressure, social image, or norms may lead to

an increase apparently reciprocal behavior that do not really represent intrinsic reciprocity.

That is, self-interested agents may be induced to show "kindness" because of external con-

straints. Our results indicate that the argument goes both ways, where (very different) sorts

of constraints may lead other-regarding agents to not show reciprocity even though they are

inherently reciprocal.

   The argument that external circumstances help determine how one acts has another im-

plication central to the design of our experiment. Our basic premise is a clear implication

of a principal-agent model. The desire of an agent to be retained in a position will lead her

to act to satisfy the principal who has the power over this decision, and may limit inherent

gratitude to other agents who put her in the position to begin with. That is, the situation of

wanting to be "reelected" to a position influences behavior in addition to any inherent other-

regarding preferences (or lack of them, in the case of selfish candidates who mimic in order

to be reelected). For incumbent politicians, the desire to be reelected is a key "constraint"

on their behavior when it comes to courting potential voters, as argued in the introduction.

Hence, an experiment putting individuals in the situation where retention in office is key to

their material payoffs seems a good laboratory to test how such concerns affect their inherent

reciprocity, even though the subjects themselves are not professional politicians.



                                 VI     CONCLUSION

Reelection or retention is a key desire of officeholders. Reciprocity to kind actions is a key

characteristic of human behavior. How will this desire affect gratitude to voters who were

responsible for the leader to be in office in the first place, when such reciprocity conflicts

with the likelihood of reelection? We study this conflict in a theoretical model of a setting

where reelection requires a candidate signalling to the relevant voters that she shares their

policy preferences. We then test the model in a laboratory experiment and find its predictions

are upheld. We think the model is interesting in itself in presenting a reelection strategy not

common in the literature (and hence may provide a useful approach to modeling electoral

strategies), but the more novel part of the paper is the experiment and its results.

   We may divide our results into two parts. First, we find that in a setting where attracting

voters means signalling unobserved candidate type, subjects in the lab act in accordance with



                                              30
a basic signalling model. Candidates play their first-best choices where signalling is not

possible but restrict those choices when signalling of type may help their reelection chances.

Voters appear to read the signals correctly.

   Second, we find that in the laboratory that the desire to be reelected may limit intrinsic

reciprocity of an elected leader to reciprocate to the voters who put her in office, but does not

eliminate it entirely. In other words, reciprocity still is present in elected leaders (in the lab)

even when put in a situation where "political" concerns, such as the desire to be reelected,

are also present.

   This would certainly seem to be descriptive of other-regarding individuals. Instrumen-

tal concerns may reduce their kindness and reciprocity to kindness, but do not generally

eliminate them. We would argue the same is true for politicians and elected leaders in the

real world. Elected officials are grateful to the voters who elected them. If self-interest fully

(T)rumps gratitude, it is probably because those officials weren't very other-regarding to be-

gin with.




                                                31
                                        References
Ariely, D., A. Bracha, and S. Meier (2009): "Doing Good or Doing Well? Image Motivation
  and Monetary Incentives in Behaving Prosocially," American Economic Review, 99, 544­55.
Barrett, G. F. and S. G. Donald (2003): "Consistent Tests for Stochastic Dominance," Econo-
  metrica, 71, 71­104.
Bénabou, R. and J. Tirole (2006): "Incentives and Prosocial Behavior," American Economic
  Review, 96, 1652­1678.
Besley, T. and S. Coate (1997): "An Economic Model of Representative Democracy," The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112, 85­114.
Binder, S. A. (1997): Minority Rights, Majority Rule: Partisanship and the Development of
  Congress, Cambridge University Press.
Bolton, G. E., E. Katok, and A. Ockenfels (2004): "How Effective are Electronic Reputation
  Mechanisms? An Experimental Investigation," Management science, 50, 1587­1602.
Brandts, J. and N. Figueras (2003): "An Exploration of Reputation Formation in Experi-
  mental Games," Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 50, 89­115.
Brown, D. (1991): Human Universals, New York: McGraw-Hill.
Cadsby, C. B., M. Frank, and V. Maksimovic (1998): "Equilibrium Dominance in Experi-
  mental Financial Markets," The Review of Financial Studies, 11, 189­232.
Camerer, C. and K. Weigelt (1988): "Experimental Tests of a Sequential Equilibrium Repu-
  tation Model," Econometrica, 1­36.
Camerer, C. F. and E. Fehr (2006): "When Does "Economic Man" Dominate Social Behav-
  ior?" Science, 311, 47­52.
Cho, I.-K. and D. M. Kreps (1987): "Signaling Games and Stable Equilibria," The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 102, 179­221.
Cox, G. W. (2010): "Swing Voters, Core Voters, and Distributive Politics," in Political Represen-
  tation, ed. by I. Shapiro, S. C. Stokes, E. J. Wood, and A. S. Kirshner, Cambridge University
  Press, chap. 13, 342­357.
Cox, J. C., D. Friedman, and S. Gjerstad (2007): "A Tractable Model of Reciprocity and
  Fairness," Games and Economic Behavior, 59, 17­45.
Drazen, A. and M. Eslava (2006): "Pork Barrel Cycles," NBER Working Paper 12190.
------ (2010): "Electoral Manipulation via Voter-Friendly Spending: Theory and Evidence,"
  Journal of Development Economics, 1, 39­52.
Drazen, A. and E. Y. Ozbay (2019): "Does "Being Chosen to Lead" Induce Non-selfish Be-
  havior? Experimental Evidence on Reciprocity," Journal of Public Economics, 174, 13­21.
Enemark, D., C. C. Gibson, M. D. McCubbins, and B. Seim (2016): "Effect of Holding Office
  on the Behavior of Politicians," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 113, 13690­



                                                 32
  13695.
Fehr, E., G. Kirchsteiger, and A. Riedl (1993): "Does Fairness Prevent Market Clearing?
  An Experimental Investigation," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108, 437­459.
Fehr, E. and K. M. Schmidt (1999): "A Theory of Fairness, Competition, and Cooperation,"
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114, 817­868.
------ (2006): The Economics of Fairness, Reciprocity and Altruism -- Experimental Evidence and
  New Theories, Elsevier, vol. 1, chap. 8, 615­691.
Finan, F. and L. Schechter (2012): "Vote-buying and Reciprocity," Econometrica, 80, 863­881.
Fischbacher, U. (2007): "z-Tree: Zurich Toolbox for Ready-made Economic Experiments,"
  Experimental economics, 10, 171­178.
Frey, B. S. and F. Oberholzer-Gee (1997): "The Cost of Price Incentives: An Empirical
  Analysis of Motivation Crowding-out," American Economic Review, 87, 746­755.
Gneezy, U. and A. Rustichini (2000): "Pay Enough or Don't Pay at All," The Quarterly journal
  of economics, 115, 791­810.
Grosskopf, B. and R. Sarin (2010): "Is Reputation Good or Bad? An Experiment," American
  Economic Review, 100, 2187­2204.
Hahn, V. (2009): "Reciprocity and Voting," Games and Economic Behavior, 67, 467­480.
Inquirer, P. (November 8, 2012): ""Will Philly Reap Rewards for Big Obama Turnout?"," .
Kirkland, J. H. and R. L. Williams (2014): "Partisanship and Reciprocity in Cross-chamber
  Legislative Interactions," The Journal of Politics, 76, 754­769.
Levine, D. K. (1998): "Modeling Altruism and Spitefulness in Experiments," Review of Eco-
  nomic Dynamics, 1, 593­622.
Malmendier, U., V. L. te Velde, and R. A. Weber (2014): "Rethinking Reciprocity," Annual
  Review of Economics, 6, 849­874.
Martorano, N. (2004): "Cohesion or Reciprocity? Majority Party Strength and Minority
  Party Procedural Rights in the Legislative Process," State Politics & Policy Quarterly, 4, 55­
  73.
Mellström, C. and M. Johannesson (2008): "Crowding Out in Blood Donation: was Tit-
  muss Right?" Journal of the European Economic Association, 6, 845­863.
Neral, J. and J. Ochs (1992): "The Sequential Equilibrium Theory of Reputation Building: A
  Further Test," Econometrica, 1151­1169.
Niza, C., B. Tung, and T. M. Marteau (2013): "Incentivizing Blood Donation: Systematic
  Review and Meta-analysis to Test Titmuss' Hypotheses," Health Psychology, 32, 941.
Osborne, M. J. and A. Slivinski (1996): "A Model of Political Competition with Citizen-
  candidates," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111, 65­96.
Ozbay, E. Y. and O. Tonguc (2018): "Vote Buying with and without Binding Promises,"
  Working Paper.

                                                33
Promberger, M. and T. M. Marteau (2013): "When do Financial Incentives Reduce Intrinsic
  Motivation? Comparing Behaviors Studied in Psychological and Economic Literatures,"
  Health Psychology, 32, 950.
Rogoff, K. and A. Sibert (1988): "Elections and Macroeconomic Policy Cycles," The Review
  of Economic Studies, 55, 1­16.
Rogoff, K. S. (1990): "Equilibrium Political Budget Cycles," .
Schlesinger, J. A. (1994): Political Parties and the Winning of Office, University of Michigan
  Press.
Sobel, J. (2005): "Interdependent Preferences and Reciprocity," Journal of Economic Literature,
  43, 392­436.
Weingast, B. R. (1979): "A Rational Choice Perspective on Congressional Norms," American
  Journal of Political Science, 23, 245­262.



        A     FORMAL MODEL OF CANDIDATE RECIPROCITY
Let us define what we mean by an equilibrium. Candidates choose strategies contingent on
their type ( ,  ) to maximize their two-period utility. Thus, a candidate of type (1,  ) and
(2,  ) solves the below programs respectively:


                                   max x1  x1 1- +  ( x1 ) y2  y1 1-                             (9a)
                                   max x1  x2 1- +  ( x1 ) y2  y2 1-                             (9b)

such that x1 + x2 = X and y1 + y2 = Y , where  ( x1 ) denotes C's probability of reelection.
 () is a function of observed benefits x1 in the signalling game, while  () is necessarily
independent of x1 in the no information game since V2 cannot base her voting decision on
the distribution of benefits in the first election. We denote V2 's posterior beliefs of a type ( ,  )
contingent on observing benefits x1 by p ( ,  | x1 ), where p ( ,  | x1 ) must satisfy Bayes Rule
on the equilibrium path (in the signalling game). V2 maximizes her expected utility given her
posterior beliefs.
   As in many signalling games, a multiplicity of equilibria arises. From now on, we restrict
attention to pure strategy Perfect Bayesian equilibria satisfying the following off equilibrium
beliefs (henceforth, referred to simply as "equilibria"): p (1,  | x1 ) = 0 for all x1 < X - Y and
all  . These off-equilibrium beliefs are reasonable since a policy preference 1 candidate always
prefers x1 = X and foregoing reelection to x1 < X - Y (even if doing so implies reelection).
They are implied, for example, by the intuitive criterion of Cho and Kreps (1987).
   V1 's behavior is trivial. V1 votes if and only if the expected benefits of voting are weakly
higher than the cost of voting. Since V1 's behavior is the same in any equilibrium for which
this holds, we do not mention V1 in our characterization of equilibria, focusing instead on
behavior after the first election. All proofs are in the next section.



                                                 34
   As background, suppose all candidates are selfish, that is, there are only (1, 0) and (2, 0)
type candidates.

Proposition 1 (Equilibrium with Selfish Candidates). In the signalling game with only selfish
candidates (i.e.  = 0), there exists a unique equilibrium where:
           (1, 0): x1 = X and y2 = 0 if reelected.
           (2, 0): x1 = 0 and y2 = Y if reelected.
           V2 : Vote if x1 < X - Y. Otherwise, abstain.

    Next, let's turn to the main motivation of the paper, the case where candidates may be
reciprocal and are motivated to signal type. We show that under reasonable conditions we get
an equilibrium where the more selfish (low  )  = 1 candidates mimic the highly reciprocal
(high  )  = 2 candidates, and the latter constrain their reciprocity to ensure their reelection.
                                                       X -Y
    If reciprocity motives are too low,  <               X ,   then  = 1 candidates have no incentive to
mimic a  = 2 candidate since the latter's first-best x1 =  X is always less than X - Y .20 To
                                                            X -Y
allow for mimicking motives, let's assume  >                  X    so that some are willing to mimic highly
reciprocal  = 2 candidates for reelection at the latter's first-best.
                 ( X - Y ) the value at which some  = 1 candidates possibly mimic  = 2
    Let's call x1
candidates for reelection. Notice that any  = 1 candidates who do not pool (who separate)
with  = 2 candidates will choose their first-best x1 = X and cannot be reelected. Given this,
let's define more precisely what we mean by an equilibrium characterized by "constrained
reciprocity."

Definition 1 (Constrained Reciprocity Equilibrium). An equilibrium is characterized by con-
                           [0, X ] if players' strategies satisfy the following conditions:
strained reciprocity at x1
           (1,  ): x1 = x1  if  <  for some   [0,  ] and x = X otherwise.
                                    1          1           1
                   y2 =  Y if reelected.
                                    
           (2,  ): x1 = x1  if   x1 and x =  X otherwise. y = Y if reelected.
                                   X      1                 2
                               
           V2 : Vote if x1  x1 . Otherwise, abstain.

    Thus far, we have made few assumptions about the distribution F (), besides continuity
in its support [0,  ] and the existence of selfish candidates F (0) > 0. Before proceeding,
we make one additional assumption to allow for well-behaved equilibria. We assume that
even if mimicking occurs by all  = 1 candidates who are willing to mimic some  = 2
candidate for reelection, those leftover at x1 = X are not reelected. Mathematically, we
                
           Y         dF ( )
assume
                1
                     k where  1 is implicitly defined by u2 1, (Y -  1 Y,  1 Y ) = X     2.
                                                                                           21
               1- F (  1 )                                  ( 1)
    As typical in signalling games, there exists a multiplicity of equilibria. We focus on equi-
                                                                                               for all
libria satisfying the following intuitive off-equilibrium beliefs: p (1,  | x1 ) = 0 if x1 < x1
 . Since no  = 1 candidates choose x1 < x1      in a given equilibrium, this is a modest level of

    20 In other words, like in the selfish case, there is a unique equilibrium in which all candidate-types play their

first-best.
   21 If                                    
        this condition is not met, but Y 0  dF ( ) < k so that all type 1 candidates are not reelected at their
first-best, then Propositions 2 and 3 still hold. However, Corollary 1 may not hold in this case. If instead
   
Y 0  dF ( ) > k, then there is a unique equilibrium satisfying the intuitive criterion in which all candidate-types
play their first-best.


                                                         35
sophistication of V2 's off-equilibrium beliefs and is implied by the intuitive criterion of Cho
and Kreps (1987). Still, there is a continuum of semi-separating equilibria since there is a
continuum of types. Nevertheless, all equilibria are characterized by constrained reciprocity.
                                                                                         -Y
Proposition 2 (Constrained Reciprocity Equilibria). For any k, there exists a 2 (k )  [ XX  , ]
such that the set of equilibria satisfying the intuitive off-equilibrium beliefs is non-empty and charac-
                                         [ X - Y ,  ( k ) X ].
terized by constrained reciprocity at x1           2

    In Proposition 2, for a given k, we get a continuum of semi-separating equilibria with
                                                       [ X - Y ,  ( k ) X ]. Such a multiplicity
 = 2 candidates facing a reciprocity cut-off at any x1           2
of equilibria also arises in Rogoff (1990), and a unique equilibrium is achieved by further
requiring dominance by the candidate sending the signal. Similarly, we find the range of
equilibria can be drastically reduced (to a unique equilibrium) by focusing on candidate
dominant equilibria. We say an equilibrium candidate dominates another equilibrium if it
supplies a weakly higher two-period utility to all candidate-types, and a strictly higher two-
period utility to some candidate-types.22 In the candidate dominant equilibrium, the cut-off
                            =  ( k ) X , as described in the proposition below.
occurs at its upper bound x1  2

Proposition 3 (Constrained Reciprocity Equilibrium). For any k, there exists a unique candi-
date dominant equilibrium satisfying the intuitive off-equilibrium beliefs characterized by constrained
                 =  ( k ) X.
reciprocity at x1  2

    Furthermore, since V2 is less willing to vote as the cost of voting rises,  = 2 candidates
further constrain themselves at a higher cost of voting to ensure their reelection.

Corollary 1 (Constrained Reciprocity and Cost of Voting). The amount highly reciprocal policy
preference 2 candidates constrain themselves in the equilibrium described in Proposition 3 is weakly
increasing in the cost of voting.


                             A.I    Reciprocity and Altruism Theory

Here we study equilibria under a modified version of the utility function where candidates
may be also be altruistic and care about giving to the non-voting voter in an election. In
addition to holding reciprocity and policy parameters  and  respectively, each candidate
is endowed with an altruism parameter . We assume  is distributed according to some
continuous distribution function G () with support [0, ], where G (0) > 0 and  < 0.5 so that
candidates care more about their self-interest than being altruistic. Furthermore, we assume
that G () is independent of F (). The utility function of each candidate in the first election is as
follows:

                                                      1-  -          1-  
                               u1
                                (1, ,) ( x1 , x2 ) = x1     x1 x2 = x1  x2                              (10a)
                                                      1-  -           1- 
                               u1
                                (2, ,) ( x1 , x2 ) = x2     x1 x2 = x1 x2                               (10b)

A (1,  , ) candidate would choose x1 = (1 - ) X if she were simply maximizing first-period
utility, while a type (2,  , ) candidate would choose x1 =  X .
  22 This
        is a more conservative version of the dominance criterion in Rogoff (1990), given that it requires the
dominance of all candidate-types and not just some.


                                                     36
   Similarly, second-period candidate utility is represented as
                                                 1-  -          1-  
                          u2
                           (1, ,) ( y1 , y2 ) = y1     y2 y1 = y1  y2                                         (11a)
                                                     1-  -           1- 
                              u2
                               (2, ,) ( y1 , y2 ) = y2     y2 y1 = y1 y2                                  (11b)

where a type (1,  , ) candidate's first-best is y2 =  Y , and a (2,  , ) candidate's first-best is
y2 = (1 - )Y . We extend the definition of a constrained reciprocity equilibrium to include
altruism as follows.

Definition 2 (Constrained Reciprocity with Altruism). An equilibrium is characterized by con-
                                         [0, X ] if players' strategies satisfy the following conditions:
strained reciprocity with altruism at x1
         (1,  , ): x1 = x1 if (  ,  )   for some compact set   [0,  ] × [0,  ]

                    and x1 = (1 - ) X > x1   otherwise. y =  Y if reelected.
                                                         2
                                     
         (2,  , ): x1 = x1 if   x1 and x =  X otherwise. y = (1 -  )Y if reelected.
                                    X      1                 2
         V2 : Vote if x1  x1 . Otherwise, abstain.


   The difference between the equilibrium described above and that in Definition 1 without
altruism is that non-mimicking and altruistic  = 1 candidates give x1 < X , and altruistic
 = 2 candidates select y2 < Y . Thus, there always exists candidates in each election giving
to the non-voting voter. The set  defines the mimicking  = 1 candidates who deviate
     to be reelected rather than playing their first-best x = (1 -  ) X > x  and foregoing
to x1                                                      1               1
reelection.
   As in the pure reciprocity model, we need to verify that V2 prefers not to reelect the  = 1
candidates who do not mimic (i.e.  = 1 candidates with ( , ) / ) for the equilibrium to
hold. From equation (11a), we see that V2 need only consider a  = 1 candidate's reciprocity
parameter  when deciding whether to reelect her. All else equal, a  = 1 candidate has
a greater incentive to mimic if she has a higher  because she has to deviate less from her
first-best to be reelected. Furthermore, as before, all else equal a  = 1 candidate has a
greater incentive to mimic if she has a lower  because she has greater utility to gain from
reelection. Thus, if V2 does not reelect a non-mimicking  = 1 candidate who has the highest
possible altruism parameter , then she does not mimic any other non-mimicking  = 1
                                                                                            k
candidates (because they have even lower  ). This holds if E( |   1 )                       Y   where 1 is
defines as the reciprocity parameter of the most altruistic  = 1 candidate (1, 1 , ) that is
indifferent between her first-best and mimicking the most reciprocal  = 2 candidate (2,  , )
for reelection. Mathematically, 1 is defined implicitly by: u1               (  X , X -  X ) + u2             (Y -
                                                                   (1,1 ,)                      (1,   1 , )

1 Y , 1 Y ) = u1     ( X -  X ,  X ). We assume the distributions of  and  follow the above
               (1,1 ,)
condition in what follows. Additionally, we assume the distribution is such that if all  = 2
candidates are mimicked by all  = 1 candidates who are willing to mimick at x1 = 0, then
V2 reelects at x1 = 0.
    As before, we focus on equilibria satisfying the intuitive off-equilibrium beliefs of Cho
                                                for all  and . Under such off-equilibrium
and Kreps (1987): p (1,  , | x1 ) = 0 if x1 < x1
beliefs, there exists a continuum of semi-separating equilibria characterized by constrained
reciprocity with altruism.




                                                   37
Proposition 4 (Constrained Reciprocity Equilibria with Altruism). For any k, there exists a
2 (k )  [0,  ] such that the set of equilibria satisfying the intuitive off-equilibrium beliefs is non-empty
                                                                 [0,  ( k ) X ].
and characterized by constrained reciprocity with altruism at x1     2

    Note that allowing for altruism allows us to extend our theoretical results, in the sense
                   may be less than       X -Y
that the cut-off x1                         X .   This is because altruistic  = 1 candidates have to
                                                                                .
deviate less to be reelected, and are thus willing to mimic at lower values of x1
    Furthermore, as before, a unique equilibrium can be found by applying candidate dom-
                                                                                       =
inance. In the candidate dominant equilibrium, the cut-off occurs at its upper bound x1
2 (k ) X , as described in the proposition below.

Proposition 5 (Constrained Reciprocity Equilibrium with Altruism). For any k, there exists a
unique candidate dominant equilibrium satisfying the intuitive off-equilibrium beliefs characterized by
                                           =  ( k ) X.
constrained reciprocity with altruism at x1  2

    Moreover,  = 2 candidates need to constrain their reciprocity more as the cost of voting
increases.

Corollary 2. The amount highly reciprocal policy preference 2 candidates constrain themselves in the
equilibrium described in Proposition 5 is weakly increasing in the cost of voting.


                                             A.II    Proofs

Proof of Proposition 1. Suppose (2, 0) chooses x1 > 0. Since p (2, 0| x1 = 0) = 1, (2, 0) could
profitably deviate to x1 = 0. Thus, (2, 0) must choose x1 = 0. Suppose (1, 0) is reelected by
pooling with (2, 0) at x1 = 0. This cannot be an optimal strategy since (1, 0) could deviate
to x1 = X and forego reelection, while improving her two-period utility. Since (1, 0) is not
reelected in any equilibrium, she must choose her first-best x1 = X .

Proof of Proposition 2. In order to characterize the set of equilibria, we need to make a couple
definitions.
    First, for a given x1 < X , we define the set of  = 1 candidates who gain from deviating
to x1 to be reelected over playing their first-best (and foregoing reelection). For any x1 
[X - Y, X - Y                                                                   1- = X . It can be shown
                 2 ], let  ( x1 ) be implicitly defined by: x1 + Y (  ) (1 -  )
                                                                       

that ( x1 ) = {(1,  )|  <  ( x1 )} is the set of  = 1 candidates who gain from choosing x1 and
being reelected over their first-best without reelection. Furthermore, ( x1 ) is monotonically
increasing in x1 (( x1 )  ( x1 ) iff x1  x1 ), with bounds ( X - Y ) = {(1, 0)} and ( X -
Y
 2 ) = { (1,  ) |    }.
     We do not construct a similar deviation set for  = 2 candidates, because any given (2,  )
is willing to choose x1 <  X over her first-best (x1 =  X ) to be reelected (this follows from
the assumptions Y > X         2 and   0.5).
     Next, note that a  = 1 candidate would not deviate from her first-best unless it implied
her reelection. Thus, we consider V2 and define the set of x1 over which type 1 candidates in
() pool with highly reciprocal  = 2 candidates and are reelected. We define 2 (k ) as the
highest  such that if type 2 candidates with   2 (k ) pool with all  = 1 candidates who
gain from mimicking ((2 (k ) X )), then V2 still votes.

                                                     38
                                                   (  (k) X )
                                 1- F (2 (k )) + 0 2          F ( )       k                                X -Y
   Define 2 (k ) implicitly by                                        =   Y   if it exists, and 2 (k ) =     X      other-
                                  1- F (2 (k )) + F ( ( 2 (k ) X ))
wise.
                            X -Y
   Note that  > 2 (k )        X    (the first inequality follows from F (0) > 0 and the continuity
of F (), while the second inequality follows from the assumption k < Y ). With definitions 1
and 2 we can characterize the set of equilibria.

   Claim 1. For a given k, the set of equilibria satisfying the intuitive off-equilibrium beliefs
(k ) is non-empty and strictly includes equilibria where:
            (1,  ): x1 =  X if  <  ( X ) and x1 = X otherwise. y2 =  Y if re-elected.
            (2,  ): x1 =  X if    and x1 =  X otherwise. y2 = Y if re-elected.
            V2 strategy: Vote if x1   X . Otherwise, abstain.
                           -Y
   for any arbitrary   [ XX    , 2 (k )].

   First, we check that the elements of (k ) constitute equilibria. Each type of C's strategy is
optimal by construction. V2 's beliefs satisfy the equilibria conditions and could be supported
by letting p (1, 0) = 1 off the equilibrium path.
   While V2 's strategy is clearly optimal for x1 < X , it remains to be seen that it is optimal
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                      Y    1    F ( )
at x1 = X . V2 's strategy must be optimal at x1 = X for all equilibria given that                     1- F ( 1 )
                                                                                                                        < k,
and  ( X ) < 1 for all  in (k ).
   Next, we show that (k ) constitutes the entire set of equilibria. One can show that any
pooling between  = 1 and  = 2 candidates must occur at a single x1 . Furthermore, it cannot
be an equilibrium for  = 1 and  = 2 candidates to pool at x1 > 2 (k ) because they would
not be reelected and some could profitably deviate to their first-bests. It also cannot be an
                                                                                 X -Y
equilibrium for  = 1 and  = 2 candidates to pool at x1 <                           X ,   as  = 1 candidates could
profitably deviate to x1 = X .
                                                                              -Y
   Moreover, given that pooling between  = 1 and  = 2 must occur at some   [ XX  , 2 (k )],
it cannot be an equilibrium for players to assort themselves in any other way:  = 2 candi-
dates with  <  must play their first-bests as the intuitive off-equilibrium beliefs imply it
gives them reelection.  = 2 candidates with  >  must play x1 =  X as anything greater
implies foregoing reelection, while anything less is suboptimal. Lastly,  = 1 candidates
cannot arrange in any other way by construction.
   Finally, note that (k) also includes an equilibrium where no  = 1 candidates pool with
                                         X -Y
 = 2 candidates in the case of  =          X .   It turns out this is the unique such equilibrium with
strict separation between  = 1 and  = 2 candidates.  = 2 candidates cannot separate from
 = 1 candidates and play x1 > X - Y as some  = 1 candidates would mimic. Also,  =
2 candidates cannot constrain to some x1 < X - Y , as intuitive off-equilibrium beliefs imply
V2 reelects at any x1 < X - Y and (2,  ) could profitably deviate. Finally, conditional on  =
2 candidates choosing x1 = X - Y and separating from  = 1 candidates,  = 1 candidates
must choose their first-best x1 = X . Thus, (k ) constitutes the entire set of equilibria.

Proof of Proposition 3. The proof of Proposition 2 shows that (k ) constitutes the entire set of
equilibria. Here, we show there is a unique equilibrium with  = 2 (k ) and 1 (k ) =  (2 (k ) X )
that candidate dominates all others in (k): each  = 2 candidate receives a weakly higher

                                                        39
two period utility; each  = 1 candidate receives a weakly higher two period utility; some
 = 2 who deviate from their first-best at other equilibria in (k ) but not at  = 2 (k ) receive
a strictly higher two period utility; and some  = 1 candidates who mimic at  = 2 (k ) but
not at other other equilibria in (k ) also receive a strictly higher two period utility.
                                                           d 2 ( k )         -Y               -Y
Proof of Corrollary 1. We want to show that           0. Suppose 2 (k) = XX
                                                             dk                  (if 2 (k) = XX  ,
       d 2 ( k )
then dk = 0 and the statement holds arbitrarily). If k increases, then the right hand side
of the equation defining 2 (k ) (see proof of Proposition 2) increases. Thus, the left hand side
must increase too. For the left hand side to increase, the ratio of  = 2 to  = 1 candidates
 1- F (2 (k))
( F ( (k       ) must increase since the former give more second election benefits to V2 . It can
      1 )))
be seen that 1 - F (2 (k )) increases and F (1 (k )) decreases when 2 (k ) decreases. Thus, 2 (k )
must decrease for the equation to hold.

Proof of Proposition 4. First, for a given x1 < X , we define the set of  = 1 candidates who gain
from deviating to x1 to be reelected over playing their first-best (and foregoing reelection).
For any x1  [0, X - Y
                    2 ], let  ( x1 )  [0,  ] × [0,  ] be implicitly defined by (  ,  ) such that:
u1                         2                       1
 (1, ,) ( x1 , X - x1 ) + u(1, ,) (Y -  Y ,  Y )  u(1, ,) ( X -  X ,  X ). It can be shown that  ( x1 ) 
( x1 ) if x1 < x1 . In other words, the set of  = 1 candidates who are willing to mimic is
decreasing as they must deviate further from their first-bests. Furthermore, it can be shown
that ( x1 ) is a compact set.
    We define 2 (k ) as the highest  such that if type 2 candidates with   2 (k ) pool with all
 = 1 candidates who gain from mimicking (2 (k ) X ), then V2 still votes. Let H ( , ) define
the joint distribution of  and .
                                               
                                    2 ( k )   0 (1-  ) G (  ) F (  )+ (2 (k) X )  H (  )
                                                                              k
    Define 2 (k ) implicitly by                                          = Y
                                              1- F (2 (k )) + H ((2 (k ) X ))
                                                                                if it exists and 2 (k ) = 1
                                                           X -Y
otherwise where 1 is defined as follows. 1  [0, X ] is implicitly defined such that the most
altruistic  = 1 candidate with zero reciprocity would be indifferent to mimicking at x1 =
1 X : u1                            2                 1
        (1,0,) ( 1 X , X - 1 X ) + u(1,0,) (Y , 0) = u(1,0,) ( X -  X ,  X ).

    Claim 2. For a given k, the set of equilibria satisfying the intuitive off-equilibrium beliefs
(k ) is non-empty and strictly includes equilibria where:
             (1,  , ): x1 =  X if ( , )  ( X ) and x1 = (1 - ) X otherwise.
                       y2 =  Y if re-elected.
             (2,  , ): x1 =  X if    and x1 =  X otherwise. y2 = (1 - )Y if re-elected.
             V2 strategy: Vote if x1   X . Otherwise, abstain.
    for any arbitrary   [1 , 2 (k )].

    First, we check that the elements of (k ) constitute equilibria. Each type C's strategy is
optimal by construction. V2 's beliefs satisfy the equilibria conditions and could be supported
by letting p (1, 0, 0) = 1 off the equilibrium path. V2 's strategy is clearly optimal for x1   X .
Furthermore, V2 's strategy is optimal at x1 >  X because V2 is unwilling to reelect any non-
                                                                                                        k
mimicking  = 1 candidate. As explained in the text, this follows because E( |   1 )                     Y.
Thus, the elements of (k ) are equilibria. The argument that (k) constitutes the entire set
of equilibria follows the same logic as in the proof of Proposition 2.



                                                              40
Proof of Proposition 5. Here, we show there is a unique equilibrium with  = 2 (k ) that candi-
date dominates all others in (k ) : each  = 2 candidate receives a weakly higher two period
utility; each  = 1 candidate receives a weakly higher two period utility; some  = 2 who
deviate from their first-best at other equilibria in (k ) but not at  = 2 (k ) receive a strictly
higher two period utility; and some  = 1 candidates who mimic at  = 2 (k ) but not at other
other equilibria in (k ) also receive a strictly higher two period utility.
                                             d 2 ( k )
Proof of Corollary 2. We want to show that     dk    0. Suppose 2 (k) = 1 (if 2 (k) = 1 , then
d 2 ( k )
  dk  = 0 and the statement holds arbitrarily). If k increases, then the right hand side of the
equation defining 2 (k) (see proof of Proposition 4) increases. Thus, the left hand side must
increase too. For the left hand side to increase, the ratio of  = 2 to  = 1 candidates must in-
crease since the former give more second election benefits to V2 . As 2 (k ) decreases, the mass
of  = 2 candidates 1 - F (2 (k )) increases and the mass of  = 1 candidates H ((2 (k ) X ))
decreases. Thus, 2 (k) must decrease for the equation to hold.




                                                 41
