                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                WEAK CREDIT COVENANTS

                                       Victoria Ivashina
                                         Boris Vallee

                                      Working Paper 27316
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27316


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2020




We are grateful to Patrick Bolton, Jonathan Cohn (FIRS discussant), Croci Ettore (discussant),
Viktar Fedaseyeu (discussant), Denis Gromb, Andres Liberman (discussant), Greg Nini (WFA
discussant), Mike Schwert, seminar and conference participants at Harvard University, Booth/
Chicago University, Stern/New York University, Northwestern University, University of
Minnesota, University of St Gallen, Ludwig Maximilian University, the 2019 WFA, the 2019
FIRS, the 2018 EFA meetings, the 2017 Yale Junior Finance Conference and the 2017 Paris
Finance meeting. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Victoria Ivashina and Boris Vallee. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Weak Credit Covenants
Victoria Ivashina and Boris Vallee
NBER Working Paper No. 27316
June 2020
JEL No. G23,G32

                                         ABSTRACT

Using novel data on 1,240 credit agreements, we investigate sources of contractual complexity in
the leveraged loan market. While negative covenants are widespread, carve-out and deductible
clauses that weaken them are as frequent. We propose simple measures of contractual weakness,
which uniquely explain the market-wide price reaction that followed the 2017 J.Crew
restructuring, a high profile use of such contractual elements. Leveraged buyouts have
significantly weaker loan agreements, and a larger non-bank funding of a loan is conducive to
weaker contractual terms. Weak covenants translate to modestly higher issuance spreads. Overall,
our findings are consistent with sophisticated borrowers catering to a reaching-for-yield
phenomenon by exploiting contractual complexity.


Victoria Ivashina
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 233
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
vivashina@hbs.edu

Boris Vallee
Baker Library 245
Harvard Business School
Boston MA 02163
bvallee@hbs.edu
1        Introduction

Corporate indentures, especially loan agreements for highly leveraged firms, are lengthy and
complex documents. Their scope goes well beyond defining the basic credit terms, or, to quote
Fitch: "Credit agreements are jam-packed with legal jargon that often bears little resemblance
to the English language."1 As pointed out by Smith and Warner (1979), much of the contract-
ing complexity results from the covenant structure designed to reduce the conflicts of interest
between creditors and equity holders. This conflict is particularly acute for firms taking on
large amounts of debt, such as leveraged loan users, the focus of this study. While the economic
principles behind the contracting framework have been well understood for nearly forty years,
the empirical advances in analyzing loan contracts and measuring contractual strength has been
limited due to the qualitative and complex nature of the contractual language used in the debt
space. Despite public alarms over the lack of understanding of deterioration in creditor protec-
tion in the recent years, especially in the $1.3 trillion US leveraged loan market, the academic
literature and policy still fall short of articulating what constitutes weak contracts.2
        In this paper, we exploit technological advances in contract processing allowing a novel data
set focused on contractual provisions that parses 1,240 leveraged loan credit agreements to de-
velop simple measures of negative covenant weakness. We analyze the full scope of negative
covenants ­ a list of restrictions (hence, "negative") on borrower's actions ­ included in a typi-
cal credit agreement and provide the first comprehensive mapping by covering all categories of
restrictions, including the six main ones: (i) restrictions on liens (or restrictions on use of collat-
eral), (ii) restrictions on indebtedness, (iii) restrictions on payments to investors, (iv) restrictions
on asset sales, (v) restrictions on affiliate transaction, and (vi) restrictions on investments. We
show that restricting this set of borrower's actions is the norm. However, any covenant can be
significantly weakened contractually through "fine print" type of clauses. In particular, we show
that issuers commonly rely on carve-outs and deductibles (or "baskets," in the industry jargon)
    1
     "Plain English Translations: General Asset Sales Basket," Fitch Solutions: Covenants Review, March 31,
2020.
   2
     At least, since 2018, there have been escalating alarms about deterioration in credit standards in the leveraged
loan market. E.g., see "Janet Yellen Sounds Alarm over Plunging Loan Standards," Financial Times, October
25, 2018; "Debt Machine: Are Risks Piling up in Leveraged Loans?", Financial Times, January 21, 2019; "Should
the World Worry about America's Corporate-Debt Mount?", the Economist, March 14, 2019; "How Regulator,
Republicans and Big Banks Fought for a Big Increase in Lucrative but Risky Corporate Bonds," Washington
Post, April 26, 2019; Powel (2019), the Congressional hearings on "Emerging threats to stability: Considering the
systematic risk of leveraged lending" held on June 4, 2019, and related media commentary.



                                                         2
to weaken core negative covenants, thereby reducing contractual creditor rights.
      These two contractual elements are somewhat overlapping and ultimately both provide the
borrower with optionality that may become highly valuable in specific contexts, such as distress.
Indeed, as the leveraged loan market comes under stress in the context of the COVID-19 pan-
demic, several industry reports are trying to anticipate consequences of the use of the carve-outs
and deductibles in different covenants.3 As a simple example, a senior secured creditor might
want to control any additional debt issuance and its type, as it might affect bankruptcy costs
and its ultimate recovery. An issuance of additional secured debt without a clear delineation of
collateral would dilute its claim and might require coordination in case of restructuring, thereby
raising overall bankruptcy costs. To avoid these adverse effects for existing creditors, a typical
credit agreement prohibits issuance of additional senior secured debt: the indebtedness restric-
tion. However, when the contract includes a carve-out, the contract prohibits issuance of senior
secured debt except for issuance of, say, second lien debt. When including a deductible, it pro-
hibits issuance of senior secured debt except for issuance of such debt up to a certain amount,
say, $100 million. A deductible therefore puts a threshold on the amount before the restriction
is applied, whereas a carve-out is not capped, but applies to a specific type of action.
      Overall, we provide a comprehensive empirical insight into contractual terms used in the
leveraged loan market. We show that consistent with theory, restrictions to prevent actions
from the issuer that increase risk for the lender are widespread in the leveraged loan market.
However, the clauses that weaken these restrictions, deductibles and carve-outs, are ubiquitous.
Importantly, there is significant heterogeneity in the use of these contractual provisions. We
introduce simple measures of covenant weakening and show that they are not spanned by the
existing measures of contract weakness in the literature. In particular, they differ from weak
financial covenant enforcement, also known as "cov-lite" provisions. As the pressures building
in the leveraged loan market has been becoming evident in recent years, industry services, such
as Fitch and Moody's, have also started to score loan contracts. While their methodologies are
comparable with ours, the extent to which such measures actually capture covenant weakness,
and whether they complement previously used measures is yet unproven. Our contribution is
therefore also methodological.
  3
    For example, "Key Sources of General-Purpose Debt Capacity for US Companies Facing a Liquidity Crunch,"
Fitch Solutions: Covenant Review, March 25, 2020. Also, "Priming Debt and Inside-Maturity Debt Allowed Under
US Credit Agreements," Fitch Solutions: Covenant Review, March 31, 2020.


                                                     3
   To establish that we are looking at contractual features that weaken senior secured creditors
rights and understand their economic consequences, we analyze the market response to a high-
profile debt restructuring from J. Crew, which had its defining steps in 2017. In a nutshell, J.
Crew management used a set of carve-outs and deductibles in its credit agreement to extract a
significant share of collateral which was securing its loan, and issue new debt that was primarily
used to refinance expiring unsecured debt. The economic significance of this transfer from J.
Crew creditors brought markets attention to the importance of covenant weakening clauses. For
example, in a Client Alert on February 24, 2017, Kind & Spalding LLC, a major corporate law
firm, stresses in its conclusions: "J. Crew serves as a dangerous example of the risks of leakage
which can arise absent a thorough and diligent review of covenants in a credit agreement before
investing in a company's debt."This event led to market-wide consequences which go beyond
direct applications of a "J. Crew maneuver" and drawn investors attention to the use of weak
contractual language in general. Indeed, we conduct an event study where we look at the market
reaction for loans and stock, for borrowers other than J. Crew. The focus is on differential
market reaction from lenders and shareholders, and for firms characterized by higher use of
carveouts and/or deductibles. We find that both loan and stock markets update their view on
the value effects of such weakening clauses at the announcement of the J. Crew restructuring.
The value transfer from lenders towards shareholders indicates that the incremental risk for
creditors resulting from these clauses is not fully priced in at issuance.
   We also show that weakening clauses are economically large and are concentrated on the
actions with more direct impact on loan value: re-pledging the collateral and issuing additional
debt, and in the most levered transactions. As a result, at origination about half of the firms
have Total debt/EBITDA below 5x; however, through use of deductibles and carve-outs, over 70%
of contracts allow the borrower to issue later on additional senior secured debt in excess of 5x
EBITDA. Similarly, over three quarters of firms with 5x EBITDA leverage at the loan origination
are allowed to issue debt in excess of 6x EBITDA later on. About the same fraction of firms with
6x EBITDA leverage can actually issue debt in excess of 7x EBITDA. The potential for dilution
of senior secured creditors in distress is therefore large. The consequences for subordinated debt
are potentially even more severe.
   Next, we focus on understanding the contracting mechanism behind the weakening clauses.
Buyout transactions stand out as the most intensive users of these provisions. Weakening clauses

                                                 4
in loan contracts appear particularly common when banks retain a smaller share of the loan
because institutional investors, such as collateralized loans obligations and mutual funds, fund
a large share of the loan, and when the borrower benefits from the high credit expertise of
their financial sponsor. Weakening clauses are also associated with a higher loan spread. Taken
together, these results are consistent with a reaching for yield phenomenon from institutional
investors, with sophisticated borrowers potentially exploiting this phenomenon while banks face
low incentives to fully monitor contracts.
       For completeness, we investigate whether the weakening of creditor rights may result from
addressing ex ante renegotiation costs, which is not mutually exclusive from the previous mech-
anism. Our data does not provide evidence in support for this mechanism playing an important
role in the development of weakening clauses. For instance, more complex capital structures are
associated with less weakening clauses, not more.
       Our work contributes to the academic debate surrounding the expansion of the leveraged
loan market and its implications, but also has practical implications. As lax credit conditions are
a leading indicator of economic downturns (L´
                                            opez-Salido et al., 2017, Greenwood and Hanson,
2013), measuring financial contract strength and understanding the underlying economic mech-
anism is of key interest to the regulators. The Leverage Lending Guidance issued jointly by the
OCC, the Federal Reserve Board and the FDIC on March 21, 2013 was a key macro-prudential
tool.4 The goal of the Guidance was to assist financial institutions in providing leveraged lending
to creditworthy borrowers in a safe-and sound manner.5 The regulators attention to the "safety
and soundness" of leveraged loans is unambiguous, but the measurement tools used by them
are rather limited. In particular, one of the red flags raised in 2015 under the Guidance was
the focus on loans with Total Debt/EBITDA in excess of 6:1 (see Zinder et al. (2016)).6 While
the intention of the Guidance is to include deductibles, it offers no methodological guidance on
how to do it. Our study shows concrete magnitudes, and points out that the optionality intro-
duced through the use of such clauses, and in particular optionality to increase the leverage, is
   4
     The full text of the Guidance can be found at https://www.federalreserve.gov/supervisionreg/srletters/sr1303a1.pdf.
   5
     Nevertheless, in October 2017, the Government Accountability Office (GAO) issued an opinion that Leveraged
Lending Guidance would need to be submitted to Congress for review before it could have force and effect of law,
which made it not enforceable. Since then, the Leveraged Loan Guidance has been a subject of debate between
the industry and the regulators. See for instance https://www.lsta.org/news-and-resources/news/supervisory-
statementsand-leveraged-lending-guidance.
   6
      ECB had proposed a very similar cutoff (e.g., https://www.lw.com/thoughtLeadership/LW-European-
Central-Bank-Publishes-Guidance-on-Leveraged-Transactions.)



                                                        5
substantial and concentrated in highly-levered transactions.
       Our work directly relates to a set of academic studies that aim to assess debt contract
strengths and weaknesses, and more broadly understand the drivers and effects of debt contract
design. By leveraging technological progress to overcome usual data limitations, we are able
to analyze in a large sample a broad set of widely-used contractual terms that are currently
overlooked in the literature. Nini et al. (2009) and Nini et al. (2012) provide empirical evidence
on the key role of covenants for limiting investments and providing creditor governance. Murfin
(2012) and Demerjian and Owens (2016) focus on financial covenants "slack", the headroom from
the current level of financial ratios to violation threshold to measure contractual weakness. Both
studies recognize the limitations in terms of scope and data availability for their exercise. Berlin
et al. (2019) provides a framework to acurately measure "covenant-lite-ness". Most closely, our
paper relates to Demiroglu and James (2010), Bradley and Roberts (2015), Billett et al. (2007).
These studies integrate multiple contractual features, including financial covenants, in a holistic
measure of contractual strength by aggregating dummies indicating whether some core contrac-
tual categories are present in a given contract. Their approach has three limitations. First,
loan contract provisions have narrow coverage in public databases. Second, several of the vari-
ables that appear in such data sources have many missing values, creating the risk of significant
composition effects.7 Third, such methodology misses the variation in contractual weakness
conditional on having a given negative covenant, and therefore does not account for carve-outs
or deductibles, which as we will show is predominant tool for weakening credit agreements. We
are able to substantially improve on all of these dimensions. Consistent with our assessment, we
show that while directionally correlated, measures used in the previous literature, collectively
or individually, capture little as compared to our variables of contractual weakness. Similarly,
the previous measures have little explanatory power for understanding the market adjustment
following the previously-mentioned court resolution. Ganglmair and Wardlaw (2017) use text
analysis to look at the level of customization in covenants and default events, and conclude that
there is a substantial heterogeneity in contractual terms, likely emanating more from firms than
from lenders. While also holistic in nature, this analysis abstracts from the economics behind
the contractual text or specific contracting tools. We focus on the weakening of creditors' rights,
   7
    For instance, in Dealscan the variable on asset sales sweep exhibits 96.7% of missing values for the transactions
over $100 million since 2011.



                                                         6
carve-outs and deductibles being the means for achieving it, and examine the specific channels
that affects the contractual terms.
       Our study complements the literature on financial contracting, both theoretical (Hart and
Moore, 1988, Hart, 2001) and empirical (Kaplan and Str¨
                                                      omberg, 2003, Roberts and Sufi, 2009),
by documenting a novel mechanism driving contractual design. We cannot yet trace the con-
sequences that the J. Crew event potentially had on contracting terms more broadly. Recent
industry reports however suggest that borrower-friendly carveouts and deductibles continue to
be a widespread phenomenon.8 This persistence is consistent with theories where investors are
inattentive to less salient risks or downturn indicators in good times (Reinhart and Rogoff, 2009,
Gennaioli et al., 2015).
       Our paper also ties to research on the debt expertise of private equity firms (Ivashina and
Kovner, 2011, Axelson et al., 2013) and their potential effects, which can translate into improved
financial performance for private equity firms and help portfolio firms navigate crisis despite
high levels of leverage, but can also potentially distort usual signals from the credit market and
facilitate value extraction from creditors. Our study illustrates a specific channel through which
private equity funds exert their debt expertise, and some of the consequences associated with it.
       Last, this study adds to the literature on the motives and effects of optionality in financial
contracts. As options typically get ignored or mispriced by less sophisticated parties, their
introduction can lead to mis-valuation in the venture capital space (Gornall and Strebulaev,
2018), increase in demand for financial products from households (C´
                                                                   el´
                                                                     erier and Vall´
                                                                                   ee, 2017),
or even an amplification of the principal-agent problems in the political system (P´
                                                                                   erignon and
Vall´
    ee, 2017). Our paper provides a novel and economically significant context in which a
sophisticated party introduces contingent clauses in a financial contract to exploit the other
party low demand elasticity to this type of clauses.
       This paper is organized as follows: Section II discusses the negative covenant structure typ-
ical of a credit agreement in the leveraged loan market. Section III introduces the dataset and
assesses its representativeness. This section also presents aggregate stylized facts and introduces
empirical proxies of contractual weakening. Section IV provides evidence that contract weaken-
ing might be a source of concern. Section V studies the contracting mechanism at play. Section
   8
    E.g., "The Top 10 Ways Loan Investors are Forfeiting Protections," Moody's Investor Services, November 13,
2018; "EBITDA on Steroids," Private Equity International, May 25, 2019.



                                                      7
VI considers alternative mechanisms for our empirical findings. Section VII concludes.



2     Elements of a Covenant Structure

2.1    The Role of Negative Covenants

Negative covenants are contractual provisions that serve as creditors' governance mechanism by
restricting (hence, "negative") actions of the borrower. A violation of negative covenants puts
control rights over the firm's assets in hands of the creditors that are covered by the contractual
agreement. Our study provides the first holistic insight into the analysis of the negative covenants
of large cash-flow based loans, which are the most complex debt contract.
    The indentures that one can see in the public space, as well as credit agreements for small
loans, or asset-backed loans, tend to be much simpler. There are several reasons behind it.
Lenders have the ability to obtain confidential information (because loans are excluded from the
1933 Securities Act and are covered by a confidentiality agreement) and are typically concen-
trated. By contrast, bonds are covered by the Regulation Fair Disclosure and have a dispersed
and heterogeneous creditor base, which makes renegotiation in case of contractual violations very
difficult (Bolton and Scharfstein, 1996). As a result, the allocation of control rights to bond-
holders through a tight covenant structure might not be desirable (e.g., Becker and Ivashina
(2016); and Green (2018)). This difference between bond and loan contracts is also consistent
with the prediction in Park (2000) that monitoring should be delegated to senior secured debt,
i.e., lenders.
    On the other hand, for small borrowers, creditors hold alternative non-contractual governance
mechanisms, because information asymmetry is large in this space, and these firms are dependent
on "relationship lending." The intensity of contractual differences for small cap vs. large cap
loans are easily notable even with a simple page count. Albeit credit agreements for small
and medium firms are not readily available, we were able to obtain a representative credit
agreement from a regional bank for a term loan granted in April 2016 to a firm with roughly
$2.2m in EBITDA. The length of this agreement is 53 pages. Similarly, Gompers and Broussard
(2009) provide an actual credit proposal for a small firm (EBITDA equivalent to $27 million
in 2016): the proposal -which is intended to specify the key terms- is five pages long. Neither
example contains a definition of EBITDA. By comparison, the main text of the 2017 Credit

                                                 8
Agreement for Outback Steakhouse (EBITDA equivalent to $450 million in 2016) is 170 pages
long. The definition of EBITDA alone takes 1,733 words. This anecdotal evidence is consistent
with the importance of relationship banking for small firms. Due to heightened information
asymmetry of small borrowers, lender substitution is costly (e.g., Dell'Ariccia and Marquez
(2004)), putting much of the bargaining power on the lender side and reducing the need for
contractual governance. For an overview of the literature on this subject, see Berger and Udell
(1995) or, more recently, Saunders and Steffen (2011).
      There are other reasons why contractual governance rights might not be valuable to creditors.
For example, if a loan is over-collateralized and there is certainty of a quick recovery of principal
in default through the liquidation of collateral, there is little value in trying to control the
borrower ahead for its default on payments. So, the intensity of covenants also depends on the
nature of the collateral and Asset Based Lending ("ABL") (as compared to Cash-Flow lending
which are the loans in our sample) uses few covenants. A car loan provides a simple illustration:
some basic screening of the borrower's income and credit history is typical of the loan approval
process, yet there are no negative covenants written in such contracts. The lending process
relies primarily on the value of the collateral. If the borrower defaults, the collateral ­the car­
is ceased and liquidated in a routine procedure. ABL is the corporate equivalent of this type of
loan.9
      Not all firms possess large enough "commodity" collateral. Yet almost all firms have other
types of assets, and it is common to use the totality of these other assets as collateral in the cash-
flow based loans. Tracking, valuing, and selling such assets is a costly and uncertain process. For
example, an apparel retailer has inventories, but those inventories constantly change. Moreover,
such retailer may have intellectual property (its brand), but there is high uncertainty on its
value, particularly in the context of default. Contractual governance rights are therefore most
relevant to cash-flow lending, which is the focus of our study. More broadly, Lian and Ma (2018)
show that over 80% of syndicated corporate loans reported in the commonly used DealScan
database are cash-flow based.
      The rich theoretical literature on covenants mostly focuses on when covenants should be
included, while providing little guidance on which covenants should be included. Expanding
  9
    Examples of assets used for ABL include receivables (and especially credit-card receivables common for
restaurants and retailers), real estate, planes, and heavy-equipment.



                                                    9
on Smith and Warner (1979), we formalize the rationale for the different types of covenant as
follows. The covenants structure of a loan contract is designed to manage potential conflict
of interest between debt holders and equity holders. Besides protecting the integrity of the
collateral backing the loans, contracts for cash-flow based loans should aim to address core
economic channels through which managers of a firm could transfer value from debt holders to
equity holders. The value of firm's equity E can be expressed as a call option on its assets V ,
with the exercise prices equal to the face value of its debt F (Black and Scholes, 1973). The
value of debt, thus, is its value as risk-free bond minus a default put. Following notation in
Myers (2003):


                    E = V - D = V - D(riskf ree) + P (V, , t, F ),                (1)

   where  is the standard deviation of assets and t is debt maturity. Equation (1) helps to
formalize the four channels of potential value transfer from creditors to shareholders (which are
the focus of the covenant structure). In particular:

        dP
    -   d    > 0: equity holders could benefit from higher volatility of cash flows at the expense of
        debt holders (Jensen and Meckling, 1976), so the credit agreement should seek to prevent
        risk shifting or asset substitution;

        dP
    -   dV   < 0: if equity is under water, firm's management might pass on positive NPV projects,
        i.e., underinvest, if the benefits accrue to the debt (Myers, 1977), thus credit agreement
        should seek to influence the investment policy;

        dP
    -   dF   > 0: equity holders benefit from diluting the claim of the existing debtholders, so the
        credit agreement should seek to control issuance of additional debt;

        dP
    -   dt   > 0: credit agreement should seek to set tight covenant provisions that would allow
        them to gain control rights and make sure that they are receiving accurate information.


   Turning to the actual provisions included in a credit agreement, the negative covenants can
be divided into six main categories: (i) restrictions on liens; (ii) restrictions on indebtedness, (iii)
restrictions on asset sales, (iv) restrictions on payments, (v) restrictions on capital expenditures,
and (vi) restrictions on affiliate transactions. While there is no exclusive mapping of the typical


                                                   10
covenants to economic principals outlined above, protection of collateral and desire to manage
the four sources of misalignment of incentives between equity and debt underpin most of the
provisions included in a cash-flow based credit agreement. Restrictions on liens prevent the
borrower from re-pledging its assets in other secured transactions. Restrictions on indebtedness
limit borrower's ability to incur additional debt. Both these restrictions aim at preventing claim
dilution. Restrictions on asset sales limit borrower ability to sell its assets, which would reduce
the collateral of the loans, and may also change the risk profile of the business. Restrictions on
payments limit certain types of cash outflows, typically dividend payments, to focus the cash
flows towards debt repayment. Restrictions on capital expenditure regulate the use of funds,
limiting the borrower's ability to invest into a potentially risky project. Lastly, restrictions
on affiliate transactions limit the borrowing entity ability to enter into transactions with other
entities of the same economic group that are not necessarily covered by the credit agreement.


2.2      Weakening Negative Covenants

The focus of our study is not only on whether the above provisions are included in the loan
contract ­ they typically are ­ but it is also to measure the weakness of these provisions. The
two main channels for weakening a negative covenant we investigate are the introduction of
"carve-outs" and deductibles ("baskets")."10
       A carve-out on a covenant insulates certain borrower actions from contractual restrictions.
For instance, a contract can include a subordinated debt carve-out to the restriction on additional
indebtedness, which means that the latter does not apply to the issuance of subordinated debt,
and the borrower can issue such debt freely. In the case of Outback Credit Agreement, principal
accreted under paid-in-kind (PIK) debt is carved-out.
       A deductible on a covenant creates a threshold until which the restriction does not apply. For
instance, the 2007 Credit Agreement backing the 2007 buyout of Outback Steakhouse includes
the following terms:11


       - Indebtedness: General deductible of $100 million;

       - Liens: General deductible of $40 million;
  10
      "Carve-outs" and "Baskets" are not contractual terms, but terms commonly used by practitioners like "cov-
lite."
   11
      Credit Agreement Dated as of June 14, 2007, for OSI Restaurant Partners, LLC.


                                                      11
         - Asset Dispositions: Deductible of $35 million;

         - Investments: Deductible of $100 million;

         - Restricted Payments: Deductible of $50 million.12

Outback therefore has contractual option/permission from creditors to issue additional debt of
up to $100 million, pledge up to $40 million in collateral (that otherwise lenders would have
senior claim on) to new creditors, sell certain assets for up to $35 million in value, do investments
for up to $100 million, and pay off claims other than lenders for an amount of $50 million.
         How do borrowers decide on which of these options-like clauses to introduce? Discussions
with several financial sponsors suggest that it is hard, even for sophisticated issuers, to predict
which clause will actually be used, and consequently on which they should focus their effort when
negotiating the contract. This uncertainty partly results from the timeline, as some of these
clauses do not come into play for years.13 Borrowers therefore most likely try to figure out what
covenants they can drop from the credit agreement, and what carve-outs and deductibles they
might include without substantially driving the cost of debt up. Economically, this corresponds
to the borrower assessing lenders price elasticity to these optional clauses and embedding as
many quasi-free options as it can. Some of these clauses have already been put to use by
issuers with substantial economic consequences for both the senior secured creditors and the
shareholders. In Section 4, we will elaborate on the 2017 J. Crew restructuring, but several
others have followed since.



3         Data, Facts, and Empirical Proxies

3.1        Data Sample

This study uses a novel dataset developed by Street Diligence, a private FinTech firm special-
ized in contract covenant visualization. The firm granted us access to their product for credit
agreements. This data is targeted towards credit investors, private equity firms, and investment
    12
      A "general deductible" on a restriction includes any type of actions falling under this covenant, while some
deductibles only cover a set of actions defined in the Credit Agreement. For example, a general deductible on
liens of $40 million means that the borrower can pledge any assets up to $40 million of the collateral for purposes
of issuing new debt. An alternative to that is that a specific set of assets-e.g., inventories- up to $40 million in
value could be pledged as collateral for issuance of new debt.
   13
       E.g., in the J. Crew's case that we use in our event study, the deductible on liens was written nearly five
years before it got used.


                                                        12
banks to improve the speed and accuracy of their benchmarking and due diligence, and covers a
large sample of loans. Street Diligence builds its loan database from SEC filings and document
contributions from its clients. For each credit agreement, Street Diligence breaks down and ag-
gregates the key covenant terms in a transparent, verifiable, and highly granular manner. While
datasets used in the literature, such as DealScan, focus on financial covenants or a limited set
of easily identified clauses, Street Diligence data provides the first comprehensive coverage of
the loan contractual terms, as the whole credit agreement is parsed out through a proprietary
methodology that mixes algorithmic and manual actions. Being a young company, the Street
Diligence contract sourcing and processing capacity are quickly evolving. The description of
the data presented here is specific to the data shared with us as of 2016 and might not be
representative of their current coverage of the loan space.
   Unlike other data sources such as Xtract Research, which is a widely used contract evalua-
tion service, Street Diligence do not provide qualitative assessment, instead focusing on parsing
contracts. Their value proposition is therefore based on the absence of "black box" or subjective
judgement. Instead, their product is intended and marketed as a platform for efficiently navi-
gating and displaying a credit agreement. At any point, the summary information provided by
the platform can be cross-checked against the underlying PDF of the credit agreement; which
displays how the text is parsed. The usefulness of Street Diligence product, therefore, crucially
relies on complete coverage of the text of the contract.
   To illustrate the comprehensiveness of the Street Diligence contract coverage, in Table 1, we
map the full covenant section for the standard LSTA credit agreement (Bellucci and McCluskey,
2017) into Street Diligence covenant categories. Because the platform is intended to be mostly
a transparent processing tool, it displays each individual carve out and deductible as a separate
bullet point ­ the data we aggregate for this study.


                                         [Insert Table 1]


   Each observation in our sample corresponds to a loan package described by a given Credit
Agreement. We conduct our analysis at this level as only the maturity and coupon varies at the
facility level within a given loan package, while contract covenants are defined at the package
level by the credit agreement. We combine this dataset on contractual terms with issuance
characteristics from DealScan. The resulting dataset covers 1,240 packages and 1,857 facilities,

                                               13
spanning the period from 2011 to 2016. We match borrowers to financial data from Compustat.
Table 2 shows summary statistics for our data sample and compares them to two benchmark
groups: (i) all loan packages over $100 million in DealScan issued after 2011, and (ii) all leveraged
loan packages issued after 2011, as defined by DealScan Market Segment information. For the
purpose of our event study, we also merge our sample with daily loan price data from Markit,
and daily stock price data from Datastream.
       77% of loans in our sample fall within the "Leveraged loan" segment based on DealScan
classification. According to Standard and Poor's (2014), leveraged borrowers are "issuers whose
credit ratings are speculative grade and who are paying spreads (premium above LIBOR or
another base rate) sufficient to attract the interest of nonbank term loan investors, typically
LIBOR + 200bps or higher, though this threshold moves up and down depending on market
conditions." The threshold also varies across different data providers. This being a new data
source, the coverage of the data over time is not uniform. It is lower in the earlier years: 8% of
leveraged loans in 2011 vs. 45% of leveraged loans in 2014. For this reason, much of our analysis
is cross-sectional in nature. Consistent with the sample being composed primarily of leveraged
loans, Total Debt/EBITDA leverage ratio is close to the DealScan leveraged subsample. How-
ever, our sample is biased toward larger loans: loans covered in our sample are comparable to
the syndicated loans above $100 million. This bias is consistent with the primary source of
credit agreements being SEC filings.


                                               [Insert Table 2]


3.2      Aggregate Stylized Facts

We first document the extent to which credit agreements restrict the actions detrimental to
the lenders as outlined in Section II. Panel A of Figure 1 displays the frequency that loans
have restrictions for each of these categories of actions in our sample. Credit agreements more
frequently restrict actions that circumvent or dilute the priority of debt holders: 92% of loan
contracts have restrictions on liens and 87% on incurring additional debt. On the other hand,
credit agreements less frequently restrict actions that potentially increase operational risk: 73%
of credit agreements have restrictions on asset sales and only 31% of contracts on investments.14
  14
    As a reference point, Nini et al. (2009) study restrictions on investments in a broader sample of syndicated
loans. In their sample, 32% of credit agreements carry such explicit restrictions.


                                                      14
                                                [Insert Figure 1]


       Overall the frequency of these restrictions is high, which is consistent with credit agreements
being a widespread tool to address conflicts between lenders and borrowers. However, the mere
existence of a negative covenant does not necessarily grant full protection to the lender in that
regard, as this can be significantly weakened through use of carve-outs and deductibles. The
natural next step of our analysis is therefore to study which restrictions are getting weakened
using these contractual elements, and to which extent.
       Panel B of Figure 1 displays the frequency of deductibles conditional on having the related
restriction. Deductibles are frequent: 96% of credit agreements include at least one kind of
deductible. The actions that are most frequently restricted ­issuance of additional debt and re-
pledging of collateral­ are also the ones that are most frequently weakened through deductibles.
While 92% of credit agreements have restriction on liens, only 14% of these do not have collateral
subject to deductibles. Similarly, while 87% of credit agreements have restrictions on additional
debt, 92% of these allow some additional debt issuance.
       Panel A of Figure 2 displays the average size of deductibles by covenant type, which we scale
by EBITDA.15 This figure reveals the large economic significance of these contractual terms.
The restriction on indebtedness in particular exhibits deductibles representing more than 2.3x
EBITDA multiples on average, nearly a half of the 5x EBITDA debt levels, which is common
for leveraged loans. Senior secured loan creditors historically recover about 70 cents on a dollar,
which gives a sense of the value of collateral and assets of the borrower. In this context, the
average deductible of 35% of EBITDA for collateral and 39% of EBITDA for assets sales also
appears sizable. Panel B of Figure 2 shows that about 10% of the credit agreements from the
sample have no deductibles, while the median agreement exhibits 8 baskets over all covenants.16


                                                [Insert Figure 2]


       In Figure 3, we turn our attention to carve-outs.               We include carve-outs on all types
of covenants, as well as on EBITDA, which affects contractual strength through financial
  15
     We aggregate deductible size at the covenant level, as a covenant typically has several deductibles of different
scopes. A small fraction of deductibles are conditional to a financial ratio meeting a threshold, or are limited in
scope. For the purpose of the analysis, we treat them as regular deductibles and aggregate them with regular
deductibles when both are present. Our results are virtually unchanged if we drop them.
  16
     A small number of deductibles apply to covenants not displayed in Panel A of figure 2.



                                                         15
covenants.17 Indeed, indebtedness is typically restricted through a maximum Debt/EBITDA
ratio. However, EBITDA, for purposes of the credit agreement, follows a contractual definition,
and as such it is also subject to weakening. For example, pro-forma cost savings could be ac-
counted for in EBITDA calculations. Panel A shows that the average contract allows for twelve
modifications to the standard financial definition of EBITDA.
       As with the deductibles, the use of carve-outs is the prevalent practice. Indeed, virtually all
credit agreements (99%) with negative covenants exhibit at least one carve-out per category of
covenants. The average credit agreement includes 79 distinct carve-outs. Similar to deductibles,
carve-outs are the most numerous for the restrictions on liens (22 on average) and indebtedness
(15 on average). Panel B of Figure 3 illustrates again the significant heterogeneity in the use of
carve-outs, which displays a skewed distribution.
       The abundance of carve-outs and deductibles and the significant variation across contracts in
their use support their importance and the sophistication that is required to interpret them. The
large number of borrower-friendly clauses is consistent with the rationale of sophisticated bor-
rowers embedding as many quasi-free options in the credit agreements as possible, as described
by practitioners.


                                              [Insert Figure 3]


3.3       Contractual Weakness Proxies

To study the cross-sectional variation in contractual terms, we focus on the measures plotted
in Panels B of Figures 2 and 3, that is the total number of carve-outs and deductibles over all
negative covenants and the EBITDA definition.18 The rationale for these proxies is to measure
the intensity of the contract weakening as expressed by the amount of optionality embedded in
the contract. Some of the contractual provisions that we observe are mutually exclusive. The
numbers of carve-outs and of deductibles should therefore be interpreted as an upper bound of the
contract flexibility on each of these measures, as we cannot account for the degree of additivity
  17
    Albeit, a more appropriate name for certain of these items is "add-backs."
  18
    More sophisticated numerical aggregation techniques are also possible. However, such approaches do not
change the central takeaways, yet they lose the intuitive appeal. In particular, we extracted the first principal
component of the number or size of deductibles for each covenant, and of the number of carve-outs for each
covenant. This approach yields a measure which has correlation of 0.9 with the measure plotted in Figure 2,
Panel B. Our methodological choice is also immune against miscategorization of the covenant for which carve-
outs and deductibles apply.



                                                       16
of these provisions. A widely used measure of shareholders' rights, the G-index (Gompers et al.,
2003), is subject to the same critique. In addition, some of the carve-outs and deductibles are
benign. For example, investments restriction should carve-out cash and liquid assets, which they
typically do. While we treat all carve-out and deductible provisions the same, all the regressions
in our empirical analysis include industry fixed effects that absorb industry-specific standard
clauses.
   In addition to the benchmark aggregate measures, we also zoom-in on two key covenants
categories: restrictions on indebtedness and restrictions on liens. When studying these specific
covenant categories, we use the size of the deductibles expressed as a fraction of EBITDA. By
nature of carve-outs, the size of the associated deduction is not explicitly stated in the contract.
For example, in the Outback case, we could only have a noisy proxy for the expected size of
the payment-in-kind carve-out. We therefore use the numbers of carve-outs for each of these
covenants throughout.
   Several existing studies use elements of debt contracting to assess contractual
strength/weakness. One question that arises is whether analyzing the full range of negative
covenants, and their deductibles and carve-outs, sheds a new light on the economic mechanism
underlying debt contracting. To what degree do the existing measures of weak contractual cred-
itor rights, such as number of financial covenants, or "cov-lite"-ness, span our novel measures?
   Before evaluating the relative power of these approaches, we want to highlight the substantial
measurement improvement that our study brings: (i) we have a comprehensive approach to
covenants, (ii) we provide a detailed insight into the use of carve-outs and deductibles, and (iii)
we de not rely on covenant data provided by DealScan. Whereas DealScan focuses on a limited
set of contractual terms, namely financial covenants and cash-proceeds sweeps, our data offer
a comprehensive coverage of the credit agreement. For example, as previously documented,
restrictions on liens ­ which are not covered in DealScan ­ are central to any credit agreement,
as this contract is intended to protect senior secured debt. Furthermore, DealScan variables on
contractual terms are hard to exploit due to their high share of missing values. For instance,
the variable on asset sales sweep exhibits 96.7% of missing values for the transactions over
$100 million since 2011. Limitations of the DealScan data are also highlighted by Demerjian
and Owens (2016) and Ganglmair and Wardlaw (2017). These differences need however to be
economically meaningful, and that, say, "cov-lite" indicator is not a simple shortcut to capture

                                                17
contractual weakness, which is mostly how the market and policy makers have been using it.
   Overall, existing literature tackling contractual provisions in the credit space can be divided
into three groups. First, several of the papers on contractual strength look at the "slack" implied
in financial covenants, which corresponds to how much room the borrower has on financial
covenants until control rights are shifted to creditors. Dichev and Skinner (2002) use covenant
slack as reported in Dealscan. Dyreng (2009) looks at slack on a range on a comprehensive set
of financial covenants which, in addition to restrictions on debt, includes current ratio, interest
coverage ratio, quick ratio, debt to EBITDA, tangible net worth, and net worth. He estimates the
financial slack as a difference between the quarterly Compustat data and the covenant threshold
scaled by the standard deviation of the actual value over the previous eight quarters. Demiroglu
and James (2010) construct a similar measure at the loan origination, using instead a twelve-
quarter window to compute the standard deviation. They also use an alternative approach
where instead they use cross-sectional median as a benchmark, rating contracts with lower slack
than the median as restrictive. Drucker and Puri (2008) employ somewhat similar methodology
for computing slack on net worth and current ratio financial covenants and complement it with
overall number of financial covenants. Finally, Murfin (2012) estimates the ex-ante probability
of shift in control assuming normal distribution of the ratios underlying the financial covenants,
using borrowers' actual financial ratios from Compustat. Similar to Murfin (2012), Demerjian
and Owens (2016) focus on financial covenants slack, however they recognize severe limitations
of DealScan as a source of information on covenants. Instead, they collect information on the
specific definitions of financial covenants, arriving to a more precise measure of covenant slack
and probabilty of covenant violation.
   A second set of papers is more closely related to our work as it goes beyond financial covenants
and instead tries to integrate multiple contractual features in a holistic measure of contractual
strength. Demiroglu and James (2010) and Bradley and Roberts (2015) use DealScan data
to construct a contractual weakness index for loans, following a methodology similar to the
governance index of Gompers et al. (2003). Specifically, they count the number of contractual
provisions based on the following six categories: (i) whether the loan is secured, and whether
the credit agreement includes (ii) dividend restriction, (iii) more than two restricted financial




                                                18
ratios,19 (iv) asset sales sweep, (v) debt issuance sweep, or (vi) equity issuance sweep.20 The
resulting index is discrete and ranges from 0 through 6. Billett et al. (2007) instead use FISD
bond data (vs. loans), which reports the incidence of over 50 different bond-holder protective
and issuer restrictive covenants. They code these covenants with 15 indicator variables and
produce a discrete index ranging between 0 and 15.
       Finally, the share of "cov-lite" loan contracts, that is contracts where financial covenants do
not have an automatic periodic verification but are checked only upon incurrence of certain ac-
tions by borrower, has been a central metric of contractual weakness in the 2013 Leveraged Loan
Guidance.21 Cov-lite loans also have been at the heart of the public debate on the deterioration
of corporate lending standard in the recent years (e.g., Stein (2013), Yellen (2018)), although,
work by Becker and Ivashina (2016), and Berlin et al. (2019) questions whether cov-lite is an
accurate measure of contractual weakness.
       In Table 3, we evaluate the relation between our weakness indices and measures previously
used in the literature. The focus is on the R2 in the OLS regressions, and the takeaway is
that the relation is weak. The combination of the three main measures from the literature
only yield a R2 of 0.5. We run separate regressions for the slack measures as their coverage
is by construction significantly lower. We find an even lower R2 . When looking at coefficients
in details, more numerous (and larger) deductibles and carve-outs appear in general correlated
with contract weakness as measured by the literature. Cov-lite transactions and contracts with
few financial covenants exhibit more and larger deductibles and more carve-outs. However, we
can observe some counterintuitive relations. For instance, covenant intensity displays a weak
positive correlation with our measures of weakness.


                                                [Insert Table 3]


       In the next section, we provide evidence supporting the claim that our approach better
captures contractual weakness, and that it allows us to document novel findings in the cross-
section of contracts.
  19
      Given that a standard credit agreement includes Total Debt/EBITDA and Senior Debt/EBITDA ratios,
whether the contract includes more than two financial covenants is a proxy for whether the contract includes
financial covenants other than indebtedness.
   20
      Sweeps are contractual provisions that give the creditors seniority over the extraordinary cash proceeds, such
as assets sales, or new issuance of debt or equity. Sweeps can be partial, requiring to pay to the lenders only a
fraction of proceeds.
   21
      https://www.occ.gov/news-issuances/bulletins/2013/bulletin-2013-9.html


                                                        19
4         A Source of Concern?

Our goal is not merely to highlight the pervasive use of baskets and carve-outs in the leveraged
loan market, but to show that they do weaken lenders rights. Traditionally, such claim would
be supported by looking at defaults and recovery rates. However, there is not a large enough
sample of defaults in the leveraged loan market to conduct such exercise, especially to do so
since its expansion after the Great Financial Crisis.
         Grasping the implications of contractual weakening in credit agreements requires time and
sophistication. The bulk of institutional retail-investors exposed to such provisions might be
reluctant to pay the information acquisition and processing costs they create. This however
might change if there is a tangible illustration of harmful borrower actions that weaker contrac-
tual languages permits. If the extent of the value transfer that weaker covenants entail is large,
investors' attention is likely to shift to these provisions and make them invest in information
acquisition. This is the setting offered by J. Crew's 2017 restructuring.


4.1         J. Crew Event Study: A Market-Wide Shock

The significance and legacy of this event is summarized in a 2020 Fitch, Covenant Review report:
"In the 1920s, Charles Ponzi ran an investment scheme where he paid existing investors outsize
returns with funds invested by new investors. Everyone now knows these types of schemes as
"Ponzi schemes." In 2016, J. Crew hatched a scheme where it moved valuable assets out of the
collateral pool and into an Unrestricted Subsidiary and issued bonds secured by those assets as
part of an exchange offer. Investors now know these types of schemes as "J. Crew transactions"
or "pulling a J. Crew." "22,23
         J. Crew was taken private in 2011 by Leonard Green & Partners and TPG Capital. In
May 2020, the firm filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy, but its financial trouble started a few
years earlier. The infamous debt restructuring was initiated in late December 2016, when, in
view of declining sales, the company found itself in a bind to refinance debt coming due in
2017. To address this challenge, J. Crew exploited a combination of an investment deductible
and a carve-out to transfer $250 million worth of the intellectual property behind J. Crew's
brand name from an existing senior collateral package to an unrestricted subsidiary, and then
    22
         "Return of the J. Crew Blocker," Fitch, Covenant Review, May 1, 2020.
    23
         Unrestricted Subsidiary means that the subsidiary is not party to the debt covered by the credit agreement.


                                                           20
used this collateral to issue new debt. The proceeds of the new debt were used to restructure
J. Crew's senior unsecured notes, the most junior layer of debt, representing roughly a third
of its 1.5B in debt outstanding, with the rest being leveraged loans. The newly issued bonds
effectively received senior secured claim over the transferred collateral, which happened to be J.
Crew's most valuable assets.24 Such actions correspond to a textbook example of what negative
covenants were created to prevent: a significant claim dilution for existing creditors, and have
been widely covered by the Loan Syndication and Trading Association (LSTA) and popular
business news channel.25
       Panel A of figure 4 plots the price J. Crew outstanding senior loans around the announcement
of the new debt issuance using the transferred collateral. We observe a significant drop in the
loan price that happens in conjunction to the announcement. The magnitude of this drop is
large, in the 10 percentage point magnitude, which suggests that the dilution of collateral is
acute, leading to a lower recovery rate, in a context of high bankruptcy risk.


                                                [Insert Figure 4]


       As our main test of contractual weakness resulting from carve-outs and deductibles, we
conduct an event study on both loan and share price from other borrowers to test whether,
following J. Crew's re-pledging of collateral to raise new debt, the market as a whole updates its
view on the risk of the debt contracts that rank high on the use of carve-outs and deductibles.
The timing of the J. Crew event is driven by its own long-term debt maturity, and not by some
systemic developments. The date that we choose for the event­June 17, 2017, the initiation of
the loan amendment enabling issuance of new debt using the extracted collateral ­is important.
Because J. Crew actions were such a significant economic event, the transfer of the collateral
led to a lawsuit.26 The lawsuit was resolved at a much later date, April 25th, 2018, and after
the debt restructuring took place. The loan market prices indicate that among the various
  24
     See "J. Crew Lenders Balk at Intellectual-Property Transfer," Courthouse News Service. June 23, 2017.
  25
     See for instance "J.Crew Tries to Ease Debt Load as Sales Decline Continues," Wall Street Journal, June 12,
or "J. Crew Debt Maneuver Can Be a Model for Other Troubled Retailers", New York Times, June 14, 2017.
  26
     As we have learned from interviews with multiple protagonists in the J. Crew case, although it is clear who
benefits from the collateral transfer, who initiates the lawsuit is a strategic matter. In general, the development
of the J. Crew case is intense in institutional elements. Most of these are beyond the scope of our paper, and we
constraint ourselves to present this case in the most concise manner, skipping the details that are are irrelevant to
the point of the paper. But we want to warn the readers to be cautious in drawing quick conclusions from some
facts that can be easily gathered from the press coverage. For example, while the majority of senior creditors will
vote to allow J. Crew to issue new debt, one cannot conclude that the majority of the creditors was supportive
of such amendment.


                                                         21
announcements, the loan amendment is the key event, consistent with it being the step that
leads the majority of old senior creditors to "surrender" to J. Crew coercive actions.27
       The price adjustment for securities of the firms in the event study, therefore, results from
a market update on the value of the optionality embedded in their credit agreements. Such an
update covers both the likelihood of such actions, and the impact they might have for investors.28
More specifically, we expect a more pronounced reallocation effect from lender to shareholders
for firms with credit agreements including a significant amount of weakening clauses, that is:
upon updating on how carve-outs and deductibles are used, the value of senior secured claims
should drop, as expected recovery rates on senior secured debt are revised down, while equity
value should increase, as the number of states where the firm is in default is reduced. Our
findings support these hypotheses.29
       As an illustration of our approach, Panel B of figure 4 plots the loan price of Gymboree, a
kids apparel manufacturer and retailer, whose contractual terms and economic performance had
been singled out in the specialized press as directly comparable to J. Crew's. Gymboree thus
ranks in the top quartile of both our measures of covenant weakness. Gymboree's loan price
appears to drop significantly shortly after J. Crew's announcement, consistent with investors
updating on the possible actions Gymboree might take.
  27
      This date is also relevant because we want to interpret the price adjustment as lenders mispricing the risk
of weak covenants ex-ante. Anchoring the event study around court decision, could introduce a "judge style"
confounding factor, which could not be anticipated ex-ante. We have no problems with the conjecture that the
creditors ex-ante cannot easily quantify the risk, that is in fact essential to our narrative. However, it is important
that the risk emanates from the contractual features, and not from a judge's idiosyncratic preferences. Because
issuance of new debt using expropriated collateral and junior debt restructuring occurred nearly one year ahead of
the court ruling, it seems reasonable to assume that market reaction had little to do with the specifics of the judge.
The two elements that seal the restructuring are also consistent with the recognition of contractual weakness,
and not a judge's style: (i) the majority of senior creditors recognize their loss by voting on an amendment that
facilitates issuance of the new debt; (ii) new creditors with the claim to the extracted collateral provide "cheap"
financing. While it could still be the case that judge's style also played a role, it is unlikely that so many market
participants, old and new, would act as if the restructuring is largely a done deal ahead of the court ruling without
them having the same interpretation of the credit agreement language. Despite the abundance of coverage of the
J. Crew restructuring, not a single document suggests that the final outcome was at the discretion of the judge.
Much of the coverage began as early as February 2017, i.e., even before the new debt was issued.
   28
      The lawsuit provides a peak into the investor updating process. The first point in the preliminary statement
of the lawsuit filed by a group of creditors on September 7, 2017 in the State of New York reads: "Defendants in
this case supposedly found a secret "trapdoor" in their senior secured debt facility. Assisted by teams of lawyers
and consultants, Defendants claim to have opened this trapdoor and dropped out substantially all of the value
of J. Crew Group, Inc., the parent company of the well-known apparel retailer (the "Company"). This value
was then pledged to other creditors in exchange for financial accommodations. As a result, the Company's senior
secured creditors, whose loans were meticulously secured by liens on a comprehensive collateral package, are now
left holding what looks like an empty sack." The language that implies creditors' surprise is present throughout
the complaint.
   29
      Our empirical exercise is consistent with recent coverage of the leveraged loan market following the COVID-19
crisis. For instance, see: "Covenants Matter: Higher Doc Scores Have Meant (Somewhat) Higher Trading Prices
in Recent Weeks, Per Data from Covenant Review and IHS Market."


                                                          22
      We turn to the whole sample of firms for which we have daily loan prices from Markit. For
transparency, we first present the raw data on loan prices: we aggregate them by quartiles of
our weakness measures, and plot these time-series around the J. Crew event.30 Figure 5 displays
the results, using number of carve-outs as the measure of contractual weakness in panel A, and
number of deductibles in panel B. We observe a drop in loan value price that is more pronounced
for the weakest contracts, while stronger loan contract do not exhibit such adjustment. This drop
is around half a percentage point. This lower magnitude compared to J. Crew and Gymboree
is to be expected: the dilution effect is attenuated by the low unconditional likelihood of J.
Crew-type actions.


                                                 [Insert Figure 5]


      We then conduct regressions to control for observable characteristics, and assess whether
previously used measures of contractual weakness would capture this price adjustment. Table 4
presents the coefficients. The dependent variable is the absolute change of the loan price, in %
of the nominal, over a -15/+15 days window centered on the announcement date of the issuance
of debt using as collateral the IP transferred to the non-restricted subsidiary. We regress this
change in price on the quartiles of our weakness proxies: number of carve-outs for columns 1
to 4, and number of deductibles for columns 5 to 8. The coefficient of interest in column 1 is
negative and statistically significant, which means that prices of loans with weaker covenants go
down relative to loans with stronger ones following J. Crew actions.
      We progressively introduce controls into our specification, and observe that the indicator
for being a cov-lite contract, a characteristic frequently used by academics and journalists as
a measure of weakness, while significant, does not affect the predictive power of our measure
over the price adjustment. This result speaks to the complementarity of the measures. The
number of financial covenants appears to have low predictive power. When interacting our
proxy of covenant weakness with a proxy for operational distress, defined as quartiles of the
inverse of return over assets in the previous exercise, we observe that the price adjustment is
significantly more pronounced for firms in operational distress, consistent with the option value
of weakening clause being higher in this context. We run the same specifications with the number
of deductibles as a measure of weakness and find similar results.
 30
      We rescale these series as per the day prior to the event.


                                                          23
                                              [Insert Table 4]

To complement this analysis on the value of loans, we conduct the same event study on the share
price of the same set of firms, as the majority of them is listed. The dependent variable now is
the cumulative CAPM-abnormal stock returns for the same -15/+15 days window, calculated
against the S&P 500. Results are displayed in table 5.
    The estimates show that the J. Crew event led to a positive stock reaction for firms with loan
contracts ranking high on our measures of contractual weaknesses. The result is statistically
significant for our first proxy of covenant weakness, but not for the second one, although this
might come from a lack of power as this proxy is less granular.


                                              [Insert Table 5]


4.2    The Latent Share of Highly Leveraged Deals

In the event study, we control for whether deals are leveraged or highly leveraged, a DealScan
market segment classification. However, as a complementary investigation, we study the inci-
dence and size of indebtedness deductibles ­ i.e., the additional allowed leverage ­ as a function
of current leverage. Given that the market and regulators find leverage in excess of 5x EBITDA
attention-worthy, we investigate what fraction of the firms in the flagged sample can further
extend their leverage and by how much, and what fraction of the firms that seem to comply
with the conservatively high leverage levels contractually could exceed it when needed.
    We measure EBITDA as of the fiscal year preceding the loan date, and the total debt is
measured as of the fiscal year end following the loan date. In Table 6, the first two lines
correspond to the distribution of leverage at issuance for firms in the leveraged loan segment
in general. We construct these using 2011-2016 data from Standard and Poor's Leveraged
Commentary and Data (LCD) quarterly market reports.31 We find that 56% of the borrowers
in the leveraged loan market have leverage in excess of 5x EBITDA (about half of the borrowers
on the net debt basis). We now adjust this distribution function for deductibles. In the third
  31
     Original LCD reports are disaggregated by year, borrower size (above and below $50 million in EBITDA
which is a cut-off for middle market), and sponsored vs. non-sponsored transactions. We take averages across
these categories. We use LCD leverage distribution as a building block because the relevant EBITDA for purposes
of a credit agreement might be difficult to calculate from scratch as these figures undergo several adjustments
even in absence of any EBITDA carve-outs. In that sense, we would still be noisily estimating the impact of
deductibles. In the multivariate regression this is mitigate through inclusion of industry controls as standard
EBITDA adjustments tend to be industry specific (e.g. adjustments for maintenance capital expenditures).


                                                      24
line of table 6, we introduce the maximal Debt/EBITDA, which corresponds to the leverage
increased by the average deductible we observe in our data for each of the leverage buckets. This
adjustment makes the share of latent leverage above 5x jump to 72% (from 56%). Interestingly,
the jump for the highest leverage bucket is equally sizable at 14 percentage points.
       The lower panel of Table 6 works exclusively with the Street Diligence data and provides
transitions from one bucket of leverage to higher buckets of leverage based on indebtedness
deductibles. These numbers indicate that 76% of firms with 5x EBITDA leverage at the loan
origination can actually issue debt in excess of 6x EBITDA. 73% of firms with objectively high
6x EBITDA leverage can actually issue debt in excess of 7x EBITDA.


                                                 [Insert Table 6]


       Figure 4 plots the distribution of Total Debt/EBITDA in our sample before and after ad-
justment for indebtedness deductible, assuming firms would use the deductible to its maximum.
Similar to Table 6, the central takeaway of this exercise is that the fraction of potentially highly
leveraged deals is significantly higher than would be inferred from a naive observation of the
leverage as of the date of the credit agreement. Whereas at the origination about half of the
companies have leverage below 5x EBITDA, in reality over 70% of companies funded in the
leverage loan market can issue additional debt later on, which would put total leverage over 5x
EBITDA. Furthermore, the potential increase in leverage is concentrated among the transactions
that are already heavily levered.32


                                                 [Insert Figure 4]


       The shift in the distribution of potential leverage attributable to indebtedness deductibles
is even more pronounced for leveraged buy-outs, as evidenced in the top-right graph of Figure
4. Leverage of sponsored transactions tends to be larger by orders of magnitude than leverage
of comparable public firms, and there are several examples of financial sponsors risk-shifting
behavior (Kaplan and Stein, 1993). Offering weaker contracts to buy-out firms might create
additional risk, and is exactly what the regulator has been trying to monitor.
  32
     The tail of the indebtedness distribution might strike as unusually large by industry standards. It is likely that
the skew in our distribution is due to the use of unadjusted EBITDA. As already pointed out, EBITDA calculation
for the purpose of a credit agreement involves a series of standard adjustments to the accounting item that we
use as denominator. For comparison, in the bottom two graphs we report the distribution of Debt/EBITDA for
two DealScan sub-samples covering the same period (2011-2016): deals over $100 million, and leveraged buyouts.


                                                          25
         Although our sample is relatively short, for illustration purpose, we plot the quarterly average
number of liens and indebtedness carve-outs during our sample period in Figure 5. Even though
the first years are to be taken with a grain of salt as the sample is much smaller before 2011,
the graph is consistent with a pro-cyclicality of contractual weakening.


                                                    [Insert Figure 5]



5         Understanding the Contracting Mechanism

The evidence presented so far shows that optionality commonly embedded in credit agreements
through carve-outs and deductibles is economically large, that a substantial fraction of this
phenomenon is concentrated in transactions that are already highly leveraged, and that recent
examples of use of these elements have been acknowledged by the market as something that
enhances the value of equity, at the expense of senior creditors. In this section, we explore the
characteristics of contracting parties that are conducive to weaker contractual terms. This sec-
tion present empirical evidence, which, when combined with the mispricing take-away from the
event study, is supportive of such contractual weakness resulting from sophisticated borrowers
and their sponsors catering to a reaching for yield phenomenon from institutional investors.33


5.1         The Special Role of Private Equity Sponsors

We start by establishing substantial and systematic differences for loan contracts backing buy-
outs. In their role as intermediaries, private equity firms interact with banks and financial
markets much more frequently than even the largest stand-alone firms. A CFO is responsible
solely for financial decisions of their company, and this company may or may not pursue ac-
quisition or special dividends. Financial sponsor, on the other hand, manages a portfolio of
firms which are routinely acquired, levered, delevered, and sold (with potential mergers and
leveraged dividend recaps along the way). Private equity firms therefore develop an expertise
in debt markets, contracting, and renegotiation. This expertise may allow private equity firms
to capture value by exploiting inefficiencies related to mispricing of credit terms in boom and
bust cycles of credit supply. The Great Recession offered supportive evidence that debt market
    33
         We define reaching-for-yield as investors accepting a below fair risk premium for a given risk.




                                                            26
inefficiencies are an important aspect of private equity value creation, as many private equity
firms started investing in leveraged loans at that time.
       To test whether borrowers backed by financial sponsors contract debt in a systematically
weaker manner than more traditional borrowers, we run OLS regressions on our measures of
covenant weakening, using an indicator for leveraged buyouts as an explanatory variable. We
include industry and quarter fixed effect to absorb any temporal or industry composition effects.
Table 7 displays the regression coefficients. The results are consistent with private equity firms
relying more heavily on covenant weakening. Both carve-outs and deductibles are significantly
more frequent in leveraged buy-outs, controlling for leverage. The magnitude is particularly
large: the lowest coefficients on the LBO indicator variable are equal to 30 for carve-outs, to
compare with an average number of 79, and 1.5 for deductibles, to compare with an average
number of 8.


                                               [Insert Table 7]


5.2      Contract Weakness: Creditors' Perspective

A private equity sponsor naturally prefers weaker contractual terms: the credit agreement ­
and the covenant structure specified in it ­ is the key governance mechanism for debt holders.
However, an explanation for why creditors would be willing to accept weaker contractual terms
is in order. One simple motive is that the creditors receive a monetary counterpart, meaning
that the risk is (at least partly) priced. Consistent with this hypothesis, we show in Figure 8
that proxies of contract weakness are associated with a higher loan spread.34 More specifically,
we regress the all-in-drawn spread of a given facility on the proxies of contractual weakness,
controlling for standard borrower and transaction characteristics, as well as the loan terms
typically studied in the literature. Importantly, we include industry fixed effects, and quarter
fixed effects to ensure that our results are not driven by a composition effect on industries, or
a specific sub-period. We then plot the predicted issuance spread by quartiles of the weakness
measures.
       This analysis reveals a statistically and economically significant relationship between loan
issuance prices and proxies for contractual weakness. Thus, moving from the bottom quartile
  34
     Spread includes interest rates and all fees, and applies to a benchmark rate, typically a LIBOR. This is what
is commonly referred to as the "all-in-drawn" spread.


                                                       27
to the top quartile on these measures of weakness corresponds to a more than 40 bps higher
issuance spread. These magnitudes compare to an average spread of 266bps in the sample.


                                                [Insert Figure 8]


       We cannot however assess whether creditors are being compensated fairly for the risk they
take, as estimating the risk ex-ante is challenging. Instead, we look at the variation in screening
and monitoring incentives by the arranging bank in the cross-section of loans. Previous literature
establishes that there is substantial information asymmetry about the borrower's quality between
the originating banks and the rest of the lending syndicate (e.g., Sufi (2007); Ivashina (2009)).
Institutional investors are likely to be less informed about the fundamentals of the borrower
and the contractual terms of the transaction. In particular, according to Standard & Poor's
Leveraged Commentary & Data (LCD), collateralized loan obligations (CLOs) represent between
41% (in 2011) and 62% (in 2016) of all institutional participants in the primary syndicated loan
market ­ the single largest institutional group. Laxer screening leading to a deterioration in
lending standards in the context of securitization is well documented (e.g., Keys et al. (2010)).35
The evidence also shows that the lead share ­"the skin in the game" for the lead bank ­ is
important in aligning screening and monitoring incentives of the lead bank (also see Wang and
Han (2014)).
       With this in mind, we use several proxies to measure weaker screening and monitoring
incentives from creditors in the cross section of loans. First, we use an indicator variable (Inst.
Indicator) equal to 1 if the loan has significant institutional participation, and 0 otherwise. To
construct this variable, we start with market segment information from DealScan, which has
"Institutional" as one of the segments. We also count as institutional any loan package that has
Term Loan B or "TLb" facility.36 Second, we look at the institutional share directly counting
term loan facilities B and above (that is, TLc, TLd, etc.) as institutional money and measuring
its proportion to the total loan amount (Instit. Share) and total term-loan amount (Instit.
Share (TL)). Finally, we look at the lead bank(s)' share of the total loan amount as reported in
  35
      Although Benmelech et al. (2012) point out that if this issue is less severe in the syndicated loan market,
it is not because of CLOs being better informed, but because of other mechanisms that are facilitating a well-
functioning syndicated loan market.
   36
      For example, according to Standard & Poor's (2014), "Institutional debt includes term loans specifically for
institutional investors, [...]. These tranches include first- and second-lien loans, as well as prefunded letters of
credit. [The latter are not in our sample] Traditionally, institutional tranches were referred as TLbs because they
were bullet payments and lined up behind TLas."


                                                        28
DealScan (Lead Share).
    The results are reported in Table 8. The number of observations is reduced due to lender
data availability. All specifications control for the (log) number of lenders, as well as a leveraged
buyout indicator variable, industry and quarter fixed effects.37 Consistent with looser screening
and monitoring incentives, we find that a larger institutional participation and a smaller lead
share are tied to weaker contractual terms. Loans from the institutional segment exhibit on
average 19 more carveouts and 1.5 more deductibles, which compares to respective averages of
19 carve-outs and 8 deductibles. These estimates are statistically significant and comparable
in magnitude to the association between leveraged buyouts and weaker contractual terms, for
which we control.


                                                [Insert Table 8]


5.3    Sponsor Credit Expertise

Last, in Table 9, we explore the role of private equity sponsor contractual expertise and bar-
gaining power in driving the design of loan contracts, by using four different proxies. First,
using CreditFlux global collateralized loan obligation (CLOs) database, we identify the financial
sponsors that have also been active in structuring and managing CLOs (special purpose vehicles
used to securitize large corporate loans). The available data from this reference database covers
CLO origination between 2000 and 2013, and includes 1,229 different CLOs. The rationale of
this proxy is that engagement in the CLO space is a reflection of the sponsors' ability to assess
the underlying credit risk as well as the demand for securitized products in the corporate space.
Both these dimensions are pivotal to leveraged loan origination and terms. As an illustration,
Blackstone's GSO, Carlyle Group, Ares Management, Apollo Global Management, and CVC-
private equity firms that are well known among practitioners for their sophisticated approach
to credit contracting ­ were among the top-ten CLO managers in this fourteen year period.
Since bank-affiliated private equity firms are likely to have the same (or perhaps even bigger)
advantage in understanding the contractual terms and market conditions, while being excluded
from the CLO space due to conflict of interests, we combine them to CLO-active sponsors to
build our first measure of expertise. The results are reported in columns (1) and (5).
 37
    These controls mitigate concerns over potential confounding factors such as syndicate size or macro conditions.
The coefficients are comparable when we do not include these controls.


                                                        29
    As a second measure of expertise, we introduce an indicator variable for private equity firms
that have large-cap buyouts as a key investment focus. This allows us to focus on sponsors that
routinely rely on the leveraged loan market to fund their transactions. Building and maintaining
the necessary expertise to sort through contractual terms represents a fixed cost, and therefore
sponsors require a certain scale in this space to make it a source of value. In columns 2 and
6, we use an indicator variable for stand-alone private equity firms having such profile, and in
columns 3 and 7, we combine them with bank-affiliated private equity firms.
    Last, in columns 4 and 8, we consider a possibility that expertise in contractual space is
built through experience. To do so we look at whether a sponsor experienced a bankruptcy
in its portfolio. Specifically, using bankruptcy data from Capital IQ, we construct an indicator
variable (Experience with Bankruptcy ) equal to 1 if the sponsor had at least one bankruptcy in its
portfolio during the five years before the beginning of our sample (2005 to 2009). All contractual
expertise variables are conditional on being a buyout, which means that the reported coefficients
are equivalent to the marginal effect within this group of transactions.
    Credit agreements that include a credit expert sponsor firm appear to exhibit significantly
weaker covenants with both more deductibles and carve-outs than in other leveraged buy-outs,
although the difference is not statistically significant for the number of deductibles. The gap
in both our measures of weaknesses between LBO with expert firms and LBO with only non-
expert firms represents close to a third of the magnitude of the gap between LBO and non-LBO
transactions for carveouts and deductibles. The heterogeneity in contractual weakness within
LBOs therefore appears to be relatively large and related to sponsor expertise, which further
speaks to the role of sophistication in determining contract design.


                                         [Insert Table 9]



6    Alternative Mechanisms

Both the event study and the cross-sectional evidence on the sophistication of contracting parties
are consistent with a reaching-for-yield phenomenon, catered to by sophisticated borrowers. We
consider a set of alternative mechanisms for our main results.




                                                30
6.1       Avoiding Costly Renegotiations

A first alternative hypothesis to consider would be that the weakening of covenants that we
observe aim at reducing frictions associated with ex post renegotiations. While such a mechanism
is hard to reconcile with the event study evidence, as avoiding costly renegotiations should have
a positive impact on debt, it is not mutually exclusive with the reaching-for-yield phenomenon,
and both could be at work.
       Despite the prominence of the concept of renegotiation cost in the theoretical literature, there
is no off-the-shelf measure of renegotiation cost in the empirical literature. We therefore consider
a battery of variables that proxy for contexts of high renegotiation cost, and study whether they
are associated with more covenant weakening. The results are presented in Table 10, and are
not supportive of the inclusion of covenant deductibles and carve-outs being primarily driven
by avoiding costly renegotiations.
       Renegotiation costs arguably have a fixed and a variable component. For example, the
renegotiation process requires coordination/time, legal steps and paperwork that carry fixed cost.
On the other hand, the banks typically charge a variable fee for renegotiation. An immediate
prediction, due to the fixed component, is that renegotiation cost is relatively smaller for large
loans, and therefore the contracts should be stronger. The results in columns 1 and 5 of Table
10 show that it is not the case, larger loans have more eroded covenant structure.
       In columns 2 and 6, we investigate whether weakening clauses positively correlate with the
number of lenders, controlling for transaction size, as a large number of parties make renego-
tiation more complex and costly.38 We find the opposite sign: a larger number of lenders is
associated with less covenant weakening.
       In columns 3 and 7, we look at a dummy equal to one if the company has a public debt
outstanding at the time of loan issuance, and zero otherwise. Having a more complex capital
structure should increase a renegotiation/restructuring process. However, we find the opposite
results, firms with bonds outstanding use less weakening clauses, not more.
       According to Garleanu and Zwiebel (2008), covenant structure could also be a response
to asymmetric information between lenders and borrowers, with stronger covenant structure
mitigating the conflict. We consider intangibles as a share of assets and leverage as proxies for
  38
   This is one key rationale for which bond contracts are weaker than loan contracts, as the former have an
atomistic investor base.



                                                    31
the level of asymmetric information in columns 4 and 8. We find that the sign on the coefficient
is in the opposite direction to the prediction in Garleanu and Zwiebel (2008).


                                           [Insert Table 10]


6.2      Other Explanations

As weakening clauses are more frequent in highly leveraged transactions, an alternative (and not
mutually exclusive) mechanism would be that these clauses aim at alleviating debt overhang,
which is likely to be acute in this context. The stock value reaction we document in section
4 could be consistent with this view, as solving debt overhang is positive for equity holders.
But solving debt overhang is also positive for creditors. Yet, we find the opposite effect when
looking at loan price reaction. Moreover, the contractual nature of the weakening clauses is at
odds with resolution of debt overhang as an explanation as a large fraction of these clauses are
designed to allow for increased debt, not for facilitating equity issuances. Such a mechanism is
also difficult to reconcile with our two cross-sectional results: the higher concentration of these
clauses in buy-outs, controlling for leverage, and when creditor monitoring is more lax. Last,
this mechanism would predict lower issuance spreads, not higher ones.
       An alternative explanation for our cross-sectional result on buy-out firms would be that
everything else equal, firms held by a sponsor firm are safer for creditors, leading them to
offer higher contractual flexibility in form of deductibles and carve-outs. Private equity firms
are indeed typically financed through a fund structure, which facilitates their access to equity
capital. So, debt overhang problem or other financing frictions could be a lesser issue for sponsor-
backed companies, allowing them to issue more flexible debt contracts. While we cannot rule out
this possibility, our favored interpretation for the contracting mechanism at play relies on more
targeted tests including the event study and the cross-section of creditor types. Moreover, access
to additional, rescue equity capital for a buyout firm is far from inconsequential, as it evidently
has an impact on the fund IRR, which is the most important indicator of fund performance and
affects both explicit and implicit incentives of the fund manager. This focus on maximizing IRR
has for instance led private equity firms to use subscription lines.39 Furthermore, any capital call
  39
    Subscription lines are revolving lines backed by capital commitments that are commonly used by buyout
firms to improve IRRs reported to LPs. For more details see: https://www.oaktreecapital.com/docs/default-
source/memos/lines-in-the-sand.pdf?sfvrsn=2



                                                   32
requires a written statement of its purpose to the LPs, which imposes an additional reputation
cost for the sponsor firm. As a result, equity injections by private equity firms are typically
used as a last resort, and there are several anecdotal examples of major buyout firms exploiting
contractual weaknesses when facing financial distress to avoid an equity cure.40



7         Conclusion

Credit standards, particularly in the leveraged loan market, have been a point of substantial
attention in the post Great Financial Crisis world. Yet, in spite of evident contractual complexity
in the loan space, the actual measurement of weak credit standards has been largely building on
"cov-lite" provision (that is, weak enforcement of financial covenants). The reason for frequent
references to the fraction of cov-lite loans is prosaic: it is simple, and it is objective. But for
the same reasons, cov-lite is unlikely to be a fruitful ground for borrowers to obtain quasi-free
contractual enhancements, especially over the period when the Leveraged Loan Guidance was
binding, which is coincidently the period of the sharp rise in cov-lite origination.
         Technological progress should allow to back the flurry of concerns on credit standards with
better measurements of what contractual weakness represents.
         Precisely, taking advantage of advances in large sample contractual processing, we conduct
a comprehensive analysis of 1,240 credit agreements, with an emphasis on the leveraged loan
market. We first document the importance of negative covenants as a governance tool for large
leveraged corporate issuers. Virtually all contracts rely on such mechanisms to protect the cred-
itors. However, the restrictions created by these covenants are frequently weakened through two
main types of contractual elements deductibles (or "baskets") and exclusions (or "carve-outs"),
which are broader and different from enforcement clauses (i.e., different from cov-liteness). We
propose a set of simple measures that assess contractual weakness, and show that clauses weak-
ening the strength of the contract are concentrated in the most leveraged transactions, thereby
offering room for the issuer to reach even higher levels of leverage. When exploring the cross-
section of use of these clauses, we observe that leveraged buy-outs are significantly more likely
to use these clauses, which is consistent with private equity sponsors having a higher bargain-
ing power towards lenders, especially in large transactions, as well as high level of expertise in
    40
         In addition to the J. Crew and PetSmart cases, see Gompers et al. (2012).



                                                          33
writing contracts. We are able to overcome limited default data by looking at a market-wide
adjustment following a high-profile case that exploited deductibles on liens to significantly dilute
lenders' claim over collateral. The redistribution of value to stockholders for contracts with sim-
ilar provisions and generally weaker contracts is consistent with these features being mispriced
options granted to borrowers.




                                                34
References
Axelson, U., T. Jenkinson, P. Str¨
                                 omberg, and M. S. Weisbach (2013). Borrow cheap, buy high? the determinants
  of leverage and pricing in buyouts. The Journal of Finance 68 (6), 2223­2267.

Becker, B. and V. Ivashina (2016). Covenant-light contracts and creditor coordination. Sveriges Riksbank Working
  Paper Series (325).

Bellucci, M. and J. McCluskey (2017). The LSTA's complete credit agreement guide. McGraw Hill Professional.

Benmelech, E., J. Dlugosz, and V. Ivashina (2012). Securitization without adverse selection: The case of clos.
  Journal of Financial Economics 106 (1), 91­113.

Berger, A. N. and G. F. Udell (1995). Relationship lending and lines of credit in small firm finance. Journal of
  Business , 351­381.

Berlin, M., G. Nini, and E. G. Yu (2019). Concentration of control rights in leveraged loan syndicates.

Billett, M. T., T.-H. D. King, and D. C. Mauer (2007). Growth opportunities and the choice of leverage, debt
   maturity, and covenants. The Journal of Finance 62 (2), 697­730.

Black, F. and M. Scholes (1973). The pricing of options and corporate liabilities. Journal of Political Econ-
  omy 81 (3), 637­654.

Bolton, P. and D. S. Scharfstein (1996). Optimal debt structure and the number of creditors. Journal of Political
  Economy 104 (1), 1­25.

Bradley, M. and M. R. Roberts (2015). The structure and pricing of corporate debt covenants. The Quarterly
  Journal of Finance 5 (02), 1550001.

C´
 el´
   erier, C. and B. Vall´
                        ee (2017). Catering to investors through security design: Headline rate and complexity.
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics 132 (3), 1469­1508.

Dell'Ariccia, G. and R. Marquez (2004). Information and bank credit allocation. Journal of Financial Eco-
  nomics 72 (1), 185­214.

Demerjian, P. R. and E. L. Owens (2016). Measuring the probability of financial covenant violation in private
  debt contracts. Journal of Accounting and Economics 61 (2-3), 433­447.

Demiroglu, C. and C. M. James (2010). The information content of bank loan covenants. The Review of Financial
  Studies 23 (10), 3700­3737.

Dichev, I. D. and D. J. Skinner (2002). Large­sample evidence on the debt covenant hypothesis. Journal of
  Accounting Research 40 (4), 1091­1123.

Drucker, S. and M. Puri (2008). On loan sales, loan contracting, and lending relationships. The Review of
  Financial Studies 22 (7), 2835­2872.

Dyreng, S. (2009). The cost of private debt covenant violation.

Ganglmair, B. and M. Wardlaw (2017). Complexity, standardization, and the design of loan agreements. Working
  Paper .

Garleanu, N. and J. Zwiebel (2008). Design and renegotiation of debt covenants. The Review of Financial
  Studies 22 (2), 749­781.

Gennaioli, N., A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny (2015). Neglected risks: The psychology of financial crises. American
  Economic Review 105 (5), 310­14.

Gompers, P., J. Ishii, and A. Metrick (2003). Corporate governance and equity prices. The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 118 (1), 107­156.

Gompers, P., K. Mugford, and J. D. Kim (2012). Bain capital: Outback steakhouse. Harvard Business School
  Case 212-087 .


                                                       35
Gompers, P. A. and V. V. Broussard (2009). Hudson manufacturing company. Harvard Business School Case 203-
  064.

Gornall, W. and I. A. Strebulaev (2018). Squaring venture capital valuations with reality. Journal of Financial
  Economics .

Green, D. (2018). Corporate refinancing, covenants, and the agency cost of debt. Working Paper .

Greenwood, R. and S. G. Hanson (2013). Issuer quality and corporate bond returns. The Review of Financial
  Studies 26 (6), 1483­1525.

Hart, O. (2001). Financial contracting. Journal of Economic Literature 39 (4), 1079­1100.

Hart, O. and J. Moore (1988). Incomplete contracts and renegotiation. Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric
  Society , 755­785.

Ivashina, V. (2009). Asymmetric information effects on loan spreads. Journal of Financial Economics 92, 300­319.

Ivashina, V. and A. Kovner (2011). The private equity advantage: Leveraged buyout firms and relationship
   banking. The Review of Financial Studies 24 (7), 2462­2498.

Jensen, M. C. and W. H. Meckling (1976). Theory of the firm: Managerial behavior, agency costs and ownership
  structure. Journal of financial economics 3 (4), 305­360.

Kaplan, S. N. and J. C. Stein (1993). The evolution of buyout pricing and financial structure in the 1980s. The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 108 (2), 313­357.

Kaplan, S. N. and P. Str¨
                        omberg (2003). Financial contracting theory meets the real world: An empirical analysis
  of venture capital contracts. The Review of Economic Studies 70 (2), 281­315.

Keys, B. J., T. Mukherjee, A. Seru, and V. Vig (2010). Did securitization lead to lax screening? evidence from
  subprime loans. Quarterly Journal of Economics 125 (1), 307­362.

Lian, C. and Y. Ma (2018). Anatomy of corporate borrowing constraints. Unpublished working paper .

L´
 opez-Salido, D., J. C. Stein, and E. Zakrajsek (2017). Credit-market sentiment and the business cycle. The
   Quarterly Journal of Economics 132 (3), 1373­1426.

Murfin, J. (2012). The supply-side determinants of loan contract strictness. The Journal of Finance 67 (5),
 1565­1601.

Myers, S. C. (1977). Determinants of corporate borrowing. Journal of financial economics 5 (2), 147­175.

Myers, S. C. (2003). Financing of corporations. Handbook of the Economics of Finance 1, 215­253.

Nini, G., D. C. Smith, and A. Sufi (2009). Creditor control rights and firm investment policy. Journal of Financial
  Economics 92 (3), 400­420.

Nini, G., D. C. Smith, and A. Sufi (2012). Creditor control rights, corporate governance, and firm value. The
  Review of Financial Studies 25 (6), 1713­1761.

Park, C. (2000). Monitoring and structure of debt contracts. The Journal of Finance 55 (5), 2157­2195.

P´
 erignon, C. and B. Vall´
                        ee (2017). The political economy of financial innovation: evidence from local governments.
   The Review of Financial Studies 30 (6), 1903­1934.

Powel, J. H. (2019). Business debt and our dynamic financial system. In Remarks at the 24th Annual Financial
  Markets Conference, sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta.

Reinhart, C. M. and K. S. Rogoff (2009). This time is different: Eight centuries of financial folly. Princeton
  University Press.

Roberts, M. R. and A. Sufi (2009). Control rights and capital structure: An empirical investigation. The Journal
  of Finance 64 (4), 1657­1695.



                                                        36
Saunders, A. and S. Steffen (2011). The costs of being private: Evidence from the loan market. The Review of
  Financial Studies 24 (12), 4091­4122.

Smith, C. W. and J. B. Warner (1979). On financial contracting: An analysis of bond covenants. Journal of
  Financial Economics 7 (2), 117­161.

Standard and Poor's (2014). Syndicate Loan Primer.

Stein, J. C. (2013). Overheating in credit markets: origins, measurement, and policy responses. In Speech given
   to the symposium on Restoring Household Financial Stability After the Great Recession, Federal Reserve Bank
   of St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri, February, Volume 7.

Sufi, A. (2007). Information asymmetry and financing arrangements: Evidence from syndicated loans. Journal
  of Finance 62, 629­668.

Wang, Y. and X. Han (2014). Do lenders still monitor when they can securitize loans?       Review of Financial
 Studies 27 (8), 2354­2391.

Yellen, J. (2018). Lunch with the ft.

Zinder, M., D. Tarr, and C. Giorgione (2016). Leveraged lending guidelines 2013 to 2015 impact. Willkie Farr
   & Gallagher LLP Client Memorandum .




                                                      37
8   Figures and Tables




                         38
                                    Panel A: Incidence of Restrictions


        1             0.93        0.92
                                              0.87        0.86
                                                                     0.81
        .8


                                                                                 0.73
        .6
        .4




                                                                                             0.31
        .2
        0




                                 Any Restriction                    On Liens
                                 On Indebtedness                    On Affiliate Transactions
                                 On Payments                        On Asset Sales
                                 On Investments


                             Panel B: Incidence of Deductibles on Restrictions

                      0.96
        1




                                              0.92
                                  0.86
        .8




                                                                     0.70        0.71
        .6




                                                                                             0.44
        .4
        .2




                                                          0.14
        0




                              Any Deductible                             On Liens
                              On Indebtedness                            On Affiliate Transactions
                              On Restricted Payments                     On Asset Sales
                              On Investments


Figure 1: Incidence of Restrictions on Borrower's actions and of Deductibles on these Restrictions

Note: This figure reports the average incidence of restrictions on the issuer actions (negative covenants), and the
average incidence of covenant deductibles ("baskets").

                                                        39
                                         Panel A: Size of Deductibles


        2.5
                                          2.34
        2
        1.5
        1
        .5




                             0.35                                          0.39
                                                          0.24                             0.23
        0




                                        On Liens                         On Indebtedness
                                        On Payments                      On Asset Sales
                                        On Investments


                                       Panel B: Number of Deductibles
             .1
             .08
           Frequency
        .04  .02
             0   .06




                       0                         10                     20                              30
                                                  Number of Deductibles


                           Figure 2: Deductibles on Covenants: Size and Distribution

Note: The upper panel of this figure reports the size of the deductibles as a multiple of EBITDA, where EBITDA is
measured as of end of the fiscal year preceding the year of the loan issuance. Lower panel displays the distribution
of the total number of deductibles.
                                                        40
                                  Panel A: Average Number of Carve-Outs


        25
        20                 22.5




                                  14.5
        15




                                                               13.9
                                                                                   11.9   11.9
                                                                        9.9
        10




                                           8.2      8.0
        5
        0




                                   On Liens                                   On Indebtedness
                                   On Affiliate Transactions                  On Payments
                                   On Asset Sales                             On Investments
                                   EBITDA                                     Other Carve-out


                                     Panel B: Distribution of Carve-Outs
             .01
             .008
                .006
          Frequency
       .004  .002
             0




                       0             50            100          150                 200          250
                                                 Number of Carve-outs


              Figure 3: Carve-outs: Average Number by Covenant Type and Distribution

The upper panel fo this figure reports the average number of carve-outs per credit agreement, and broken down
by negative covenants. The lower panel displays the distribution of the total number of carve-outs.
                                                       41
                                                    JCrew




                      70
                      65
                    Bid
                    6055
                      50




                           01may2017        01jun2017        01jul2017        01aug2017


                                                  Gymboree
                      45
                      40
                    Bid
                    3530
                      25




                           01may2017        01jun2017        01jul2017        01aug2017



        Figure 4: Loan Prices Around J. Crew Announcement: J. Crew and Gymboree

This figures plots the senior secured loan daily prices of J. Crew (Panel A) and Gymboree (Panel B) over a
-50days/+50days event window around the June 12th, 2017 J. Crew announcement date.




                                                    42
                                               Number of Carve-outs




                        100.2
                        100
                      99.8
                      Bid
                        99.6
                        99.4




                       14may2017        04jun2017        25jun2017     16jul2017        06aug2017



                                             Number of Deductibles
                         100.1
                         100
                         99.9
                      Bid
                         99.8
                         99.7
                         99.6




                        14may2017       04jun2017       25jun2017      16jul2017        06aug2017

                                             First quartile           Second quartile
                                             Third quartile           Forth quartile



                Figure 5: Loan Prices Around J. Crew Announcement: Full Sample

This figures plots the senior secured loan prices of all leveraged loans in the sample over a -30days/+50days event
window around the June 12th, 2017 J. Crew announcement date. The top figure (Panel A) presents the price
reaction for loans aggregated by quartiles of number of carve-outs, and the bottom figure (Panel B) presents the
price reaction for loans aggregated by quartiles of number of deductibles.




                                                         43
                          Full Sample                                             LBO
          .2




                                                              .2
          .15




                                                              .15
          .1




                                                              .1
          .05




                                                              .05
          0




                                                              0
                 0         5           10           15               0       5           10          15
                               x Ebitda                                          x Ebitda

                         Observed            Adjusted                     Observed             Adjusted


                     Dealscan - >USD100m                       .2         Dealscan - LBO
           .2




                                                               .15
           .15




                                                               .1
           .1




                                                               .05
           .05
           0




                                                               0




                 0          5           10          15               0        5           10         15
                                x Ebitda                                          x Ebitda



 Figure 6: Distribution of Leverage with and without Adjusting for Indebtedness Deductibles

Note: This figure plots the distribution of leverage, calculated as Total Debt / EBITDA. The top left graph
displays the distribution of leverage with and without adjusting for the deductible on the indebtedness covenant
for the whole Street Diligence dataset. The top right graph conducts the same exercise, while restricting the sample
to leverage buyouts. The bottom two graphs plot the unadjusted distribution of leverage for two corresponding
benchmark samples from Dealscan: the transactions over USD100m since 2011, and the leverage buyouts since
2011.




                                                         44
                   30       25
        Number of Carve-outs
           15      20
                   10
                   5




                         2006h1   2008h1    2010h1      2012h1               2014h1          2016h1
                                              Issuance Semester

                                              Liens                Indebtedness


     Figure 7: Evolution of Number of Carve-Outs on Liens and Indebtedness Restrictions

Note: This figure plots the average number of carve-outs on the Indebtedness and Liens covenants at semi-annual
frequency.




                                                      45
                                      Number of Carve-outs                                             Number of Deductibles


                     310




                                                                                      310
                                280




                                                                                                 280
         Predicted Spread (in bps)




                                                                          Predicted Spread (in bps)
                 250




                                                                                  250
                     220




                                                                                      220
                     190




                                                                                      190

                                      1       2              3   4                                     1       2              3   4
                                                  Quartile                                                         Quartile



                                          Figure 8: Contractual Weakness and Issuance Spreads

Note: This figure displays predicted issuance spreads by quartile of weakness measures. The predicted values are
estimated from regressions where the dependent variable is the "all-in-drawn" spread at the loan issuance and
the explanatory variables are the weakness measures as well as controls for issuance and issuer characteristics,
including the level of leverage, an indicator variable for buyouts, an indicator variable for cov-lite issuance, the
number of financial covenants, and maturity, number of negative covenants, industry, and quarter of issuance fixed
effects. The spread includes interest rates and all fees and applies to a benchmark rate, typically the LIBOR.




                                                                     46
                                                               Table 1: LSTA Credit Agreements

                                 LSTA Credit Agreements                                                     Street Diligence                                 Other Data
                      Section                      Basic Descripiton                 Coverage                           Category
     7.1       Some General Princi-     Introduction                                N/A
               ples
     7.2       Scope of Covenant        Definitions of relevant of contract         N/A
               Coverage                 reach within organizational structure
     7.3       Covenant Definitions     Key financial definitions including         Yes         Baskets and carve-outs to financial items typically
                                        EBITDA, and Debt                                        appear in definitions (e.g., EBITDA add-backs); the
                                                                                                data combines relevant information in the definitions
                                                                                                and in the covenant sections of the agreement
     7.4       Financial Covenants                                                  Yes         Any additional carve-outs that appear in the covenant       DealScan
                                                                                                section are consolidated with those that appear in
                                                                                                covenants definitions




47
     7.5       Affirmative Covenants    Includes disclosure, inspection rights,     Yes         For the most part, these items appearing in this sec-
                                        insurance (including interest rate pro-                 tion do not interact with baskets and carve-outs; how-
                                        tection), use of proceeds                               ever, to the degree that use of proceeds carries a bas-
                                                                                                ket of carve-out it is counted in the respective category
                                                                                                (e.g., restrictions on CAPEX)
     7.6       Negative Covenants
       7.6.1   Lien Covenant            Protects collateral by restricting bor-     Yes         Restrictions on liens
                                        rower from granting liens on its assets
       7.6.2   Equal and Ratable                                                    N/A         Not typical for a credit agreement; used in bond in-
               Sharing Clause                                                                   dentures and private placements
       7.6.3   Negative Pledge or       Amplifies the effect of lien covenants,     Yes         No negative pledges
               Burdensome      Agree-   by prohibits lien restrictions with third
               ments                    party
       7.6.4   Debt                     Restrict incurrence of debt                 Yes         Restrictions on indebtedness
       7.6.5   Disqualified Stock       Limits issuance of stock with debt-like     Yes         Restrictions on indebtedness
                                        provisions
                                                                               Table 1 (continued)
                                                                            LSTA Credit Agreements
                                        LSTA Credit Agreements                                                   Street Diligence                              Other Data
                            Section                     Basic Descripiton                 Coverage                            Category
       7.6.6        Fundamental Changes,                                                 Yes         Restrictions on indebtedness
                    Asset Sales, and Ac-
                    quisitions
       7.6.7        Sale-Leasebacks           Limits transactions where the bor-         Yes         Restrictions on asset sales
                                              rower sells an asset and then immedi-
                                              ately leases it back
       7.6.8        Investments                                                          Yes         Permitted investments
       7.6.9        Lines of Business                                                    Yes         Permitted investments
       7.6.10       Derivatives               Specific to business with hedging prac-
                                              tices (e.g., commodities related); lim-
                                              its hedging activity
       7.6.11       Guarantees or Contin-     Controls indirect indebtedness             Yes         Restrictions on indebtedness
                    gent Liabilities
       7.6.12       Dividends and Equity                                                 Yes         Restricted payments
                    Repurchases




48
       7.6.13       Tax-sharing Payments                                                 Yes         Affiliate transactions
                    and Permitted Tax
                    Distributions
       7.6.14       Restrictions on Sub-                                                 Yes         Affiliate transactions
                    sidiary Distributions
       7.6.15       Modification and Pre-     Controls indirect indebtedness             Yes         Restricted payments
                    payment of Other Debt
       7.6.16       Affiliate Transactions                                               Yes         Affiliate Transactions
       7.6.17       Amendments to Or-         Restricts borrowers ability to modify      No          Standard and autonomous part of the contract
                    ganic Documents and       charter, bylaws, or other essential doc-
                    Other Agreements          uments
       7.6.18       Fiscal Periods and Ac-                                               No          Standard and autonomous part of the contract
                    counting Changes
       7.6.19       Passive Holding Com-                                                 No          Standard and autonomous part of the contract
                    pany
     7.7            Incorporation by pref-                                               No          Standard and autonomous part of the contract
                    erence
     7.8            Covenant Lite                                                                                                                            LCD

           Note: The table presents the full content of "Chapter 7: Covenants" in the LSTA's Complete Credit Agreement (2017) and illustrates how it maps into the data
           sources used in our study.
                                   Table 2: Summary Statistics


                      Year                        2011     2012    2013     2014     2015     2016     Total
                                                            Our sample (Source: Street Diligence)
  Number of Credit Agreements/Loans                 53      74      222      353      350      188     1,240
  Number of Facilities                              71     117      336      534      514      285     1,857
  Share Leveraged Deal                            84.3%   80.8%    87.0%    73.6%    73.1%    77.3%    77.3%
  Share LBO Deal                                  37.7%   37.8%    37.8%    37.8%    16.0%    19.7%    22.3%

  Average   Loan Size ($m)                        1,675    800     1,203    1,122     990     1,224    1,119
  Average   Maturity (years)                       7.2     6.4      5.9      5.6      5.2      5.0      5.6
  Average   Issuer Assets                         4,815   6,441    6,970    7,861    7,341    9,953    7,704
  Average   Issuer EBITDA                          571     830      658      820      726      758      747
  Average   Leverage (x EBITDA)                    5.2     4.8      7.1      5.9      6.6      5.3      6.2

                                                               Benchmark (Source: DealScan)
  All syndicated loans >$100m
  Average Loan Size ($m)                          909      867     1,090    1,132    1,241    1,346    1,080
  Average Maturity (years)                        4.7      4.6      4.7      4.7      4.6      4.7      4.7
  Average Issuer Assets                          10,838   12,168   11,605   12,496   13,842   15,260   12,509
  Average Issuer EBITDA                          1,191    1,416    1,424    1,543    1,691    1,866    1,491
  Average Leverage (x EBITDA)                      3.5     3.9      4.2       4.0      4.2      3.8      3.9

  Leveraged loans
  Average Loan Size ($m)                           646     679      836      789      899      956      798
  Average Maturity (years)                         5.1     4.9      5.0      5.3      5.1      5.2      5.1
  Average Issuer Assets                           2,918   3,916    4,362    4,128    4,057    4,789    4,032
  Average Issuer EBITDA                            357     528      497      498      459      552      480
  Average Leverage (x EBITDA)                      4.9     5.3      5.0      5.0      5.5      4.4      5.0



Note: The table presents summary statistics for our sample and benchmarks it against: (i) a subset of
loans reported in DeaScan that are larger than $100 million; (ii) a subset of loans identified in DealScan as
leveraged. All accounting variables are from Compustat. Assets and EBITDA are measured as of the fiscal
year end preceding the year of the loan issuance. Total debt is measured as of the fiscal year end.




                                                     49
                     Table 3: Alternative Measures of Covenant Weakness


                                                     (1)        (2)      (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)
  All Covenants                                      Number of Carve-outs           Number of Deductibles
  Covenant Intensity                               0.446                         0.496***
                                                   (0.52)                         (4.91)
  Cov-lite (dummy)                               31.309***                       2.272***
                                                  (11.12)                         (7.85)
  Number of financial covenants                  -4.078***                       -0.608***
                                                   (-3.17)                         (-4.12)
  Slack Debt/EBITDA                                           0.795**                        0.141***
                                                               (2.40)                         (3.59)
  Normalized Slack Debt/EBITDA                                          0.030                           0.004*
                                                                        (0.99)                          (1.83)
  Observations                                     1,240        377      369       1,240       377        369
  R2                                               0.503       0.358    0.345      0.456      0.353      0.339

  Indebtedness Covenant                              Number of Carve-outs         Deductible Size (x EBITDA)
  Covenant Intensity                               0.275*                        0.155**
                                                   (1.73)                         (2.37)
  Cov-lite (dummy)                                4.767***                       0.573**
                                                   (10.08)                        (2.57)
  Number of financial covenants                  -1.043***                       -0.331***
                                                   (-4.27)                         (-3.17)
  Slack Debt/EBITDA                                          0.212***                        -0.060
                                                              (3.66)                         (-1.41)
  Normalized Slack Debt/EBITDA                                          0.002                            0.001
                                                                        (1.01)                           (0.85)
  Observations                                     1,240        377      369       1,055       377        369
  R2                                               0.427       0.276    0.258      0.103      0.075      0.072

  Liens Covenant                                     Number of Carve-outs         Deductible Size (x EBITDA)
  Covenant Intensity                               -0.105                        -0.027**
                                                   (-0.45)                        (-2.08)
  Cov-lite (dummy)                                6.255***                        -0.011
                                                   (9.16)                         (-0.31)
  Number of financial covenants                    -0.575                         0.007
                                                   (-1.61)                        (0.35)
  Slack Debt/EBITDA                                           0.185**                        -0.004
                                                               (2.51)                        (-0.50)
  Normalized Slack Debt/EBITDA                                          0.004                           -0.000**
                                                                        (0.78)                           (-1.99)
  Observations                                     1,240        377      369       1,055       377        369
  R2                                               0.378       0.276    0.264      0.049      0.073      0.083



Note: This table presents OLS regression coefficients, where the dependent variable is the number of carve-
outs (column 1 to 3) and the total number of deductibles (column 4 to 6) in panel a, and the number of
carve-outs for the given covenant for columns 1 to 3, and the size of the deductible on the given covenant
(scaled by EBITDA) for columns 4 to 6 in panel b and c. Explanatory variables are as follows: Covenant
intensity is a measure used Demiroglu and James (2010) and Bradley and Roberts (2015). It is a discrete
variable that takes value between 0 and 6. Cov-lite is a dummy variable equal to 1 is the loan has only
incurrence (vs. maintenance) financial tests. The data on covenant lightness is from S&P LCD. t-statistics
are reported in parenthesis. Slack corresponds to the distance from the actual covenant variable (as observed
in Compustat) to the trigger level. Normalized scale corresponds to the slack divided by the standard
deviation of the covenant variable over the last 12 quarters. ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at
the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively. Standard errors are clustered at the issuance month level.




                                                      50
                Table 4: Event Study: Loan Reaction to J. Crew Announcement


                                                       Cumulative Abnormal Return, -15/+15 days
                                      (1)       (2)        (3)       (4)       (5)        (6)        (7)       (8)
Number of Carve-outs                -0.003*   -0.003*    -0.002*   -0.000
                                    (-2.03)   (-2.19)    (-2.05)   (-0.52)
Number of Deductibles                                                        -0.035**   -0.033**   -0.030*   -0.001
                                                                              (-2.77)    (-2.48)   (-1.99)   (-0.14)
Remaining Maturity (in years)                 0.049      0.067                           0.030     0.056
                                              (1.19)     (1.58)                          (0.69)    (1.27)
Number Financial Covenants                               0.126                                     0.133
                                                         (1.74)                                    (1.68)
Cov-lite Deal                                            -0.295*                                   -0.304*
                                                         (-2.18)                                   (-2.04)
Operating Distress Proxy                                           0.156**                                   0.247**
                                                                    (3.10)                                    (2.40)
Operating Distress Proxy                                           -0.002*
× Number of Carve-outs                                             (-1.86)
Operating Distress Proxy                                                                                     -0.023**
× Number of Deductibles                                                                                       (-2.67)
Leveraged                                     -0.147*    -0.032                         -0.128     0.013
                                              (-2.02)    (-0.35)                        (-1.72)    (0.17)
Sector FE                             Yes      Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes
Cluster                              Sector   Sector     Sector    Sector    Sector     Sector     Sector    Sector
Observations                          404      403        403       352       404        403        403       352
R2                                   0.068    0.072      0.091     0.079     0.075      0.077      0.099     0.095



 Note: This table presents OLS regression coefficients, where the dependent variable is the change in loan price
 over a -15days/+15days window around the June 12th amendment proposal by J. Crew. Main explanatory
 variables are the number of carve-outs, and number of deductibles. Operational distress proxy is calculated
 as the quartile of the inverse of returns over assets from the previous exercise. T-statistics are reported in
 parenthesis. ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively.




                                                        51
            Table 5: Event Study: Stock Reaction to J. Crew Announcement


                                                  Cumulative Abnormal Return, -15/+15 days
                                                (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)         (6)
Number of Carve-outs                          0.035**      0.038*    0.036*
                                               (2.34)      (2.04)    (1.99)
Number of Deductibles                                                            0.247      0.241      0.229
                                                                                 (1.48)     (1.42)     (1.45)
Remaining Maturity (in days)                               -0.002    -0.003                -0.002     -0.002
                                                           (-0.61)   (-0.64)               (-0.43)    (-0.52)
Number of Financial Covenants                                        -0.298                           -0.466
                                                                     (-0.44)                          (-0.70)
Cov-lite Deal                                                         0.764                            1.115
                                                                      (0.33)                           (0.48)
Leveraged                                                  0.135     -0.119                 0.464      0.033
                                                           (0.15)    (-0.17)                (0.41)     (0.04)
Sector FE                                      Yes          Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes
Cluster                                       Sector       Sector    Sector     Sector     Sector      Sector
Observations                                   224          224       224        224        224         224
R2                                            0.275        0.278     0.279      0.270      0.272       0.274


Note: This table presents OLS regression coefficients, where the dependent variable is the stock cumulative
abnormal returns over a -15days/+15days window around the June 12th announcement by J. Crew. The
abnormal returns are calculated against the S&P500 index. Explanatory variables are as per the previous
table. t-statistics are reported in parenthesis. ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%
and 10% level, respectively.




                                                      52
                             Table 6: Additional Leverage Room


                                                            Multiple of EBITDA
                                                          >4x   >5x      >6x >7x
             Leverage at loan issuance:
             Debt/EBITDA                                  67%      56%      47%     41%
             Net Debt/EBITDA                              62%      51%      43%     39%

             Max Potential Debt/EBITDA                    80%      72%      63%     55%

             Transition probabilities:
             <4.00x                                      39%       25%      14%      9%
             4.00x-4.99x                                 100%      71%      47%     24%
             5.00x-5.99x                                   ­      100%      76%     44%
             6.00x-6.99x                                   ­        ­      100%     73%


Note: Data on average Debt/EBITDA in S&P is disaggregated by (i) year, (ii) size (above and below $50
million in EBITDA), and (iii) whether the transaction is an LBO. The numbers reported here are weighted
by the number of observations in each category in our sample.




                                                  53
                   Table 7: Inclusion of Deductibles and Carve-outs in Buyouts


                                                     (1)           (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)
All Covenants                                           Number of Carve-outs               Number of Deductibles
Buyout                                           31.763***      30.197***   30.685***   1.961***   1.700***   1.589***
                                                   (9.51)         (8.31)      (7.80)     (6.08)     (5.90)     (5.03)
Leveraged                                         10.273**       6.436**     7.338**    1.760***   1.293***   1.355***
                                                   (3.00)         (2.49)      (2.32)     (6.87)     (6.27)     (6.17)
Highly Leveraged                                  9.248***      8.261***     7.378**    1.000***   1.088***    0.998**
                                                   (3.65)        (3.16)       (2.63)     (3.11)     (3.36)      (2.69)
Number of Covenants FE                               Yes           Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes
Industry FE                                          No            Yes         Yes        No         Yes         Yes
Quarter FE                                           No            No          Yes        No         No          Yes
Observations                                        1213          1210        1206       1213       1210        1206
R2                                                  0.513         0.590       0.604      0.460      0.547       0.557



    Note: This table presents OLS regression coefficients, where the dependent variable is the number of carve-
    outs (column 1 to 3) and the total number of deductibles (column 4 to 6). Industry is defined as a 2-digit
    SIC code. t-statistics are reported in parenthesis. ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%,
    5% and 10% level, respectively. Standard errors are clustered at the issuance month level.




                                                           54
                     Table 8: Contractual Weakness and Bank Skin in the Game


All Covenants                               Number of Carve-outs                               Number of Deductibles
                                   (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)         (5)         (6)          (7)       (8)
Institutional                  19.525***                                            1.470***
                                 (9.34)                                              (9.56)
Instit. Share                               21.126***                                           2.097***
                                              (5.11)                                             (8.58)
Instit. Share (TL)                                        19.611***                                         1.756***
                                                            (6.64)                                           (9.90)
Lead Share                                                              -6.556**                                        -1.644**
                                                                         (-2.40)                                         (-3.09)
Log (# of Lenders)              3.190**      4.441**       4.040**      3.617**      0.379**     0.532**     0.484**    0.500**
                                 (3.02)       (3.07)        (2.87)       (2.45)       (2.22)      (3.00)      (2.69)     (2.57)
Buyout                         27.013***    26.399***     26.611***    29.011***    1.242***     1.073**     1.120**    1.299***
                                 (6.54)       (6.30)        (6.13)       (6.94)      (3.26)       (2.92)      (2.99)     (3.37)
Leveraged                        5.600       8.416**       7.875**      9.654**     1.177***    1.423***    1.390***    1.491***
                                 (1.56)       (2.41)        (2.22)       (2.86)      (4.85)      (5.37)      (5.14)      (4.88)
Highly Leveraged                 0.682        0.237         0.645       8.600**       0.694       0.497       0.618*    1.269***
                                 (0.24)       (0.08)        (0.20)       (2.23)       (1.74)      (1.50)      (1.84)     (3.56)
Log (Assets)                   3.107***       2.738*       2.837**      3.752**      0.256**      0.156       0.176     0.240**
                                (3.27)        (2.12)        (2.23)       (2.81)       (2.33)      (1.55)      (1.68)     (2.29)
Number of Covenants FE
Industry FE                       Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes
Quarter FE
Cluster
Observations                     1,087          972          972          972         1,087        972         972        972
R2                               0.637         0.645        0.647        0.630        0.574       0.591       0.590      0.583


     Note: This table presents OLS regression coefficients, where the dependent variable is the total number of
     carve-outs (columns 1 to 5) and the total number of deductibles (column 6 to 10). Instit. Indicator is equal
     to 1 if the loan has significant institutional participation and 0 otherwise. Instit. Share is the institutional
     share directly counting term loan facilities B and above (that is, TLc, TLd, etc.) as institutional money and
     measuring its proportion to the total loan amount, while Instit. Share (TL) does so regarding the total term
     loan amount. t-statistics are reported in parenthesis. Lead Share is the lead bank(s)' share of the total loan
     amount as reported in DealScan. ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level,
     respectively. Standard errors are clustered at the issuance month level.




                                                           55
                                            Table 9: Credit Expertise


                                   (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)       (7)         (8)
All Covenants                               Number of Carve-outs                            Number of Deductibles
Credit Expertise                 9.563*     10.419**     11.123**                 0.668       0.683      0.758
                                 (1.98)      (2.27)       (2.50)                  (1.27)      (1.33)     (1.49)
Bankruptcy Experience                                               19.488***                                        1.166
                                                                      (3.42)                                         (1.69)
Buyout                         24.759***    24.251***   23.866***   20.742***     1.083*      1.067*     1.029*      0.884*
                                 (4.86)       (4.80)      (4.81)      (5.13)      (2.13)      (2.05)     (1.98)      (1.85)
Leveraged                       8.038**      8.040**     8.023**      7.898**    1.360***    1.360***   1.359***    1.351***
                                 (2.44)       (2.44)      (2.44)       (2.46)     (5.58)      (5.57)     (5.58)      (5.45)
Highly Leveraged                7.451**      7.392**     7.397**      7.181**    1.129***    1.127***   1.126***    1.116**
                                 (2.56)       (2.51)      (2.50)       (2.31)     (3.22)      (3.19)     (3.19)      (3.07)
Log (Assets)                    4.386***    4.390***     4.367***    4.171***    0.377***    0.378***   0.376***    0.367***
                                 (4.75)      (4.81)       (4.81)      (4.57)      (3.50)      (3.50)     (3.50)      (3.33)
Number of Covenants FE             Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes       Yes         Yes
Industry FE                        Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes       Yes         Yes
Quarter FE                         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes       Yes         Yes
Observations                      1089        1089        1089         1089        1089        1089      1089        1089
R2                                0.614       0.615       0.615        0.619       0.560       0.560     0.560       0.561



     Note: This table presents OLS regression coefficients, where the dependent variable is the total number of
     carve-outs (column 1 to 4) and the total number of deductibles (column 5 to 8). Each column corresponds
     to an alternative definition of contractual expertise. The proxies for credit expertise are described in section
     5.3. Industry is defined as a 2-digit SIC code. t-statistics are reported in parenthesis. ***, ** and * indicate
     statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively. Standard errors are clustered at the issuance
     month level.




                                                           56
                                        Table 10: Renegotiation Costs


All Covenants                                     Number of Carve-outs                                Number of Deductibles
                                         (1)          (2)             (3)         (4)        (5)          (6)       (7)         (8)
Loan Amount                           8.164***     8.738***        8.395***    7.367***    0.513***    0.453***   0.531***    0.476***
                                       (7.71)       (6.01)          (7.48)      (6.68)      (4.16)      (3.40)     (4.10)      (4.13)
Log(# of lenders)                                   -1.500                                              0.164
                                                    (-0.84)                                             (0.90)
Bond Dummy                                                         -4.496**                                       -0.351
                                                                    (-2.45)                                       (-1.00)
Intangible Assets Total Assets                                                 39.717***                                      2.904***
                                                                                 (5.53)                                        (3.68)
Leveraged                             11.776***   11.638***        11.666***    9.138**    1.602***    1.597***   1.593***    1.386***
                                        (3.88)      (3.83)           (3.85)      (3.09)     (6.59)      (6.66)     (6.38)      (5.23)
Highly Leveraged                      12.959***   12.340***        12.603***   12.482***   1.296***    1.395***   1.268***    1.336***
                                        (4.25)      (3.92)           (4.21)      (5.02)     (3.61)      (3.52)     (3.46)      (4.28)
Number of Covenants FE                   Yes          Yes             Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes       Yes         Yes
Industry FE                              Yes          Yes             Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes       Yes         Yes
Quarter FE                               Yes          Yes             Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes       Yes         Yes
Observations                            1206         1204            1206        1074       1206         1204      1206        1074
R2                                      0.580        0.582           0.582       0.603      0.554        0.558     0.555       0.560


     Note: This table presents OLS regression coefficients, where the dependent variable is the total number
     of carve-outs (columns 1 to 4) and the total number of deductibles (column 5 to 8). Bond Dummy is
     an indicator variable for the issuer having at least one bond issuance outstanding. ***, ** and * indicate
     statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively. Standard errors are clustered at the issuance
     month level.




                                                              57
APPENDIX




   58
                               Table A1: Elements of Debt Contracting


This paper                               Demiroglu and James (2010)    Billett, King, and Mauer (2007)
                                         Bradley and Roberts (2015)
Loans, senior secured                    Loans                         Bonds

Restrictions on liens                    - Debt issuance sweep
· Deductibles
· Carve-outs

Restrictions on indebtedness                                           Restrictions on:
· Deductibles                                                          - Funded debt
· Carve-outs                                                           - Subordinated debt
                                                                       - Senior debt
                                                                       - Secured debt
                                                                       - Total leverage test

Restrictions on affiliate transactions
· Deductibles
· Carve-outs

Restrictions on payments                 Restrictions on:              Restrictions on:
· Deductibles                            - Dividends                   - Dividends
· Carve-outs                                                           - Share repurchases

Restrictions on asset sales              Restrictions on:              Restrictions on:
· Deductibles                            - Asset sales sweep           - Sale and leaseback
· Carve-outs                                                           - Asset sale clause

Restrictions on capital expenditures     Restrictions on:              Restrictions on:
· Deductibles                                                          - Investment policy restriction
· Carve-outs

(standard)                               - Secured

                                         - Other financial covenants   - Financial covenants: Net worth and rating

                                         - Equity issuance sweep       - Restrictions on stock issue

(standard)                               (standard)                    - Poison put/Change of control
                                                                       - Merger restrictions

(standard)                               (standard)                    - Cross-default provisions




                                                      59
