                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         MY PROFESSOR CARES:
       EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE ON THE ROLE OF FACULTY ENGAGEMENT

                                         Scott E. Carrell
                                        Michal Kurlaender

                                       Working Paper 27312
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27312


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2020




This project was funded through a grant from the College Futures Foundation: https://
collegefutures.org. We thank Joy Salvetti for her partnership and assistance, Monica Bhatt for
research support and collaboration on the initial pilot, and Sherrie Reed for technical support. We
also thank Ryan Bandy, Claudia Escobar, Brian Fernandez-Oquendo, Betsey Friedman, and
Derek Rury for providing excellent research assistance. We are grateful for comments from
participants at the numerous conferences and seminars where we have presented this project. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

 2020 by Scott E. Carrell and Michal Kurlaender. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
 notice, is given to the source.
My Professor Cares: Experimental Evidence on the Role of Faculty Engagement
Scott E. Carrell and Michal Kurlaender
NBER Working Paper No. 27312
June 2020
JEL No. I20

                                          ABSTRACT

Despite a growing body of literature that instructors "matter" in higher education, there is virtually
no evidence about how their actions influence student outcomes. We provide experimental evidence
on the impact of specific faculty behaviors aimed at increasing student success. We test the effect of
professor feedback on student success in higher education classrooms though a "light-touch" randomized
intervention. We present results from a small pilot in an introductory-level microeconomics course
at a comprehensive research university, and the scale-up conducted in over 43 classrooms and nearly
4,000 students at a large broad-access university. The intervention consisted of several strategically-timed
E-mails to students from the professor indicating keys to success in the class, the students' current
standing in the course, and a reminder of when the professor is available. Results from the pilot show
that students in the treatment group scored higher on exams, homework assignments, and final course
grade. Results from the scaled-up experiment are more mixed--we find significant positive effects
on student perceptions of the professor and course for all students. However, we only find positive
achievement effects for our target population, first year students from underrepresented minority groups.
Finally, we replicated the pilot to test the robustness of these results and again find positive effects
on student achievement. We conclude that in certain settings and with some students, targeted feedback
from professors can lead to meaningful gains in achievement.


Scott E. Carrell
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
secarrell@ucdavis.edu

Michal Kurlaender
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
School of Education
Davis, CA 95616
mkurlaender@ucdavis.edu



A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at http://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/5875
1. Introduction

       The rising value of a college degree has been well documented among social scientists

(Pew Research Center, 2014; Baum, Ma, & Payea, 2013), and more broadly in the popular press

(Leonhardt, New York Times, 2014) and in policy efforts (Turner, 2018). However, despite

increases in college attendance, college completion has not kept up (Holzer & Baum, 2017; Pew

Research Center, 2014; Snyder & Dillow, 2013). Moreover, many disparities by social origin

and race/ethnicity exist in college access and college completion (Holzer & Baum, 2017; Hoxby

& Avery, 2013; Bailey & Dynarski, 2011). Despite a growing number of randomized control

trials on improving college access, particularly for low income and other underrepresented

groups (Phillips & Reber, 2019; Castelman, Page, & Schooley, 2014; Carrell & Sacerdote, 2017;

Hoxby & Turner, 2013; Bettinger, Long, Oreopoulos, & Sanbonmatsu, 2012; Avery & Kane,

2004; Barr & Castleman, 2017), the research base is decidedly thin on how to keep students in

college, and on improving college success and degree completion.

       Interventions that have focused directly on increasing student supports for college

retention and completion efforts have been met with mixed results. For example, financial

incentives and need-based aid programs reveal inconsistent results on college persistence and

degree receipt (Carlson et al., 2019; Anderson et al., 2018; Angrist et al. 2014; Angrist et al.

2009), as does coaching and advising (Oreopoulos & Petronijevic, 2019; Bettinger & Baker,

2014; Angrist et al.; 2009). Several psychological interventions aimed at improving students'

academic mindsets and sense of belonging found positive impacts on persistence, performance,

and reductions in achievement and persistence gaps by race and gender (Walton & Cohen, 2011;

Yaeger et al., 2016); yet similar interventions fail to replicate in other settings (Dobronyi et al.,

2019; Oreopoulos & Petronijevic, 2019). Notably, nearly all of the college persistence




                                                   2
interventions have been targeted at students, neglecting a potential key input in the education

production function--faculty.

       In fact, a growing body of literature suggests that college instructors matter (Braga et al.

2014; Carrell & West, 2010). In particular, prior work has demonstrated that demographic

characteristics of professors such as gender (Carrell et al. 2010; Price, 2010; Hoffmann &

Oreopoulos, 2009) and race (Fairlie et al., 2014; Price, 2010) can influence student performance

and attainment in particular courses. And, instructor status (i.e. adjunct employment or academic

rank) (Ran & Xu, 2018; Figlio, Schapiro, & Soter, 2015; Bettinger and Long, 2006; Carrell &

West, 2010; Ehrenberg & Zhang, 2005), as well as the effectiveness of student evaluations

(Braga et al., 2014; Beleche et al., 2012; Carrell & West, 2010) as predictors of both

contemporaneous and longer run outcomes of students. However, prior studies on college

instructors have focused almost exclusively on their innate traits, job features or unobservable

characteristics. The one exception is Brownback and Sadoff (2019) who conducted a field

experiment testing the impact of performance-based financial incentives for community college

instructors. They find that instructor incentives significantly improved students' performance and

completion in a course, and had broader spillovers for credit accumulation and transfer. This

study provides evidence that instructor effectiveness in the postsecondary environment is

malleable and that financial incentives--at least in the community college context--may

improve instructor effectiveness. However, the literature, as a whole, leaves the question about

how faculty could improve their effectiveness unanswered.

       In this paper, we provide the first experimental evidence on the impact of specific faculty

behaviors aimed at increasing student success. We test a theoretically grounded treatment

designed to address a fundamental aspect of the college experience: faculty-student engagement.




                                                 3
Moreover, unlike the unique settings of many of the prior studies on the role of college

instructors (e.g., elite universities, military academies, or community colleges), the setting for

our study is a large representative broad-access four-year university campus. Thus, the study

represents, to our knowledge, the first experiment in higher education aimed at inducing a

pedagogical change in faculty behavior.

       Specifically, we test the effect of increased and individualized professor feedback on

student success. The paper presents the full development of the intervention: Exploratory

qualitative work with our target population--underrepresented minority students attending a

large broad-access university, the pilot phase of the intervention, two waves of full-scale

implementation, and finally a replication of the pilot. The "light-touch" intervention consisted

of strategically-timed personalized e-mails to students from the professor indicating the

professor's knowledge of the students' current standing in the course, keys to success in the class,

and a reminder of when the professor is available. Results from the pilot were promising--

students in the randomly selected treatment group exhibited increased effort on homework as

well as a significant increase in academic achievement, motivating a scale-up of the intervention

at the same large, broad-access, four-year institution where we conducted the focus groups. We

implemented the intervention with 34 faculty members across 43 classrooms in 27 different

course subjects and nearly 4,000 students during the spring of 2016 and fall of 2017. Results

showed positive effects on students' perceptions of instructor support for all students, and

positive effects on course grades for the target population--students from underrepresented

minority backgrounds, but not for all students. We examine other treatment heterogeneity,

fidelity of implementation, and adjust our inference for multiple comparisons. Finally, to test the

robustness of the intervention, we replicated the pilot in the spring of 2019. Results again show




                                                  4
significant positive effects on student achievement. We conclude that context likely matters, and

that in certain settings and with some students, targeted feedback from professors can lead to

meaningful gains in student achievement, particularly for those students in their first year of

college.



2. Faculty Feedback and Student Engagement


2.1 Focus Groups

       To explore ways to improve college success, particularly for underrepresented students in

their first-year of college, we conducted a series of open-ended qualitative focus groups with

African American and Latino male students at a large, broad access, four-year university in

Northern California during the winter of 2014. We chose this population given the documented

low six-year completion rate they experienced at that institution--less than 30 percent. The

interviews focused on student experiences and struggles while in college. More specifically, we

asked students to reflect on their experiences in the classroom. Two key themes emerged. First,

students expressed a general lack of interaction with faculty, they found it hard to engage with

instructors both in and outside of formal class times (i.e. office hours). Second, students felt

unsure of what they needed to do to be more successful in their courses, something they

described as very much a departure from the success they felt as high school students in their

courses. In short, students did not believe most college instructors were accessible, clear about

their expectations of students, or supportive of their learning.




                                                  5
2.2 Developing an Intervention

       These focus groups inspired a pilot intervention aimed at providing personalized

information and encouragement from a professor to her/his students. The intervention is "light

touch" in that it requires a modest amount of extra time on the part of the faculty member to

implement. We piloted the intervention to students enrolled in a large introductory course at a

comprehensive university. The intervention itself consists of personalized emails from the

professor at the beginning and middle of the term, providing students with specific information

about the necessary steps to succeed in the course and encouragement about how to be successful

in college.

       The specific treatment is built upon theories from behavioral economics about

information, from education on the role of feedback and student outcomes, and from social

psychology on self-efficacy and affirmation. Moreover, the intervention rests upon one key

premise: Faculty are an important and (potentially) under-utilized resource to increase student

success more generally and retention and completion more specifically. Our hypothesis is that

receiving additional information about course performance and positive directions and

encouragement regarding college success can improve students' sense of self-efficacy and

influence their decision to persist towards, and ultimately complete, the degree. Moreover, we

speculate that such information may be particularly valuable to students early in their college

careers and to students who have been historically underrepresented at the University (e.g. Black

and Latinx students).

       Specifically, students in the treatment condition received two e-mails with the explicit

purpose of providing information about (1) how they are progressing in the class; (2) how to be

successful in the class moving forward; and (3) the availability of the professor and other




                                                 6
supports. The goal was to test whether these personalized messages from faculty influence

short-term outcomes such as homework and midterm exam performance, and medium-run

outcomes such as course completion and grade. We also tested potential mechanisms for the

interpretation of results by surveying students on their perception of the professor and the course

after the submission of the final exam.

         At the heart of our treatment is the notion that increased and individualized information

provided by faculty to students regarding their performance and direction for future work will

improve their sense of self-efficacy and their course and college outcomes. We know from

human capital theory that the individual decision to invest in education (i.e. persist in college)

should be based on an interaction of students' resources (financial or otherwise) to enroll, tastes

for the college experience, and ability to do the work. Students rely on many sources of

information to make these decisions. That is, students will use information about the cost of

college, their experience in college (grades, friends, etc.), and, arguably, some knowledge about

the long-term benefit of having a college degree to make the optimal decision about whether to

stay in school (Avery & Kane, 2004).1 However, recent work in behavioral economics is more

critical of rational choice, and posits that human behavior is more psychologically driven,

suggesting that decisions are heavily influenced by factors such as how the information is

conveyed, by whom, and in what context (Thaler & Sunstein, 2008). Here, we hypothesize that

a small increase in information that is personalized and provided directly from students' course

instructors can influence performance in that course, and ultimately, their persistence in college

overall. We also conceive of the information being provided to students as a form of

personalized feedback, given that it happens after faculty have some indication of student

1
  Students may display hyperbolic discounting (Laibson, 1997) in evaluating the costs and benefits of staying in
college. That is, short sightedness causes them to highly discount the benefits of increased earnings, which are
likely years away.


                                                         7
performance in the course, and that the information is specifically tailored toward students in

light of their performance.

       Feedback in the teaching and learning literature refers to the information provided in

response to one's performance or understanding. As such, feedback is considered a

"consequence of performance" (Hattie & Timperley, 2007). Empirical evidence from the

literature on feedback suggests that it can be a powerful influence on achievement in the K-12

context, but that it is also highly variable. A meta-analysis found that studies showing the highest

effect sizes involved students receiving feedback about a task and how to do it more effectively,

while lower effect sizes were associated with feedback in the form of praise, rewards, and

punishment (Hattie & Timperley, 2007; Kluger & DeNisi, 1998). Our intervention is not

focused on changing how faculty grade assignments or provide feedback on specific course tasks,

rather on how they can provide feedback about the processes underlying the tasks expected of

students in their courses and the strategies students can incorporate to improve performance.

Feedback at this "process level" has been found to be particularly effective (Balzer, Doherty, &

O'Connor, 1989) and is the basis for the information that faculty in our intervention provide.

Specifically, the goal is to provide feedback on how to seek help (a learned process) and how to

overcome potential self-doubt or embarrassment about such help-seeing behavior (Karabenick &

Knapp, 1991). In fact, a critical mediator to feedback is the perception of self-efficacy (Hattie

and Timperley, 2007; Kluger & DeNisi, 1998). That is, feedback is particularly valuable if it also

encourages and promotes students' sense of self-efficacy.

       Although largely framed as an information and feedback intervention, our underlying

theory of change suggests that this information can have important consequences for students'

sense of support, self-efficacy and help-seeking behavior. Self-efficacy is a key component to




                                                 8
how students may handle challenging or unpredictable situations and, importantly, how much

effort they may decide to expend or how long they persist in light of challenging or unpredictable

situations (Bandura, 1993). Individuals' perceived sense of efficacy can influence actions

indirectly, for example, by its impact on goals and aspirations, their effort and commitments to

different pursuits, and how they cope with stressful situations (Steele, 1988; Bandura and Schunk,

1981). Experiments from social psychology demonstrate that accentuating positive growth rather

than shortfalls enhance self-efficacy, aspirations, and performance (Bandura, 1993; Yeager and

Walton, 2011). Thus, the nature of the feedback and information provided by faculty may play

an important role in perceived self-efficacy and ultimately in course success.



3. Piloting the Intervention

3.1 Pilot Design

           The pilot setting was a large, introductory-level microeconomics course with an initial

enrollment of 420 students at a large selective comprehensive university. In this course, students

are required to complete 5 of 7 homework assignments throughout the term. Data from prior

years of this course indicate that failure to complete the first homework is a good early indication

of struggling students.2

      During the spring quarter of 2014, the research team randomized students who did not submit

or failed the first homework assignment into a treatment group and control group. Students in the

treatment group received a two-tiered intervention in the form of e-mails from the professor

reminding them of the behaviors that lead to success in the course (attend class, complete

practice problems, attend section and utilize office hours as needed), as well as a reminder of

when the professor is available.

2
    Students who fail to complete the first homework score about 10 percentage points lower in the course, on average.


                                                           9
    The first e-mail to the treatment group was sent as a result of failing the first homework

assignment. The second e-mail to the treatment group was sent after the first midterm exam and

feedback to students was based on their exam performance:

       Group A: Students that received a B+ or higher: E-mail text commends the student on a

        job well done and reminds the student of the professor's office hours availability.

       Group B: Students that received between a C- and B: E-mail text tells the student what

        their grade in the course is likely to be based on this midterm performance and highlights

        that it is not too late to improve their grade and the set of behaviors that will help the

        student be successful in the course, as well as reminds the student of the professor's

        office hours availability.

       Group C: Students that received lower than a C- on the midterm: E-mail text warns the

        student that based on his/her trajectory, the student may be at risk of failing the course,

        but reminds them there is time to recover and details the behaviors that would allow them

        to pass the course successfully, and reminds students to seek additional supports and the

        professor's office hours availability.3



    During the course of the term, we tracked students' course dropout status, homework

completion, time spent on homework, midterm and final exam scores, final course grades, and

office hour attendance. We also asked students at the end of the class about their personal

motivation to do well in the course and their perception of how much the professor cared about

their performance.




3
 A fourth group of five students, who had dropped out of the course from the treatment group at the time the second
e-mail was sent, received no e-mails.


                                                        10
     Data were collected via the online homework portal through which students submitted

assignments, office-hour sign-in sheets, course gradebooks, and two survey questions placed on

the final exam. In addition, we merged student-level data from the University registrar on

student sex, underrepresented minority status, whether or not a student was a first-generation

college student, high school GPA, residency status, and the year in which they entered college.



3.2 Pilot Data and Methods

   Of the 69 students who did not submit the first homework assignment, 35 were assigned to

the treatment group and 34 to the control group, and 16 students dropped out of the course. The

sample of students overall is 68% male, 89% California residents, 26% of students are first-

generation college students, 23% of students are underrepresented minorities (Table 1). The

treatment and control groups are comparable with respect to student characteristics with some

minor differences. For example, the treatment group has slightly more first-generation college

students than the control group (28% as compared to 25%), but the control group has a greater

proportion of underrepresented minority students (29%) than the control group (17%). We

conduct randomization checks on the comparability of treatment and control group by regressing

student characteristics on an indicator variable for treatment status (Table A1). The results

indicate that student characteristics are not significantly predictive of treatment status and

provides evidence that randomization created groups that were equal in expectation for receipt of

the treatment.

                                            [Insert Table 1]


   The study design, random assignment of study subjects to treatment or control status,

allowed for a simple analytic strategy. Specifically, we use ordinary least squares (OLS)



                                                 11
regression analysis to calculate the average causal treatment effect for our "light-touch" feedback

intervention with the following regression:

                                     Yis = a + b*treatis + g*Xi + ls + eis


    Where Y represents our respective outcomes of interest for student i in section s, "treat" is a

dummy variable for treatment versus control status and X is a vector of individual student

characteristics. In this analysis, b represents the average causal effect of the (intervention) on

student outcomes. We investigate several outcomes: exam grades, total course score and grade,

homework score, time spent on homework, office hour attendance, attitudinal measures towards

the course and professor, and course completion.4

    We calculate a treatment effect for each outcome variable of interest using three

specifications. The first specification includes only a dummy indicator for treatment status. The

second specification includes TA fixed effects (ls) to account for variation in teaching and

learning across each of the four TAs in the course. Each student in the course was assigned to

one TA and attended his/her small-group section once a week.5 Attendance at section was not

mandatory, nor was seeking out TA assistance in office hours. The TA fixed effects are

represented by a dummy indicator for each TA and allows comparisons between individuals with

the same TA while eliminating between-TA differences. The third and final specification

includes both TA fixed effects and student-level controls. Individual control variables include

whether the student is male, first-generation college student status, under-represented minority

status, California residency status, entering cohort year, and high school GPA. In addition, we

conducted a randomization check by regressing individual student characteristics on treatment

4
  For analyzing treatment effects on survey questions "The professor cares about my performance" and "I am
motivated to do well in the course" we use a probit model that accounts for a binomial outcome.
5
  Importantly, students do not choose their TA as the TA's are assigned to sections after the student's primary
registration period ends.


                                                         12
status both with and without TA fixed effects. Results showed that there are no statistically

significant relationships between individual characteristics and treatment status.



3.3 Pilot Results

   Results are displayed in Table 2 for each outcome variable of interest over three

specifications: (1) no controls, (2) TA fixed effects, and (3) TA fixed effects and student

demographic controls. Results are presented for students in the sample who did not dropout of

the course. Results presented in Panel A of Table 2 indicate a strong positive treatment effect of

14 percentage points on students' second midterm scores, which followed after the second e-mail

of the intervention. Perhaps driven by this treatment effect on the second midterm, students in

the treatment group also performed 8 percentage points (or approximately half a letter grade)

higher compared to their control group peers on their final course grade.

                                            [Insert Table 2]



   Students in the treatment group also scored approximately 15 percentage points higher than

students in the control group on their overall homework assignments (Table 2, Panel B). Results

in Panel B of Table 2 also indicate that there is some evidence that students in the treatment

group spent as much as two hours or more on their homework assignments, as measured by time

spent in the homework portal; however, these results are not statistically significant. Additional

results on plausible mechanisms (Panel C) suggest that there are small, positive treatment effects

on the number of office hour visits and negative effects on the likelihood of dropping out of the

course, though, these results are also not statistically significant. Finally, there is some evidence

that students in the treatment group are more likely to report that their professor cares about their




                                                 13
performance but less likely to report that they are motivated to do well in the course. Again,

these results are not statistically significantly different from zero.

    Overall, the pilot results suggest that a light-touch intervention of increased professor

feedback (i.e. engagement) can significantly affect students' course performance. Potential

mechanisms for this treatment effect may be that students spend more time on assignments and

devote more time to course material. Alternatively, students may feel more comfortable seeking

help from the professor or TA and therefore understand the material better. A third reason may

be that students feel the professor cares about their experiences, causing them to be more

motivated and engaged in the course. Additional qualitative feedback provided through students'

replies to professor emails indicate that the third explanation may be at play; specifically, that the

professor's engagement and concern for their well-being, was an important feature of the course

for students in the treatment group. Student email replies expressing their gratitude towards this

individual attention are instructive, examples of this feedback include:

           I'd...like to thank you for offering your help in such a kind manner, I've rarely seen

            teachers at this school respond to missed assignments the way you have. I'll be sure

            to complete future assignments in a timely manner, the first practice homework was

            indeed pretty helpful.

           Thanks for talking to me about my homework and test scores. Even though you have a

            couple hundred students, I really appreciate the effort you put into making it personal

            for your students. I would have gone to office hours the first time you emailed me, but

            I simply forgot by the end of the week.

           This class is fulfilling a GE for me and my other classes do rank higher on my list.

            While I do enjoy microeconomics and usually aim to only take GE's that interest me,




                                                  14
             I'm just too busy to spend too much time on the homework. I definitely plan to study

             and practice extensively for the tests, but not make it a priority, which I know is not

             ideal but a reality for this quarter. But once again, thanks for the email, I really

             appreciate what you're doing and I do wish more professors do what you are doing.



It is worth noting that each of these comments suggest that students are appreciative primarily of

the contact between them and the professor, rather than the information provided itself.

Moreover, these e-mails indicate that students are not accustomed to receiving individualized

attention from their professors in large, introductory courses and that they are appreciative of

such gestures. Given the promising results from the pilot, we scaled-up the intervention at the

same large, broad-access, four-year institution where we conducted the initial focus groups, and

where completion rates--particularly for Latinx and Black student--are low.



4. Scale-up

        The study was implemented in two separate waves during the spring of 2016 and fall of

2017 at a large representative, broad-access four-year institution where the original focus groups

took place.6 We randomly chose 30 large undergraduate courses (serving over 120 students) in

each respective term and identified the instructor of record. Collaborating with the Campus

Center for College and Career Readiness we recruited these professors by sending personalized

letters signed by both the Provost and Dean of Undergraduate Studies.7 In total, 34 faculty

members across 27 different course subjects participated in the study, with nearly 4,000 total

students in the treatment and control groups. All participating faculty were given templates of E-

6
  This study was registered at the American Economic Association's registry for randomized controlled trials:
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/5875
7
  All recruitment materials available from the authors upon request.


                                                        15
mails that they were encouraged to personalize to their own courses (available in Appendix B).

Given the autonomy faculty have in the college classroom, our goal in the scale-up was to allow

faculty to individualize to their own teaching style (i.e. what each respectively believed was the

feedback students needed about how to be successful in their course). However, all emails had

to meet three basic criteria: 1) they had to be personalized to the student; 2) they had to

acknowledge a student's performance in the course thus far; and 3) they had to provide feedback

about what students could do to improve grade performance and/or seek additional help.

Participating professors received a $500 payment to be a part of the experiment, with an

additional $100 gift card for completing a survey at the end of the semester.8



4.1 Scale-up Design and Sample

           There are several key differences between the scale-up intervention and pilot that are

worth mentioning. First, because of both logistical concerns and the overall low graduation rate

at the institution we study, rather than condition on the first assignment as was done in the pilot,

we chose to randomly select students from the entire course. In the spring of 2016 the treatment

group comprised of a randomly selected one-half of the students in 14 large undergraduate

classes. To assess whether spillovers may be biasing our estimates, in the Fall of 2017, we drew

our treatment group in two different ways. In eight large classes (>120 students) we randomly

selected one-third of students into treatment (in contrast to the half randomized in the first wave).

Additionally, we randomly selected the entire class to receive treatment in the ten cases where

the professor taught two sections of the identical course. Second, rather than providing two

targeted emails as was done in the pilot (at a 10-week quarter system course), we chose to have

three targeted emails in the scale-up (at 16-week semester system courses). The timing of these

8
    Post implementation surveys for participating faculty were only included in the first wave (spring 2016).


                                                           16
emails differed slightly in the two waves. During spring of 2016, the first email entailed an

initial "welcome to my class" message containing strategies to succeed in the course. The

second and third emails were targeted performance feedbacks at the midway point in the course

and just before the final exam. In the fall of 2017, similar to the pilot, we asked professors to

give students in the treatment targeted feedback based on the first "meaningful" assignment as

well as midway through the course and just before the final exam.

       Since professors volunteered to participate in the study, it is important to know whether

there are differences in the types of professors who chose to participate in the study versus those

who chose not to participate. Though, this level of selection will not bias the internal validity of

our estimated effects (i.e., our estimates are unbiased for the sample of professors in the study),

professor selection may bias the external validity (i.e., the effects could differ for the average

professor at the university). Comparing professor characteristics in Table A2 shows there are no

significant differences in Rate My Professor ratings of participating versus non-participating

professors. However, participating professors are significantly more likely to be female, Black

or Latino. It is unclear, however, how this selection may affect external validity.



4.2 Scale-up Data and Methods

       Our sample consists of a broad set of academic subjects from Art to Engineering (Table

A3 in the Appendix lists the set of course subjects taught by professors in the study). The sample

for the scale-up intervention is very diverse across race/ethnicity, with Latino students who

represent the largest group on campus at 25% of the sample. Fifty-percent of students are female

and 37% are first-time freshman. The average student is midway through their sophomore year,

having completed just over 45 units, with an average combined SAT score of 964. To ensure




                                                 17
balance across randomization we regress treatment status on the set of observable characteristics.

Results indicate that student characteristics are largely uncorrelated with treatment status, with

only 2 of 30 coefficients significant at the 10-percent level (Table A4 in the Appendix).

   To assess plausible mechanisms of treatment effects, we collected data on student

perceptions of the professor and course, as well as academic achievement measures. Student

perceptions were obtained via survey at the end of the course. The survey was administered via

email, where students were incentivized to complete the survey by being entered into a lottery to

win an iPad or Amazon gift card. In addition, at the end of the Fall 2017 semester the survey

was administered in-person by our research assistants in select classes. Table 3 includes the list

of questions on the survey as well as summary statistics for responses measured on a 1-5 Likert-

scale. The overall survey response rate was 25%, which is quite similar to other college surveys

(Carrell & Sacerdote, 2017). Table A5 in the Appendix provides results from models regressing

the probability of response on student background characteristics. Unsurprisingly, response is

positively correlated with college GPA and SAT scores. Importantly, response is uncorrelated

with treatment status.

       Our primary measure of academic achievement is course grade, which was obtained from

the university registrar. Given the coarseness of this measure, we also collected gradebooks

from willing professors, which allows us to examine the effects of the intervention on the total

percentage of points earned in the course. Summary statistics for the scale-up in Table 3 show

that the average course grade is 2.53, with 82% of students earning a passing grade. Among

classes where we were able to obtain gradebooks, the average percentage of points earned in the

course (after the first feedback email) is 72%.

                                            [Insert Table 3]




                                                  18
        Similar to the pilot, random assignment of study subjects to treatment status again allows

for a simple OLS regression analysis to calculate the average treatment:

                                   Yict = a + b*treatict + g*Xi + lct + eict


        Where Y represents our respective outcomes of interest for student i in course c, during

semester t, "treat" is a dummy variable for treatment versus control status and X is a vector of

individual student characteristics. b represents the average causal effect of the (intervention) on

student outcomes. We calculate treatment effects for each outcome variable using two

specifications. The first specification includes a dummy indicator for treatment status and a

professor by semester fixed effect (lct). The professor by semester fixed effect is used to account

for unobserved differences across professor and semester. The second specification includes

both professor by semester fixed effects and student-level controls. Individual control variables

include: Female, Cumulative Units Earned, College GPA, remediation status, First Time

Freshman, SAT Combined Score, Black, Latino, Asian, White, Missing_SAT. For statistical

inference, and to address for multiple hypothesis testing, we follow Athey and Imbens (2017)

and List, Shaikh, and Xu (2019) and use a bootstrap-based procedure for testing these null

hypotheses simultaneously using experimental data in which random sampling is used to assign

treatment status. Hence, instead of reporting traditional clustered standard errors, square

brackets contain empirical p-values from randomization-based inference using a counterfactual

of randomly assigning treatment status within classrooms 500 times.9 




9  Athey and Imbens (2017) recommend the use of randomization-based inference in lieu of sampling-based
inference for experiments. Additionally, as discussed by List, Shaikh, and Xu (2019), "by incorporating information
about dependence ignored in classical multiple testing procedures, such as the Bonferroni (1935) and Holm (1979)
corrections randomization-based inference has much greater ability to detect truly false null hypotheses."



                                                        19
4.3 Scale-up Results

4.3.1 Average Treatment Effects

       Findings of average treatment effects for the scale-up are presented in Table 4. Results

are displayed for each outcome variable of interest over two specifications: (1) Professor by

semester fixed effects, and (2) Professor by semester fixed effects with student controls.

Importantly, across all outcomes, our results are largely unchanged when including controls,

providing further evidence that the randomization is valid and that treatment is uncorrelated with

survey response. Results in Table 4, columns 1-4 show the treatment had no discernable effect

on student performance in the course. Across all measures of achievement, including course

grade, percentage of points earned in the course, passing the course, or earning an A or B grade,

we find null effects. These null findings are quite precise--for instance, we can rule out effects

sizes larger than 0.12 grade points for final course grade and three percentage points for the

percentage of points earned in the course.

       Table 4, columns 5-9 present how students experienced this intervention, specifically

results from the survey, which examines student perceptions of the professor and course. We

provide evidence of a strong positive treatment effect on student perceptions of the instructor and

course. Students in the treatment group respond more positively on questions asking whether the

professor was approachable, available, and cared as well as how well the student felt supported

and informed. The largest treatment effects are for the questions that asked students how much

they believed the professor cared about their success and how well the professor kept them

informed about their progress in the class. The magnitudes of these effects are relatively large

with students in the treatment group, on average, responding nearly a quarter of a standard

deviation higher than students in the control condition. Of note is the fact that the question




                                                 20
asking about the usefulness of professor feedback is statistically insignificant and of much

smaller magnitude (.104 standard deviation). Finally, to test whether our null effects could be

driven by attrition, in column 10, we see that the treatment had no effect on whether students

dropped the course.

                                          [Insert Table 4]



4.3.2 Heterogeneous Treatment Effects

       Our focus groups targeted male students of color, the group with the lowest graduation

rates, and the target population for this intervention. Moreover, our pre-experiment hypothesis

was that targeted information from the professor would most likely help students in their first

year of college. Thus, in Tables 5a and 5b we present heterogeneous treatment effects by

race/ethnicity, gender, and measures of experience and academic preparedness (results from

models that include additional controls are in the Appendix). To adjust inference for multiple

hypothesis testing, as recommended by List, Shaikh, and Xu (2019), in square brackets we again

report empirical p-values from randomization-based inference using a counterfactual of

randomly assigning treatment status within classrooms 500 times. Results in Table 5a show

treatment effects for African American and Latinx students. Here we first note positive average

treatment effects on course grades, which is driven by first year students, particularly those who

enter less prepared (as measured by their high school GPA). For these groups, (freshman and

those least academically prepared) the effect sizes are quite large with students in the treatment

significantly outperforming control students by upwards of a third of a letter grade (0.31 and

0.43, respectively). Although, the treatment had no overall effect on dropping the course, we do

note that treatment students in the most vulnerable group (freshman men of color) were 6-




                                                21
percentage points less likely to drop the course (p-value = 0.040). Treatment effects on students'

perceptions of their instructor were universally positive and by and large statistically significant

for Black and Latinx students, irrespective of gender and first year status.

       Table 5b presents results for non-Black and Latinx students. We note the positive and

statistically significant effect of the treatment for first year female students' course grade, and a

correspondingly negative and statistically significant effect on first year male students' course

grade. Similar to the underrepresented minority population, treatment effects on students'

perceptions of their instructor were largely positive and statistically significant for all non-black

and Latinx students, irrespective of gender and first year status.

       Together the results suggest that the treatment had a positive effect on students'

perception of instructor support. However, this only translated to higher course grades for some

students, in particular students of color and those early in their college career, suggesting that

students may interpret targeted emails from the professor differently depending on their

background and when it comes in their college career.

                                      [Insert Table 5a and 5b]



4.3.3 Treatment Effects on Other (Non-Treated) Courses

       An important question, particularly for our target population (first year students from

underrepresented minority groups) where we find positive treatment effects, is whether the

intervention in one course affects academic performance in treated students' other (non-treated)

courses. On the one hand, the positive treatment effects we observe could be driven by a

reallocation of student effort from non-treated classes to the treated class, resulting in no overall

gain in average academic achievement. On the other hand, faculty engagement from one




                                                  22
professor could result in an overall increase in treated students' self-efficacy or sense of

belonging, thereby improving performance in their non-treated courses. To test these

possibilities, in Table 6 we present results for student grades in courses other than those in the

experimental study. For comparison purposes, we also show in odd numbered columns results

for treated courses. Overall, the pattern of results shows compelling evidence of a positive

spillover from treated courses to non-treated courses. For students in the target populations

(Black/Latinx first year students, Black/Latinx first year males, and Black/Latinx with low high

school GPAs), the magnitude of the treatment effect on grades in non-treated courses is roughly

one-half the size of the effects in treated courses and statistically significant at the 0.05-level.

For example, while the treatment effect for Black/Latinx freshman is 0.31 grade points for

treated courses, the effect in other (non-treated) courses is a 0.15 grade points (p=0.024).

                                           [Insert Table 6]



5. Discussion

        Overall, these scale-up results suggest that a light-touch intervention that demonstrates

professor engagement significantly improves all students' perceptions of the professor and

course, and the course performance of some students, namely underrepresented minority students

in their first year of college. Differences in these course performance effects could be driven by a

number of factors, including: (1) fidelity of implementation of the treatment, (2) differential

response to the feedback, or (3) contextual differences with the pilot setting. We explore these

plausible explanations below.




                                                  23
5.1. Fidelity of Implementation and Course/Instructor Differences

           One potential concern with the scale-up is the fact that professors may have not followed

through with the experiment, or were just motivated by the monetary incentive, rather than the

potential for improving student outcomes. To address potential differences across courses we do

several things: First, we assigned a research assistant to all participating faculty to assist with E-

mail drafts and ensure no contamination of the control group; second, we examine the timeliness

and quality of the emails sent to students by all instructors. Although we find differences in the

quality of the text of the emails provided to students (i.e. specificity and/or encouragement), and

timeliness of the feedback (i.e. in conjunction with key course assignments or exams), all

participating instructors met the three criteria required by the emails--personalized feedback

responsive to student performance. Thus, we can confidently rule out fidelity as a potential

mechanism. In addition to fidelity of implementation, we also explore whether treatment effects

may have differed by other course and instructor types. Specifically, we look at differences by

course discipline, faculty characteristics (gender and race/ethnicity), and appointment status

(lecturer, tenured faculty, tenured-track faculty). We find no systematic pattern of treatment

effects by course or instructor type.10



5.2 Student response to feedback

            All participating professors collected any student replies to their E-mails, which we

analyze qualitatively. Similar to the pilot, many students from the treatment group wrote E-mails

expressing their appreciation and gratitude towards this individual attention. Examples of this

feedback include:

               Thank you for your email, I will keep that in mind for the future. I appreciate all the help.

10   These results are available upon request.


                                                             24
            Hello Professor, It means a great deal to receive feedback and am appreciative of your time and help.
             I love what im learning and will reach out if when I need guidance.
            Hi Professor, Thank you for all of this information. It's very useful and I'm looking forward to learning
             a lot from your class. I was struggling in the beginning because I've never taken a one part lecture and
             one part discussion based class, but I think I'm starting to get the hang of it. If I have any questions, I'll
             be sure to stop by your office hours. Thanks once again!"



        Several other themes in the qualitative data emerged. Students were apologetic, often

expressing regret for their actions, and students also communicated a host of explanations that

included both academic and personal challenges:

            Hello professor. I attend every class, go to the review sessions, and have turned in the extra credit so I
             am defiantly trying to do well but I am still struggling. I will come to office hours and try to meet up
             with our TA as well. Let me know if there is anything else I can do. Thank you
            I apologize for missing your class wednesday afternoon, i was stuck in [Name] hall trying to pay my
             monthly installment for tuition. I will definitely be at mondays lecture.
            Thank you for email! I hope to do well on the next 2 exams. I also apologize for my poor performance
             on the first exam, there was a personal problem I had to deal with the day before and it affected my
             studying & performance on the exam. Thank you for reaching out, I really appreciate it.
            Thank you so much for your concern I have been struggling a bit in the class with chapter 3, I have
             been trying to keep up with school along with working but I am not making any excuses. I was also not
             too pleased with my performance with my grade on the first midterm because I had did well on
             majority of the homework's and attend class daily. I do plan on seeking help and getting a tutor in
             Brighton Hall that will work with my schedule and spending a little more time focusing on homework's.
             I appreciate your encouragement in making sure I stay on track in the class and I will be sure to do
             better the remaining of the semester
            I truly appreciate the grade check-in, the bad grade was due to my lack of organization and failure to
             take it before the deadline. Once again i truly appreciate the check in and i will make sure to be more
             aware of the upcoming due dates.



        Students--at least those that replied--communicated an effort to try to respond to the

suggested actions on the part of the instructor. As an example, in response to one instructor's

final email to students in the treatment group, as follows:


I hope you had a great Thanksgiving break! We are approaching the end of the semester.

I want to let you know that I have been looking over your grades. Earlier today I sent an email announcement to the
class, where I mentioned that your current grades on the class have been posted on UnivCT under the heading
"Grade_Nov27" and explained how this grade was calculated. Your current grade in the class is XX%. I am a bit
concerned with your current grade and want to encourage you to study hard for this exam and the final.

I also encourage you to continue coming to class regularly, completing the few remaining assignments on time and
seeking help when concepts are unclear.


                                                           25

We have an exam coming up this Friday. To remind you, my office hours are as follows...
Please feel free to contact me if you have any questions.

Students' replies include:
            Thank you for your concern and informing me on my current grade. I intend on focusing my time to
             study hard for the upcoming exam as well as the final. If I'm unsure about a topic or have any
             questions I will be sure to come to your office.
            Thank you professor, I am trying my best to prepare for this exam, I plan on earning at least a B on
             this one! Thank you for the encouragement, it helps a lot!
            Thank you, I hope that you did too! I'm going to come see you during office hours tomorrow because I
             know that although I have an 81.25% nearly half of my grade is undetermined yet. I really need to get
             a passing score on this Exam so I will see you at 2PM tomorrow! Thanks for the update on my grade. I
             appreciate it.
            Thank you for the email and thank you for caring about my grade I really appreciate it and I can say
             that your efforts have helped me. I will be finishing off the semester the best that I can by performing
             my best on the exam 3 and final exam I hope to come to one of your office hours tomorrow.



5.3 Faculty Response to the Intervention

     How did faculty respond to this intervention? We surveyed all faculty participants in the

scale-up. We asked faculty how they interpreted the nature of the student responses to their

emails. Faculty reported students' replies were largely positive, thanking them and suggesting

they would try harder. A few also described students' concern over receiving an email, either in a

curious way, with some potentially worried. Faculty were both surprised by the gratitude

expressed by students: "It was surprising how thankful they were for such a simple email" (as

reported by one instructor); while other faculty were more skeptical: "Responses generally came

from what I would consider already conscientious students. They weren't defined by grade, but

by active involvement. If they were really engaged in the classroom, they were more interested in

the emails. Students that didn't care probably ignored them" (as reported by another instructor).

Faculty were asked how long the emails took them to complete; a conservative estimate is

approximately 1 minute per email. Faculty believed that increasing interaction with students in

their class could improve student outcomes, and while some were enthusiastic by this specific




                                                        26
effort: "With a class of this size, I think these emails really did serve a useful purpose of

establishing some level of one-on-one interaction between myself and the students." Others were

more skeptical of the effort, "I think it's important, but some of them really don't care. I can't

force them to come to my office." These qualitative findings suggest that faculty are by and large

receptive to various tools that may increase feedback to students and greater interaction with

their students. However, it also suggests that these efforts may be mediated by faculty attitudes

and perceptions of the utility of various pedagogical efforts in their classrooms.



5.4 Pilot Replication

       Given the heterogeneity in our treatment findings on course performance, we replicated

the pilot in the same large, introductory-level course at a selective comprehensive research

university in the spring of 2019. We do so to examine the robustness of the finding that

motivated the scale up. There was only one major difference regarding the research design from

the initial pilot. The professor was unable to draw the sample based on performance on the first

homework because only 13 of 720 students failed the first homework assignment. Rather, the

professor based the sample from the students who failed (<60%) the first (of four) exams, which

occurs within the first three weeks of the course. Two feedback emails were sent, one

immediately after exam 1 and the second after exam 3.

       Table 7 presents results from the pilot replication. Similar to the initial pilot, we find a

significant positive effect from instructor feedback on exam performance. Across all exams,

there is a 5 percentage point boost in student performance, though the estimates are only

significant at the 10-percent level (p=0.066). However, of note is that this effect did not lead to a

statistically significant effect on the course grade, which was determined after dropping each




                                                 27
student's lowest exam score and curving. Though, students in the treatment group were more

likely to pass the course (0.021 ppts) and earn a grade of B or higher (0.129 ppts), neither of

these effect are significant at conventional levels. Finally, similar to both the original pilot and

scale-up, students by and large provided positive responses to receiving individualized feedback

from the instructor.

                                           [Insert Table 7]



6. Conclusion

College completion and success remains highly uneven by institutional type (i.e. selectivity), and,

by students' background characteristics. Despite the robust evidence from K-12 on the role of

teachers, to date, we have a much more limited sense of the role of college faculty/instructors in

student success. To our knowledge, this study represents the first experiment aimed at altering

faculty behaviors in the college classroom. The experiment follows a theoretically grounded and

carefully piloted and tested treatment that represents an effort, not to revolutionize the college

classroom, but rather to modestly increase faculty engagement through individualized feedback

to students in large lecture class.

    The results provide experimental evidence that professor feedback to students can have a

positive significant effect on all students' perception of support in their college classes, and on

course performance for some students and in some settings. Moreover, a compelling set of

qualitative evidence suggests that students recognize and appreciate this type of feedback from

their instructors.

        By conveying beliefs in students' abilities to succeed in a course and in college more

generally, college instructors have an important way to directly and indirectly contribute to




                                                 28
college success: directly through the intended transfer of content knowledge and/or skills and

indirectly through boosting students' sense of self-efficacy. Students' beliefs about college and

how they process early difficulties can influence their postsecondary trajectory. Thus, we

hypothesize that feedback and encouragement earlier in an academic transition, particularly from

a faculty member, could trigger a host of positive effects (e.g. improved self-efficacy), or avert a

downward cycle of self-doubt that may lead to premature departure from college.

        Faculty are often an untapped source of (dis)encouragement and/or support for college

students aspiring to obtain a degree. Despite considerable conjecture about the role of faculty, we

have very limited evidence about their potential influence and virtually no evidence about how

they might influence student outcomes. This study affirms that faculty can play a critical role in

improving student success through a modest set of activities to reach out to their students. More

specifically, having direct feedback from faculty that is both individualized in knowledge of the

student's progress in the course and encouraging about their potential success could be a

powerful motivator. Future work can and should offer additional experimentation with

pedagogical approaches to feedback and support in the college classroom, and that is cognizant

of how such efforts may be received differently by different types of students (e.g., demographic

background, preparation levels, etc.), by different messengers (i.e. instructor differences), and in

different contexts (e.g., institutions, disciplines, course format, etc.).

REFERENCES

Avery, C. & Kane, T. (2004). Student Perceptions of College Opportunities. The Boston
       COACH Program. In Caroline Hoxby ed, College Choices: The Economics of Where to
       Go, When to Go, and How to Pay For It, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pages
       355-394.

Agrist, J. Oreopoulos, P. & Williams, T. (2014). When Opportunity Knocks, Who Answers?
        New Evidence on College Achievement Awards. Forthcoming, Journal of Human
        Resources.


                                                   29
Anderson, D. M., Broton, K. M., Goldrick-Rab, S., & Kelchen, R. (2018). Experimental
      Evidence on the Impacts of Need-Based Financial Aid: Longitudinal Assessment of the
      Wisconsin Scholars Grant.

Angrist, J., Lang, D., & Oreopoulos, P. (2009). Incentives and services for college achievement:
       Evidence from a randomized trial. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 1(1),
       136-63.

Athey, S. & Imbens, G. (2017). The Econometrics of Randomized Experiments, Handbookof
       EconomicFieldExperiments, Edited by Abhijit Vinayak Banerjee, Esther Duflo,
       Volume1, 2017, Pages 73-140.

Bailey, M. J. & Dynarski, S. (2011). Inequality in Postsecondary Education. In Duncan, G. J. and
        Murnane, R. J. (eds.), Wither Opportunity. Russell Sage. Pp. 117-132.

Balzer, W. K., Doherty, M. E., & O'Connor, R., Jr. (1989). Effects of cognitive feedback on
        performance. Psychological Bulletin, 106(3), 410433.

Bandura, A. (1993). Perceived Self-Efficacy in Cognitive Development and Functioning.
      Educational Psychologist, 28(2), 117-148.

Bandura, A., & Schunk, D. H. (1981). Cultivating Competence, Self-Efficacy, and Intrinsic
      Interest Through Proximal Self-Motivation. Journal of Personality and Social
      Psychology, 41(3), 586-598.

Barr, A. and Castleman, B. (2017). TheBottomLineonCollegeCounseling.WorkingPaper.

Baum, S., Ma, J., & Payea, K. (2013) Education pays: The benefits of higher education for
      individuals and society. Retrieved from The College Board website:
      http://trends.collegeboard.org/sites/default/files/education-pays-2013-full-report.pdf

Bettinger, E. P., & Baker, R. B. (2014). The effects of student coaching: An evaluation of a
       randomized experiment in student advising. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis,
       36(1), 3-19.

Bettinger, E. P., Long, B. T., Oreopoulos, P., & Sanbonmatsu, L. (2012) The role of application
       assistance and information in college decisions: From the H&R Block FAFSA
       experiment. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 127(3), 1205-1242.

Beleche, T., Fairris, D., & Marks, M. (2012). Do course evaluations truly reflect student
       learning? Evidence from an objectively graded post-test. Economics of Education Review,
       31(5): 709-719.

Bettinger and Long, (2010). Does Cheaper Mean Better? The Impact of Using Adjunct
       Instructors on Student Outcomes. Review of Economics and Statistics, 92(3): 598-613.

Braga, M., Paccagnella, M. & Pellizzari, M., (2014). Evaluating Students' Evaluations of
       Professors. Economic of Education Review, 41, 71-88.


                                               30
Brownback, A. & Sadoff, S. (2019). Improving College Instruction Through Incentives. Journal
      of Political Economy.

Carlson, D. E., Elwert, F., Hillman, N., Schmidt, A., & Wolfe, B. L. (2019). The effects of
       financial aid grant offers on postsecondary educational outcomes: New experimental
       evidence from the fund for Wisconsin scholars. Technical report, National Bureau of
       Economic Research.

Carrell, S. E., Page, M. E., & West, J. E. (2010). Sex and Science: How Professor Gender
        Perpetuates the Gender Gap. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(3): 1101-1144.

Carrell, S., & Sacerdote, B. (2017). "Why Do College Going Interventions Work?" American
        Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 9(3): 124-51, July 2017.

Carrell, S.E. & West, J. E., (2010). Does Professor Quality Matter? Evidence from Random
        Assignment of Students to Professors," Journal of Political Economy, Volume 118, No. 3,
        409-432, June 2010.

Castleman, B.L., Page, L.C., & Schooley, K. (2014). The forgotten summer: Mitigating summer
       attrition among college-intending low-income high school graduates. The Journal of
       Policy Analysis and Management.

Dobronyi, C. R., Oreopoulos, P., & Petronijevic, U. (2019). Goal Setting, Academic
      Reminders, and College Success: A Large-Scale Field Experiment, Journal of Research
      on Educational Effectiveness, 12(1):38-66.

Ehrenberg, R. G. & Zhang, L. (2005). Do tenured and tenure-track faculty matter? Journal of
      Human Resources, 40(3):647659.

Fairlie, Hoffman, & Oreopoulos, P. (2013). A community college instructor like me: Race and
         ethnicity interactions in the classroom. American Economic Review.


Figlio, D. N., Schapiro, M. O., & Soter, K. B. (2015). Are tenure track professors better
        teachers? Review of Economics and Statistics, 97(4):715724.

Hattie, J., & Timperley, H. (2007). The power of feedback. Review of Educational Research,
        77(1), 81-112.

Hoffmann, F. & Oreopoulos, P. (2009). A Professor Like Me: The Influence of Instructor
      Gender on College Achievement, Journal of Human Resources, 44(2).

Holzer, H. & Baum, S. (2017). Making College Work: Pathways to Success for Disadvantaged
       Students. The Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C.

Hoxby, C., & Turner, S. (2013). Expanding college opportunities. Education Next, 13(4).
      Retrieved from http://educationnext.org/expanding-college-opportunities/


                                                31
Laibson D. (1997). Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting. Quarterly Journal of
       Economics,112(2):443-477.

Leonhardt, D. (2014, May 27). Is College Worth It? Clearly, New Data Say. The New York
      Times. Retrieved from http://www.nytimes.com

Karabenick, S. A., & Knapp, J. R. (1991). Relationship of academic help seeking to the use of
      learning strategies and other instrumental achievement behavior in college students.
      Journal of Educational Psychology, 83, 221230.

Kluger, A. N., & DeNisi, A. (1998). Feedback interventions: Towards the understanding of a
       double-edge sword. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 7(3) 6772.

List, J.A., Shaikh, A.M. & Xu, Y. Multiple hypothesis testing in experimental economics. Exp
        Econ 22, 773793 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10683-018-09597-5

Oreopoulos, P. & Petronijevic, U. (2019). The Remarkable Unresponsiveness of College
      Students to Nudging and What We Can Learn from It. National Bureau of Economic
      Research, Working Paper 26059.

Pew Research Center. (2014, February). The Rising Cost of Not Going to College. Retrieved
      from http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2014/02/11/the-rising-cost-of-not-going-to-college/

Phillips, M. & Reber, S. (2019). Does Virtual Advising Increase College Enrollment? Evidence
        from a Random Assignment College Access Field Experiment. National Bureau of
        Economic Research, Working Paper 26509.

Price, J. (2010). The effect of instructor race and gender on student persistence in STEM fields.
        EconomicsofEducationReview, Volume 29, Issue 6, December 2010, Pages 901-910.

Ran, X. & Xu, D. (2016). How and why do adjunct instructors affect students' academic
       outcomes? Evidence from two-year and four-year colleges.


Snyder, T.D., & Dillow, S.A. (2013). Digest of Education Statistics 2012 (NCES 2014-015).
       National Center for Education Statistics, Institute of Education Sciences. Washington,
       D.C.: U.S. Department of Education.

Steele, C. M. (1988). The psychology of self-affirmation: Sustaining the integrity of the self. In
        L.Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology. NewYork: Academic
        Press.

Thaler, R. H., & Sunstein, C. R. (2008). Nudge: Improving Decisions about Health, Wealth, and
        Happiness. New London, CN: Yale University Press.

Turner, S. (2018). The Policy Imperative: Policy Tools Should Create Incentives for College
       Completion. American Enterprise Institute.



                                                32
Umbach, P. D., & Wawrzynski, M. R. (2005). Faculty do matter: The role of college faculty in
     student learning and engagement. Research in Higher Education, 46(2), 153-184.

Walton, G. & Cohen, G. (2011). A Brief Social-Belonging Intervention Improves Academic and
      Health Outcomes of Minority Students, Science, 331(6023): 1447-1451.

Yeager, D. S. & Walton, G. M. (2011). Social-psychological interventions in education: They're
      not magic. Review of Educational Research, 81, 267-301.

Yeager, D. S., Walton, G.M., Brady, S.T., Akcinar, E.N.,Paunesku, D., Keane, L., Kamentz,
      D., Ritter, G., Duckworth, A. L., Urstein, R., Gomez, E. M., Markus, H. R., Cohen, G.L.,
      Dweck, C.S. (2016). Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, June
      2016, 113 (24): E3341-E3348; DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1524360113.




                                              33
Tables

 Table 1. Descriptive Statistics
   Variable                               No. Obs.   Mean      SD     Min.   Max.
   Midterm 1 (%)                               53       0.74   0.17   0.33       1
   Midterm 2 (%)                               53       0.68   0.20      0       1
   Final Exam (%)                              53       0.64   0.15      0    0.95
   All Exams (%)                               53       0.68   0.14      0    0.93
   Total Course Score (%)                      53       0.72   0.13   0.21    0.94
   Course Grade (0-4)                          53       2.40   0.89      0       4
   Homework Score (%)                          53       0.93   0.20      0       1
   Homework Points Earned (%)                  53       0.55   0.21      0    0.88
   Homework Total Time Spent (hours)           53       7.05   4.16      0   14.82
   Homework Median Time Spent (hours)          53       0.85   0.59      0    2.38
   Professor Cares about my Performance        51       2.39   0.87      0       3
   Motivated to Do Well in Course              52       3.02   1.02      0       4
   Total Office Hour Visits (number)           53       2.32   2.29      0       9
   Dropped Out of Course (%)                   69       0.23   0.43      0       1
   Male                                        53       0.68   0.47      0       1
   First Generation College Student            53       0.26   0.45      0       1
   HS GPA                                      53       3.77   0.37   2.87    4.24
   Under-represented Minority                  53       0.23   0.42      0       1
   CA Resident                                 53       0.89   0.32      0       1
   Entering Cohort                             53    2012.43   0.69   2011    2013

                                  




                                          34
   Table 2: Pilot Results
   Panel A. Test Score Outcomes on Exams
                                  1              2                    3                4                     5             6

                                                                                                            Total
                              Midterm        Midterm 2              Final         All Exams                             Course
   Outcome                                                                                                  Score
                              1 (pct)          (pct)              Exam (pct)         (pct)                            Grade (0-4)
                                                                                                            (pct)
                                0.065           0.121**             0.022             0.063              0.064*         0.431*
   No Controls
                               (0.048)         (0.054)             (0.042)           (0.039)            (0.034)        (0.239)
                                0.073           0.150**             0.042             0.082**           0.078**        0.521**
   TA Fixed Effects
                               (0.052)         (0.057)             (0.043)           (0.041)            (0.036)        (0.249)
   Individual Controls          0.057           0.136**             0.049             0.076*            0.076**         0.501*
   and TA Fixed Effects        (0.053)         (0.060)             (0.042)           (0.041)            (0.037)           (0.254)
   Observations                  53              53                  53                53                    53             53

   Panel B. Homework Scores and Time Spent
                                 1                       2                   3                 4
                                                                          Homewor        Homewor
                                  Homewor        Homework                  k Total       k Median
   Outcome                         k Score         Points                   Time           Time
                                    (pct)        Earned (pct)               Spent          Spent
                                                                           (hours)        (hours)
                                    0.103*             0.067                1.804             0.271*
   No Controls
                                   (0.057)            (0.055)              (1.131)          (0.159)
                                    0.119*             0.052                1.794            0.257
   TA Fixed Effects
                                   (0.062)            (0.060)              (1.242)          (0.175)
   Individual Controls and          0.152**            0.075                1.969            0.311
   TA Fixed Effects                (0.062)            (0.061)              (1.333)          (0.186)
   Observations                       53                 53                  53                53

   Panel C. Mechanisms
                                      1                       2                   3                     5             6
                                Professor           "Professor               "Motivated        TA Office            Dropped
   Outcome                    Office Hour        Cares About My              to Do Well        Hour Visits           Out of
                             Visits (number)      Performance"               in Course"         (number)            Course
                                  0.131                 0.54                   -0.328               0.967            -0.123
   No Controls
                                 (0.103)               (0.332)                 (0.310)             (0.128)          (0.102)
                                  0.101                 0.540                  -0.328               0.802
   TA Fixed Effects                                                                                                   NA
                                 (0.105)               (0.332)                 (0.310)             (0.672)
   Individual Controls            0.093                 0.535                  -0.237
                                                                                                    NA                NA
   and TA Fixed Effects          (0.104)               (0.387)                 (0.367)
   Observations                       53                 51                  52                    53                 69




                                                             35
   Table 2 Notes: * Significant at the 0.10 level, ** Significant at the 0.05 level, *** Significant at the 0.01
   level. Each cell represents the results from regressing the outcome listed on a treatment dummy variable.
   Specifications 2 & 3 in panel C are estimated using an ordered Probit model. All other specifications are
   estimated using OLS. Individual control variables include whether the student is male, first generation
   college, under-represented minority, CA resident, entering cohort, and high school GPA.


                                      




                                                       36
   Table 3. Descriptive Statistics
   Variable                                                   No. Obs.   Mean   SD     Min.   Max.
   Treatment Group                                             3,930     0.46   0.50     0       1
   Female                                                      3,922     0.54   0.50     0       1
   White                                                       3,931     0.22   0.42     0       1
   Asian                                                       3,931     0.25   0.44     0       1
   Black                                                       3,931     0.10   0.29     0       1
   Latino                                                      3,931     0.35   0.48     0       1
   High School GPA                                             3,384     3.29   0.42     2    4.44
   Freshman                                                    3,931     0.40   0.49     0       1
   Sophomore                                                   3,931     0.28   0.45     0       1
   Junior                                                      3,931     0.19   0.39     0       1
   College GPA                                                 3,642     2.90   0.60     0    4.00
   Total Units                                                 3,922     0.45   0.34     0    2.16
   Course Grade                                                3,734     2.53   1.19     0     4.0
   Passed Course                                               3,734     0.82   0.38      0      1
   Earned A or B                                               3,734     0.57   0.50      0      1
   Dropped Curse                                               3,930     0.04   0.19      0      1
   % Points Earned after First Feedback                        1,624     0.72   0.22   0.00   1.01
   How approachable was the instructor in class?               1,014     4.50   1.21      1      6
   How available was the instructor outside of class?          1,011     4.46   1.11      1      6
   How useful was the instructor's feedback in helping you
                                                               1,015     4.57   1.22
   learn?                                                                                1       6
   How much do you believe the instructor cared about your
                                                               1,014     4.31   1.24
   success in the class?                                                                 1       6
   How well did the instructor keep you informed about your
                                                               1,014     4.26   1.31
   progress in the class?                                                                1       6




                                                   37
Table 4: Scale-up Results
   Specification                       1               2               3               4               5              6               7               8               9            10

                                                                                                                                                 How much
                                                                                                                                               do you believe   How well did
                                                                                                                                  How useful         the        the instructor
                                                                                                     How            How             was the      instructor          keep
                                                                                                approachable available was        instructor's  cared about     you informed
                                                    % Points                                       was the     the instructor    feedback in        your          about your
                                                  Earned after                                   instructor in   outside of      helping you success in the        progress      Dropped
   Outcome                           Grade       First Feedback     Passed          A or B          class?         class?           learn?         class?        in the class?   Course
   Panel A. Class Fixed Effects
                                      0.01            0.01            0.01           0.01            0.22***         0.17**          0.12          0.28***         0.28***        -0.01
   Full Sample
                                     [.660]          [.250]          [.456]         [.746]          [.004]          [.014]          [.118]         [.000]          [.000]         [.356]
   Obs                               3,735           1,624
                                                        0            3,7350.00      3,735           1,015           1,012           1,015          1,016           1,015          3,930
   Panel B. Class Fixed Effects and Controls
                                      0.04            0.01            0.01            0.01           0.23***         0.17**          0.11           0.28***         0.27***       -0.01
   Full Sample
                                     [.204]          [.240]          [.254]          [.298]         [.006]          [.016]          [.160]          [.000]          [.002]        [.326]
   Obs                               3,729           1,620           3,729          3,729           1,012           1,009           1,012          1,013           1,012          3,922
   Notes: Each column reports results from a separate regression. All specifications include course by phase fixed effects. Controls include Female, Total Units Earned, High
   School GPA, College GPA, indicators for year of study, Black, Latino, Asian, White. Square brackets contain p-values from randomization-based inference using a
   counterfactual of randomly assigning treatment status within classrooms 500 times. Note: There are eight students in the sample with missing demographics. The results
   are unchanged when dropping these students from Panel A.
   * Significant at the 10% level
   ** Significant at the 5% level
   *** Significant at the 1% level




                                                                                              38
   Table 5a. Scale-up Results for Latino/Black Students (no controls)
Specification                            1            2             3            4              5                6              7              8               9             10

                                                                                                                                          How much
                                                                                                                                        do you believe   How well did
                                                                                                                         How useful           the        the instructor
                                                                                               How            How          was the        instructor          keep
                                                  % Points                                approachable available was instructor's        cared about     you informed
                                                 Earned after                                was the     the instructor feedback in          your          about your
                                                    First                                  instructor in   outside of   helping you     success in the      progress      Dropped     N (Grades)
Outcome                               Grade       Feedback       Passed       A or B          class?         class?        learn?           class?        in the class?   Course      N (Survey)
Treatment Effects for Black/Latino Students
                                       0.07         0.03*          0.02         0.03          0.27*           0.22**          0.17         0.35***         0.33***         -0.01          1,619
All Latino/Black
                                      [.172]        [.080]        [.372]       [.124]         [.074]          [.034]         [.252]         [.000]          [.002]         [.236]           403
                                       0.10          0.00          0.03         0.05          0.33*           0.29**          0.18         0.42***         0.42***          0.00            938
   Female
                                      [.160]        [.970]        [.360]       [.146]         [.078]          [.038]         [.436]         [.004]          [.006]        [1.000]           271
                                       -0.01       0.05**          -0.01        -0.01          0.16            0.02           0.24            0.29           0.40*         -0.02            681
   Male
                                      [.956]       [.046]         [.806]       [.972]         [.332]          [.880]         [.198]          [.136]          [.060]        [.094]           132
                                     0.31***         0.04          0.09       0.09**          0.44**          0.35**         0.41**         0.52**         0.58***         -0.01            710
   Freshman
                                      [.002]        [.104]        [.022]      [.032]          [.012]          [.028]         [.018]         [.012]          [.010]         [.236]           180
                                       -0.07         0.02          -0.03        -0.01          0.16            0.17           0.06          0.28**            0.19         -0.01            909
   Upperclass
                                      [.608]        [.378]        [.356]       [.886]         [.490]          [.240]         [.744]         [.036]           [.184]        [.490]           223
                                      0.28**         0.02          0.08         0.07         0.55***         0.44***         0.42**        0.63***            0.59          0.01            435
   Freshman Female
                                      [.046]        [.526]        [.138]       [.234]         [.006]          [.008]         [.036]         [.010]           [.016]        [.708]           127
                                      0.30*         0.08          0.08         0.11*          0.41             0.17           0.35           0.40            0.76         -0.06**           275
   Freshman Male
                                      [.058]        [.140]       [.106]        [.052]         [.506]          [.768]         [.532]          [.532]          [.182]        [.040]            53
                                     0.43***        0.07*        0.14**        0.11*          0.64**          0.52**          0.27           0.55            0.48          -0.02            402
   Freshman w/Low HS GPA
                                      [.010]        [.070]        [.016]       [.074]         [.014]          [.014]         [.296]          [.214]          [.198]        [.242]            94
                                       0.11          0.02          0.00         0.04           0.34            0.22          0.63**        0.68***          0.64**          0.00            308
   Freshman w/High HS GPA
                                      [.400]        [.688]        [.894]       [.430]         [.228]          [.418]         [.038]         [.008]           [.03]        [1.000]            86
Notes: Each column reports results from a separate regression. All specifications include course by phase fixed effects. Square brackets contain p-values from randomization-based
inference using a counterfactual of randomly assigning treatment status within classrooms 500 times. *Significant at 10% level; **Significant at 5% level; Significant at 1% level.


*   Significant at the 10% level
** Significant at the 5% level
*** Significant at the 1% level




                                                                                              39
Table 5b. Scale-up Results for Non-Latino/Black Students (no controls)
Specification                            1             2            3            4              5                6              7              8               9             10

                                                                                                                                          How much
                                                                                                                                        do you believe   How well did
                                                                                                                         How useful           the        the instructor
                                                                                               How            How          was the        instructor          keep
                                                   % Points                               approachable available was instructor's        cared about     you informed
                                                  Earned after                               was the     the instructor feedback in          your          about your
                                                     First                                 instructor in   outside of   helping you     success in the      progress      Dropped      N (Grades)
Outcome                               Grade        Feedback      Passed       A or B          class?         class?        learn?           class?        in the class?   Course       N (Survey)
Treatment Effects for non-Black/Latino Students
                                       -0.03          -0.01        0.01         -0.02         0.22**          0.16*           0.12          0.24**         0.25***          0.00           2,110
All non-Black/Latino
                                      [.512]         [.662]       [.742]       [.396]         [.016]          [.066]         [.154]          [.03]          [.008]         [.902]            609
                                       0.02           -0.02        0.01         0.01          0.31**          0.18**         0.18*         0.30***         0.28***          0.01           1,100
   Female
                                      [.576]         [.186]       [.774]       [.784]         [.018]          [.046]         [.062]         [.000]          [.006]         [.392]            374
                                       -0.10          0.01         0.00         -0.05          0.09            0.14           -0.04           0.21          0.27**         -0.01           1,010
   Male
                                      [.156]         [.654]       [.890]       [.110]         [.426]          [.334]         [.776]          [.272]         [.040]         [.410]            235
                                       0.03           0.01         0.01         0.00          0.26**           0.14          0.24*          0.31**         0.51***          0.00             802
   Freshman
                                      [.680]         [.668]       [.548]       [.986]         [.026]          [.214]         [.054]         [.038]          [.004]        [1.000]            223
                                       -0.05          -0.01        0.00         -0.02          0.18            0.13           0.04            0.18            0.11          0.00           1,308
   Upperclass
                                      [.338]         [.332]       [.906]       [.368]         [.114]          [.296]         [.710]          [.146]          [.248]        [.874]            386
                                      0.24**          0.02       0.08**        0.08*          0.40**           0.24          0.33**          0.33*         0.56***          0.02             433
   Freshman Female
                                      [.048]         [.432]       [.05]        [.06]          [.018]          [.126]         [.048]          [.06]          [.006]         [.264]            152
                                      -0.22*          -0.01      -0.07*       -0.09**         -0.05           -0.26           -0.23           0.42            0.33         -0.03             369
   Freshman Male
                                      [.074]         [.778]      [.060]        [.036]         [.836]          [.256]         [.354]          [.062]          [.356]        [.250]             71
                                       0.00           0.03         0.06        -0.09*         0.44*            0.30           0.33           0.46*           0.56*          0.00             366
   Freshman Low GPA (HS)
                                      [.988]         [.406]       [.216]       [.060]         [.090]          [.176]         [.126]          [.090]          [.056]       [1.000]             87
                                       0.02           -0.01        -0.02        0.06           0.01            0.02           0.11            0.15            0.35          0.00             436
   Freshman High GPA (HS)
                                      [.788]         [.856]       [.386]       [.124]         [.940]          [.896]         [.540]          [.408]          [.112]       [1.000]            136
Notes: Each column reports results from a separate regression. All specifications include course by phase fixed effects. Square brackets contain p-values from randomization-based
inference using a counterfactual of randomly assigning treatment status within classrooms 500 times. *Significant at the 10% level; **Significant at the 5% level; ***Significant at
the 1% level.

*   Significant at the 10% level
** Significant at the 5% level
*** Significant at the 1% level




                                                                                              40
Table 6: Treatment Effects on Other (Non-Treated) Courses
   Specification                                 1                2                   3                4
                                                Black/Latino Students              Non-Black/Latino Students
                                                            Grades in Non-                        Grades in Non-
                                              Grade in         Treated             Grade in          Treated
   Outcome                                 Treated Course      Courses          Treated Course       Courses
                                                 0.07             0.05               -0.03              0.02
   All Students
                                                [.172]           [.222]              [.512]            [.608]
                                                 0.10             0.06                0.02              0.04
    Female
                                                [.160]           [.276]              [.576]            [.536]
                                                -0.01             0.01               -0.10             -0.01
    Male
                                                [.956]           [.900]              [.156]            [.810]
                                              0.31***           0.15**                0.03              0.06
    Freshman
                                               [.002]           [.024]               [.680]            [.334]
                                                -0.07             0.00               -0.52              0.18
    Upperclass
                                                [.608]           [.982]              [.338]            [.832]
                                               0.28**             0.08               0.24**             0.11
    Freshman Female
                                               [.046]            [.342]              [.048]            [.266]
                                                0.30*           0.23**               -0.22*             0.05
    Freshman Male
                                                [.058]           [.034]              [.074]            [.612]
                                              0.43***           0.24***               0.00              0.07
    Freshman w/Low HS GPA
                                                [.010]           [.010]              [.988]            [.508]
                                                 0.11             0.03                0.02              0.05
    Freshman w/High HS GPA
                                                [.400]           [.768]              [.788]            [.526]

   Notes: Each column reports results from a separate regression. All specifications include course by phase fixed
   effects. Square brackets contain p-values from randomization-based inference using a counterfactual of
   randomly assigning treatment status within classrooms 500 times. *Significant at 10% level; **Significant at
   5% level; Significant at 1% level.

   *   Significant at the 10% level
   ** Significant at the 5% level
   *** Significant at the 1% level
                                                                                                                     




                                                         41
   Table 7: Pilot Replication Results
   Panel A. Test Score Outcomes
                        1                 2              3            4            5              6

                                                                                              Course
                    Midterm 1        Midterm 2        Midterm      Midterm     Exams 2-      Grade Post
   Outcome
                      (pct)            (pct)          3 (pct)      4 (pct)      4 (pct)       Exam 1
                                                                                               (pct)

                      0.008              0.049*        0.050        0.049         0.049*        0.044*
   Treatment
                     (0.031)           (0.029)        (0.031)      (0.037)      (0.027)        (0.026)
   Observations        138               138            138          138          138            138
   Control Mean       0.542             0.628          0.490        0.598        0.572          0.624


   Panel B. Homework and Grade Outcomes
                        1                 2              3            4            5              6

                    Homework                                                    Grade of
                                     Homework          Letter       Pass                     Grade of B
   Outcome            Score                                                       C or
                                    Time (min)         Grade       Course                     or higher
                      (pts)                                                      higher
                      1.264             7.975          0.163        0.021        0.082          0.129
   Treatment
                     (2.941)          (49.770)        (0.126)      (0.042)      (0.070)        (0.081)
 Observations           138                114            138          138            138        138
 Control Mean          70.143            440.690         2.097        0.890          0.643      0.271
Notes: Each cell represents the results from regressing the outcome listed on a treatment dummy variable.
All specifications control for midterm 1 score.
* Significant at the 10% level; **Significant at the 5% level; *** Significant at the 1% level.




                                                   42
Appendix A

   Table A1: Pilot Randomization Checks
   Variable                                                                 1           2
                                                                         -0.155       -0.091
   Male
                                                                         (0.173)     (0.173)
                                                                           0.058       0.05
   First Generation College Goer
                                                                         (0.166)     (0.169)
                                                                           0.153       0.081
   HS GPA
                                                                         (0.210)     (0.214)
                                                                          -0.227      -0.296
   Under-represented Minority
                                                                         (0.196)     (0.196)
                                                                            0.2        0.139
   CA Resident
                                                                         (0.244)     (0.243)
                                                                          -0.091      -0.162
   Entering Cohort==2012
                                                                         (0.252)     (0.249)
                                                                           0.083      -0.042
   Entering Cohort==2012
                                                                         (0.239)     (0.240)
   Observations                                                            53           53
   P-value: Joint Significance of all individual covariates              0.8905       0.8449
   Includes TA Fixed Effects                                               No          Yes

   Notes: * Significant at the 0.10 level, ** Significant at the 0.05 level, *** Significant
   at the 0.01 level. Each specification represents results for a regression where the
   dependent variable is an indicator for treatment status.




                                                       43
   Table A2: Professor Characteristics
                                                 Summary Stats              Selection Regressions
   Variable                                        (mean/std)         1         2          3           4
                                                      3.82          -0.12                            -0.07
   Rate My Professor Overall Difficulty Rating
                                                      (0.49)       (0.10)                            (0.10)
                                                       2.85         -0.07                             -0.06
   Rate My Professor Overall Rating
                                                      (0.60)       (0.09)                            (0.09)
                                                      0.38                                           0.17
   Full Professor                                                            0.24**
                                                      (0.49)                 (0.11)                  (0.11)
                                                       0.11                   0.14                    0.12
   Associate Professor
                                                      (0.32)                 (0.17)                  (0.17)
                                                       0.08                   0.17                    0.33
   Assistant Professor
                                                      (0.27)                 (0.20)                  (0.21)
                                                      0.35                                 0.18*
   Female                                                                                            0.20*
                                                      (0.48)                             (0.10)      (0.11)
                                                      0.06
   Black                                                                                0.51**      0.49**
                                                      (0.23)                            (0.21)      (0.22)
                                                      0.12
   Asian                                                                                0.45***     0.37**
                                                      (0.33)                             (0.15)     (0.16)
                                                       0.07                               0.28       0.24
   Latino
                                                      (0.25)                             (0.20)     (0.21)
   Observations                                         89           88        89           89          88
 P-value: Joint Significance covariates                 NA          0.481    0.232        0.004       0.024
Table Notes: * Significant at the 10% level; ** Significant at the 5% level;*** Significant at the 1% level.
Each specification represents results for a regression where the dependent variable is an indicator for
participating in the experiment.




                                                     44
   Table A3: Courses in Scale-up
   Accountancy 1
   Art 1B
   Art 3B
   Astronomy 4A
   Astronomy 4B
   Biology 22
   Chemistry 1A (2 courses)
   Criminal Justice 1
   Criminal Justice 5
   Economics 1B
   Engineering 45 (3 courses)
   English 50B
   Ethnic Studies 11
   Family and Consumer Sciences 10
   Geology 7 (2 courses)
   Health Science 50
   History 5
   History 7
   History 17B
   History 50
   History 51
   Math 24 (3 courses)
   Music 8
   Music 18
   Philosophy 4 (2 courses)
   Psychology 2 (3 courses)




                                     45
   Table A4: Scale-up Randomization Checks
   Specification                1             2          3
                                All
                             Students     Phase 1     Phase 2
                                 0.04*        0.05*      0.02
   Female
                              (0.02)       (0.02)      (0.04)
                               -0.01        -0.02        0.01
   White
                              (0.03)       (0.04)      (0.04)
                                0.01         0.03       -0.02
   Asian
                              (0.02)       (0.04)      (0.03)
                               -0.03        -0.01       -0.06
   Black
                              (0.03)       (0.04)      (0.04)
                                0.02         0.03        0.00
   Latino
                              (0.02)       (0.03)      (0.02)
                                0.02         0.01        0.03
   High School GPA
                              (0.02)       (0.03)      (0.03)
                                0.03        -0.05        0.13
   Freshman
                              (0.10)       (0.15)      (0.15)
                                0.00        -0.04        0.03
   Sophomore
                              (0.08)       (0.10)      (0.13)
                                0.00        -0.06        0.08
   Junior
                              (0.07)       (0.06)      (0.15)
                                -0.03*      -0.01       -0.07**
   College GPA
                              (0.02)       (0.02)      (0.03)
                                0.05       (0.05)        0.15
   Total College Units
                              (0.12)       (0.17)      (0.20)
   Observations               3,922        2,350       1,572




                                         46
   Table A5: Survey Response Checks

   Specification            1          2             3
                           All
                         Students    Phase 1       Phase 2
                           0.02        0.02          0.01
   Treatment
                          (0.02)      (0.02)        (0.02)

   Female                  0.08***   0.09***       0.08***
                          (0.01)      (0.01)        (0.02)
                           0.03        0.01           0.06
   White
                          (0.02)      (0.03)        (0.04)
                           0.05**      0.05**         0.05
   Asian
                          (0.02)      (0.02)        (0.04)
                           0.00        0.01          -0.01
   Black
                          (0.02)      (0.03)        (0.04)
                           0.02        0.01           0.03
   Latino
                          (0.02)      (0.03)        (0.04)

   High School GPA         0.05***    0.00         0.11***
                          (0.02)     (0.01)         (0.02)
                           0.08       0.09           0.09
   Freshman
                          (0.07)     (0.09)         (0.13)
                           0.08       0.09           0.08
   Sophomore
                          (0.06)     (0.06)         (0.11)
                           0.04       0.03           0.05
   Junior
                          (0.03)     (0.04)         (0.04)

   College GPA             0.07***   0.06***       0.09***
                          (0.01)      (0.01)        (0.02)
                           0.01        0.03          0.02
   Total College Units
                          (0.07)      (0.09)        (0.13)
   Observations           3,922       2,350         1,572




                                              47
Table A6-Panel A: Scale-up Results for Latino/Black Students (with controls)
Specification                            1            2             3            4              5                6              7              8               9             10

                                                                                                                                          How much
                                                                                                                                        do you believe   How well did
                                                                                                                         How useful           the        the instructor
                                                                                               How            How          was the        instructor          keep
                                                  % Points                                approachable available was instructor's        cared about     you informed
                                                 Earned after                                was the     the instructor feedback in          your          about your
                                                    First                                  instructor in   outside of   helping you     success in the      progress      Dropped      N (Grades)
Outcome                               Grade       Feedback       Passed       A or B          class?         class?        learn?           class?        in the class?   Course       N (Survey)
Treatment Effects for Black/Latino Students
                                       0.08           0.03**       0.02        0.04*            0.27*           0.22*         0.17           0.35***         0.35***       -0.01           1,619
All Latino/Black
                                      [.116]        [.062]        [.378]       [.054]         [.088]           [.06]         [.272]          [.004]          [.002]        [.164]            403
                                      0.12*          0.00          0.03          0.06*         0.36**           0.29*         0.18           0.45***          0.45**        0.00             938
   Female
                                      [.046]        [.862]        [.274]       [.066]         [.048]          [.056]         [.422]          [.002]          [.014]        [.994]            271
                                       -0.02         0.06**        -0.02        -0.01          0.20            0.02           0.16            0.31          0.48**         -0.02*            681
   Male
                                      [.858]        [.040]        [.630]       [.934]         [.288]          [.898]         [.368]          [.160]         [.040]         [.068]            132
                                       0.25***       0.03           0.07*        0.08*         0.39**          0.32**        0.38***          0.54* *        0.62***       -0.02             710
   Freshman
                                      [.006]        [.166]        [.084]       [.056]         [.036]          [.012]         [.010]          [.028]          [.008]        [.198]            180
                                       -0.03         0.04          -0.02        0.01           0.20            0.18           0.07           0.25*            0.19         -0.01             909
   Upperclass
                                      [.718]        [.144]        [.458]       [.848]         [.386]          [.304]         [.732]          [.078]          [.166]        [.418]            223
                                       0.24**        0.01          0.08         0.06           0.53**          0.45***        0.45**         0.74***         0.67***        0.01             435
   Freshman Female
                                      [.034]        [.800]        [.142]       [.242]         [.016]          [.010]         [.030]          [.002]          [.008]        [.536]            127
                                       0.25          0.08          0.06         0.10           0.40            0.18           0.30           0.42            0.72          -0.05*            275
   Freshman Male
                                      [.110]        [.138]        [.226]       [.132]         [.414]          [.666]         [.476]          [.426]          [.148]        [.07]              53
                                       0.38***       0.05          0.12**        0.11*        0.51**          0.47**          0.20           0.49            0.49          -0.02             402
   Freshman w/Low HS GPA
                                      [.002]        [.144]        [.028]       [.062]         [.022]          [.016]         [.392]          [.160]          [.124]        [.172]             94
                                       0.09          0.01          0.00         0.04           0.43            0.26           0.64**          0.86***        0.87***        0.00             308
   Freshman w/High HS GPA
                                      [.466]        [.694]        [.966]       [.486]         [.124]          [.244]         [.042]          [.002]          [.008]        [.844]             86
Notes: Each column reports results from a separate regression. All specifications include course by phase fixed effects. Square brackets contain p-values from randomization-based
inference using a counterfactual of randomly assigning treatment status within classrooms 500 times. *Significant at the 10% level; **Significant at the 5% level; ***Significant at
the 1% level.
* Significant at the 10% level
** Significant at the 5% level
*** Significant at the 1% level




                                                                                              48
Table A6-Panel B: Scale-up Results for Non-Latino/Black Students (with controls)
Specification                            1             2            3            4              5                6              7              8               9             10

                                                                                                                                          How much
                                                                                                                                        do you believe   How well did
                                                                                                                         How useful           the        the instructor
                                                                                               How            How          was the        instructor          keep
                                                   % Points                               approachable available was instructor's        cared about     you informed
                                                  Earned after                               was the     the instructor feedback in          your          about your
                                                     First                                 instructor in   outside of   helping you     success in the      progress      Dropped      N (Grades)
Outcome                               Grade        Feedback      Passed       A or B          class?         class?        learn?           class?        in the class?   Course       N (Survey)
Treatment Effects for non-Black/Latino Students
                                       0.00           0.00         0.01         0.00            0.23**         0.17**         0.12           0.23***       0.23***          0.00           2,110
All non-Black/Latino
                                      [.894]         [.792]       [.406]       [.778]         [.014]          [.042]         [.190]          [.008]         [.002]         [.788]            609
                                       0.03           -0.02        0.01         0.01           0.35***         0.24**        0.18*           0.31***         0.28***        0.01           1,100
   Female
                                      [.576]         [.220]       [.608]       [.662]         [.002]          [.012]         [.076]          [.008]          [.008]        [.440]            374
                                       -0.03          0.02         0.01         -0.02          0.12            0.14           -0.02           0.24           0.26*         -0.01           1,010
   Male
                                      [.570]         [.354]       [.598]       [.358]         [.294]          [.314]         [.894]          [.232]          [.056]        [.216]            235
                                       0.03           0.00         0.02         0.00            0.29**         0.15            0.25*          0.29**          0.50***       0.00             802
   Freshman
                                      [.602]         [.968]       [.468]       [.950]         [.018]          [.198]         [.062]          [.034]          [.002]        [.900]            223
                                       0.00           0.00         0.01         0.00          0.22*            0.15           0.06           0.23*            0.09          0.00           1,308
   Upperclass
                                      [.914]         [.792]       [.438]       [.990]         [.060]          [.246]         [.610]          [.074]          [.314]        [.926]            386
                                      0.16*           0.01          0.06*       0.05           0.39**          0.26           0.29            0.25            0.53**        0.02             433
   Freshman Female
                                      [.092]         [.662]       [.072]       [.120]         [.026]          [.130]         [.118]          [.150]          [.014]        [.124]            152
                                       -0.11          -0.01        -0.04        -0.05          0.22           -0.09           -0.15            0.62**         0.34         -0.03*            369
   Freshman Male
                                      [.308]         [.700]       [.278]       [.266]         [.346]          [.720]         [.536]          [.012]          [.348]        [.080]             71
                                       0.02           0.02          0.07*       -0.08          0.55**         0.39*          0.40*             0.48*          0.63**        0.00             366
   Freshman Low GPA (HS)
                                      [.846]         [.596]       [.074]       [.104]         [.044]          [.092]         [.094]          [.066]          [.042]        [.844]             87
                                       0.00           0.00         -0.03        0.05           0.10            0.03           0.16            0.18             0.41*        0.00             436
   Freshman High GPA (HS)
                                      [.958]         [.882]       [.284]       [.174]         [.486]          [.848]         [.342]          [.312]          [.054]        [.830]            136
Notes: Each column reports results from a separate regression. All specifications include course by phase fixed effects. Square brackets contain p-values from randomization-based
inference using a counterfactual of randomly assigning treatment status within classrooms 500 times. *Significant at the 10% level; **Significant at the 5% level; ***Significant at
the 1% level.
* Significant at the 10% level
** Significant at the 5% level
*** Significant at the 1% level




                                                                                              49
Appendix B--Research Protocols


Recruitment Letter

Dear [Faculty member's first and last name]:

We are pleased to invite you to participate in an exciting opportunity on our campus. Recently,
our Center for College & Career Readiness (CCR) was awarded a grant from the College Futures
Foundation to explore innovations to improve college persistence and completion. As a result
of this funding, the Center, in partnership with collaborators from University of California Davis,
is continuing their work on an exciting faculty-based project. The project aims to carry out a
"light-touch" intervention where faculty provide students with a few structured individualized
emails about their progress in the course throughout the term.

The Co-PIs for the project are XXX, Director of the Center for College & Career Readiness and
Professors Michal Kurlaender and Scott Carrell from University of California Davis. Based on
initial review of classes, the Co-PIs have determined that your course (Class Number  Course
Title), scheduled for fall semester, meets the criteria for inclusion in the project. Participation in
the study is voluntary, but faculty who participate will be compensated for their time at a rate of
$500 for the term.

Please let us know if you are interested in participating by replying all to this email or by
contacting XXX directly using the contact information below. We will schedule a follow up
phone call with you to share additional details and to answer questions you may have.
[INSERT CONTACT INFO]

In keeping with the goals of our campus Strategic Plan, we are eager to find promising
innovations to provide support to our students, and to increase our persistence and degree
completion rates. We believe supporting all of our students through degree completion
demands new innovations across our campus, and this effort to increase information about
college success at the most micro level  the faculty member in the classroom  has great
promise. We look forward to your participation.

Sincerely,
XXX                                                        XXX
Provost & Vice President for Academic Affairs              Dean of Undergraduate Studies




                                                 50
FAQs with Participating Faculty

How are students chosen for additional email correspondence (the intervention) from faculty?
As required by our grant funding, the research team will randomly select students to receive the
correspondence. The random selection methods differ based on the class size. For smaller
classes with multiple sections taught by the same professor, we will randomly select one section
where all students receive the correspondence. The second section will serve as the control
group where no students will receive the correspondence. For large courses, we will randomly
select a subset of students within the course to receive the correspondence. Randomization of
students will enable us to determine whether the intervention has meaningful effects on
student outcomes. Faculty will be notified which sections or students are to receive
correspondence (treatment group) or not receive the additional correspondence (control
group).

How many students will receive the intervention?
For small classes, all students will receive the correspondence. For large courses, no more than
70 students will be randomly selected to receive the emails.

How will you assess the outcome of the intervention?
Because the intervention is randomly assigned, we will compare outcomes of students who
receive the correspondence to those who do not receive the additional emails.

How will student progress/performance be measured?
We will measure both short-run and medium-run outcomes. Short-run outcomes include
completion of the course and course grade. The medium-run outcomes we plan to investigate
include persistence into the subsequent term(s), and entry or persistence into specific college
majors.

How many emails do you expect faculty to send during the semester as part of this program?
We request a minimum of three emails per student throughout the semester: 1) after the first
assignment, 2) midway through the term, ideally after the first exam, and 3) end of the term.

Will the emails be structured by the researchers or faculty? Will faculty be able to tailor each
message to each individual student?
Emails will be sent by the course instructor to students in the treatment group. Research
assistance will be provided to work with faculty on email content that is tailored to specific
course structure and instructor style. Below are examples:

Example of Email 1 from professor to student after submission of first assignment/exam
STUDENT PROFILE 1 (DID NOT TURN IN FIRST ASSIGNMENT)
Dear [Student Name],
I see you didn't turn in HW#1; although you only have to submit 5 out of the 7 homework assignments for
full credit, the material in every homework is important for doing well in this class. I want to emphasize
that doing well in this class requires coming to class regularly, completing the homework assignments,
and seeking help when the concepts are unclear. To remind you, my office hours are: Monday and
Wednesday 3:15 - 4:15 pm. Please feel free to come see your TA or me if you have any questions.
Sincerely, Professor X




                                                   51
STUDENT PROFILE 2 (TURNED IN FIRST ASSIGNMENT)
Dear [Student Name],
I noticed you did well [struggled with] on HW#1. Keep up the good work [Please make sure you] by
coming to class regularly, completing future homework assignments, and seeking help when the concepts
are unclear. To remind you, my office hours are: Monday and Wednesday 3:15 - 4:15 pm. Please feel free
to come see your TA or me if you have any questions.
Sincerely, Professor X

Example of Email 2:
STUDENT PROFILE 1 (< C ACCEPTABLE PERFORMANCE)
Dear [Student Name],
We are approaching the mid point in the semester. I am concerned that based on your performance on
the [Fill-in: Midterm, quiz, homework/?] you may be struggling in this course. However, don't be
discouraged, there is still plenty of time to recover. To do well in the upcoming [Fill-in Final, next
assignment, HW, ??] I encourage you to [fill-in: come to class regularly, review lecture notes, go to office
hours].
Sincerely,
Professor X

STUDENT PROFILE 2 (B/ C PERFORMANCE)
Dear [Student Name],
We are approaching the mid point in the semester. You've done well so far on [Fill-in: Midterm, quiz,
homework/?]. To strengthen your grade in the course and do well in the upcoming [Fill-in Final, next
assignment, HW, ??], I want to encourage you to [fill-in: come to class regularly, review lecture notes, go
to office hours].
Sincerely,
Professor X

STUDENT PROFILE 3 (B+ OR HIGHER PERFORMANCE)
Dear [Student Name],
We are approaching the mid point in the semester. You've done very well so far on [Fill-in: Midterm, quiz,
homework/?]. To keep up your grade and do well in the upcoming [Fill-in Final, next assignment, HW, ??],
I encourage you to [fill-in: come to class regularly, review lecture notes, go to office hours].
Sincerely,
Professor X

Email 3:
This will be structured as E-mail 2 with a focus on passing the course for students in the <C group.

What will I tell a student who didn't receive an email (but may be aware that their peer did)
and inquires as to why?
If a student inquires about why they did not receive correspondence from you, please indicate
that you are randomly emailing students regarding their performance in the course. Then
proceed to advise the student as you usually would. Please make note of this if it occurs, as it
will be tracked by the research team.

What else is required for participation?
We would like you to forward students' responses to the emails (if they occur). We would also
appreciate access to your course grade book, any records of office hour attendance, and any
other communication/interactions that may occur. We will also request your participation in a
short survey at the end of the term.



                                                     52
