                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          PROGRAM RECERTIFICATION COSTS:
                               EVIDENCE FROM SNAP

                                      Tatiana Homonoff
                                      Jason Somerville

                                      Working Paper 27311
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27311


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2020




We gratefully acknowledge Manasi Deshpande, Peter Ganong, Jacob Goldin, Colin Gray, Doug
Miller, Matt Notowidigdo, Ted O'Donoghue, Zhuan Pei, and Matt Unrath as well as conference
and seminar participants at UC-Berkeley, Yale, Vanderbilt, Georgia State, UVA-Batten, Hunter-
CUNY, NYU, Cornell, NBER-Public Economics, IRP-SRW, AEA, APPAM, and UPenn-CHIBE
for conversations and suggestions that have greatly improved the quality of this project. We
especially thank Peri Weisberg for providing data and guidance on policies and practices along
with Mark Woo, Noelle Simmons, Dan Kelly, Taninha Ferreira, Yakob Kflom, Priscilla Prado,
James Choi, Alan Geist at the San Francisco Human Services Agency and the California
Department of Social Services as well as Nate Higgins and Rurui Kuang from the Social and
Behavioral Sciences Team. All remaining errors are our own. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Tatiana Homonoff and Jason Somerville. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Program Recertification Costs: Evidence from SNAP
Tatiana Homonoff and Jason Somerville
NBER Working Paper No. 27311
June 2020
JEL No. H53,I14,I38

                                          ABSTRACT

Recipients of means-tested program benefits must periodically document continued eligibility
through a recertification process. We find evidence that the administrative burden associated with
SNAP recertification leads to decreases in program participation. Cases assigned to later
recertification interview dates, which leave less time to reschedule missed interviews, are over 20
percent less likely to recertify than cases assigned to interviews earlier in the month. Cases that
fail recertification due to later assignments lose an average of $600 in benefits in the following
year. These losses are highly skewed: many cases quickly re-enroll, while one quarter remain off
SNAP for over a year post-recertification.


Tatiana Homonoff
New York University
Robert F. Wagner School of Public Service
295 Lafayette Street, 2nd Floor
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
tatiana.homonoff@nyu.edu

Jason Somerville
Cornell University
Department of Economics
Uris Hall, Room 457
Ithaca, NY 14853
js2946@cornell.edu
    Researchers have documented incomplete take-up across a wide variety of social pro-


grams, often citing under-awareness of program availability, unfamiliarity with eligibility


rules, or other application costs as barriers to take-up (Madrian and Shea, 2001; Chetty,

                                                                                                          1
Friedman and Saez, 2013; Bhargava and Manoli, 2015; Finkelstein and Notowidigdo, 2019).


In addition to these initial costs of enrollment, recipients of means-tested program benets


must document continued eligibility through a periodic recertication process. For example,


the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) requires that recipients submit in-


come verication and complete a caseworker interview at least once per year to maintain


program access. Cases that miss the recertication deadline by even one day are terminated


from the program.


    A substantial fraction of cases fail to recertify for SNAP  in San Francisco, for example,


over half of active SNAP cases fail recertication. One possible explanation for this nding


is that the majority of cases are no longer eligible, underlining the importance of the recerti-


cation process in ensuring program integrity. However, half of these recertication failures


re-enter the program within the following months, many within less than a month, evidence


consistent with the possibility that many cases fail recertication due to administrative bur-


den associated with the recertication process rather than due to ineligibility.


    This paper examines the eect of one of the components of the recertication process


 the timing of the recertication interview assignment  to determine its eect on recerti-


cation success and subsequent program participation. To successfully recertify for SNAP,


recipients must complete a recertication interview by the end of the calendar month in


which their certication period ends. In San Francisco, program administrators assign each


case an initial interview date that is included in an appointment letter in their recertication


packet.   Specically, these initial interview dates are          randomly assigned      across cases and


staggered throughout the month to smooth caseworker workloads. Recipients may resched-

   1A  related literature in the eld of public administration demonstrates several instances in which admin-
istrative burden, conceptualized as a combination of learning, psychological, and compliance costs associ-
ated with interactions with government programs, impacts program participation (Heinrich, 2015; Herd and
Moynihan, 2019).

                                                     2
ule their interview for any point during the month, however, all recipients must complete


the recertication process by the end of the calendar month regardless of the timing of the


initial interview assignment.   This means that recipients who are assigned a date at the


start of the calendar month have more than four weeks to complete their recertication re-


quirements post-interview assignment (such as rescheduling a missed interview or compiling


income documentation), while others have as little as a few days.


   To estimate the eect of interview assignment, we analyze unique administrative data


from the San Francisco Human Services Agency (SF-HSA) on the universe of the county's


roughly 40,000 SNAP recertication cases from November 2014 to November 2016. The data


contain information on recertication date, both initial and rescheduled interviews, recerti-


cation outcome, and subsequent reapplications for cases that fail to recertify.     This data


allows us to examine how the timing of the administrative process aects both recertication


and subsequent participation by comparing outcomes for those who were randomly assigned


to early versus late initial interview dates.


   We nd that the initial interview assignment has a large and signicant impact on recer-


tication success: a case assigned to an interview at the end of the recertication month is


11 percentage points less likely to recertify than a case assigned to an interview at the start


of the month, a 22 percent decrease.     We nd evidence that suggests that administrative


burden associated with the recertication process not only decreases recertication success,


but longer-term program participation as well. Specically. we nd that cases with inter-


view assignments at the end of the month are 3 percentage points less likely to participate in


SNAP at any point in the year following recertication. We estimate that the marginal case


that fails recertication due to later interview assignment loses an average of almost $600 in


SNAP benets in the year following recertication.


   Estimates of average benet losses mask substantial heterogeneity across these marginal


recertication failures:   25 percent of cases that fail recertication due to later interview


assignment remain o the program for at least one full year post-recertication, while the




                                                3
remaining 75 percent of cases re-enter the program shortly after being discontinued. This


suggests that while the majority of cases may miss as little as a week of benets, a quarter


of these marginal failures lose over a year of benets (up to roughly $2,000 per person).


However, program churn, recertication failure followed by subsequent re-enrollment, is not


without its own costs: administrative expenses associated with cases that churn are up to


twice as large as for cases that successfully recertify (Mills et al., 2014).   This highlights


important dierences in the distribution of costs associated with recertication failure de-


pending on the post-recertication outcome. Cases that remain o the program long-term


suer large private costs in the form of missed benets, but create no additional costs to


program administrators. In contrast, cases that churn experience smaller private costs, but


generate large administrative costs.


   We provide evidence to suggest that under-awareness, coupled with diculty in reschedul-


ing missed appointments, may explain a substantial portion of the relationship between in-


terview assignment and recertication. We nd that cases with later interview assignments,


which have less time to reschedule a missed appointment before the recertication deadline,


are 7 percentage points less likely to complete an interview. However, we nd no relationship


between interview assignment and completion of the rst attempted interview, suggesting


that some cases may be inattentive to or unaware of their interview assignment. Consistent


with this interpretation, we nd evidence that additional early alerts (such as missed inter-


view voicemails or text communications) may partially mitigate the negative eects of late


interviews. These ndings suggest that improved communication strategies on the part of


program administrators may prevent eligible cases from losing program access.


   Our results contribute to a growing literature detailing instances in which administra-


tive hassles lead to low rates of initial program enrollment.    Several recent interventions


demonstrate that informing likely eligible individuals about program availability leads to


signicant increases in enrollment (Armour, 2018; Barr and Turner, 2018; Bhargava and


Manoli, 2015). Other work shows that automatic enrollment, pre-population of application




                                              4
forms, and other types of application assistance lead to higher enrollment across a variety


of programs (Madrian and Shea, 2001; Bettinger et al., 2012; Finkelstein and Notowidigdo,


2019). Conversely, increased application costs associated with local program oce closures


lead to signicant decreases in program applications (Rossin-Slater, 2013; Deshpande and


Li, 2019).


   The requirements associated with initial application and recertication are often quite


similar, however, there are several reasons to believe that barriers to program participation


dier across the two stages. First, awareness of a program's availability is a key issue for


program enrollment, but not for recertication. Second, individuals who have already applied


for a program at least once are likely to have a better understanding of their eligibility than


rst time enrollees.     Lastly, current participants have demonstrated a past preference for


participation, while eligible but unenrolled individuals may have purposely chosen not to


participate in the program for a variety of reasons such as stigma (Mott, 1983; Currie


and Grogger, 2001). Our ndings contribute to a small, but growing literature on program


recertication that shows that reminders (Castleman and Page, 2016) and exibility in the


recertication process, such as phone interviews or online case management (Ganong and

                                                                                2
Liebman, 2018; Gray, 2019), can lead to higher rates of participation.


   Our results also contribute to a literature examining the relationship between hassle


costs associated with program participation and targeting eciency. While standard models


suggest that application costs improve targeting eciency (Nichols and Zeckhauser, 1982),


alternative models suggest that these costs can worsen targeting eciency (Deshpande and


Li, 2019).   We estimate the eect of interview assignment on recertication and program


participation by benet level and nd results consistent with a model in which administrative


burden in the form of later interview assignments worsens targeting eciency. These ndings


are in line with several prior empirical ndings on heterogeneity in response to barriers to

   2A related literature shows that shorter certication periods are associated with lower SNAP enrollment
(Currie and Grogger, 2001; Kabbani and Wilde, 2003; Ribar, Edelhoch and Liu, 2008; Ganong and Liebman,
2018). In a slightly dierent context, Hastings and Shapiro (2018) use these certication periods as an
exogenous source of variation in timing of exit from the SNAP program.

                                                   5
program take-up (Currie and Grogger, 2001; Bhargava and Manoli, 2015; Deshpande and Li,


2019), while standing in contrast to others (Alatas et al., 2016; Finkelstein and Notowidigdo,


2019).


    This paper is organized as follows.          Section I reviews the institutional background on


SNAP recertication. Section II describes the recertication and interview assignment pro-


cess. Section III describes the data sources used in the empirical analysis. Section IV presents


descriptive statistics. Section V estimates of the impact of initial interview date assignment


on recertication and program participation. Section VI describes the welfare implications.


Section VII discusses possible mechanisms.              Section VIII examines the eect on targeting


eciency. Section IX concludes.




I. Institutional Background

The Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) is the largest nutritional assistance


program in the United States, serving over 42 million individuals at an annual cost of $69


billion (CBO, 2018). The program provides monthly food vouchers to low-income households


via Electronic Benets Transfer (EBT) cards with an average monthly benet of $126 per


person. The program is federally funded but administered by the states who are responsible


for determining eligibility and distributing benets.


    SNAP is a means-tested program meaning that all recipients are subject to income eligi-

                                                    3
bility requirements determined by the state.            To ensure that individuals receiving SNAP are


eligible for program benets, recipients must complete a recertication process at the end of


each certication period. Certication periods are typically between six and twelve months

   3 In California, for example, eligibility requirements are based on two income tests: gross household income
must be below 200% of the federal poverty line (FPL) and net income must be below 100% FPL. However,
many households are only subject to the gross income test including those with only 1-2 members (85 percent
of our sample) or recipients of other means-tested programs such as Temporary Assistance for Needy Families
(TANF). Additionally, individuals between the ages of 18 to 49 who are unemployed but not disabled and
who do not have any dependent children (Able-Bodied Adults Without Dependents or ABAWDs), are limited
to three months of eligibility in any given 36-month period or subject to work requirements. Importantly
for this paper, all counties in California operated under a waiver of the ABAWD work requirements for the
duration of our study period.


                                                        6
                                                                                       4
long, though the exact length varies by state and household composition.


    To successfully recertify, cases must complete the following three steps in any order by


the end of the certication period.          First, cases must ll out and submit a recertication


application. This form elicits detailed information on household composition, income, and


expenses to determine eligibility and benet amount. Second, cases must submit documents


(e.g., pay stubs) to verify income and other household circumstances described in the re-


certication application. Finally, cases must complete a scheduled interview with a SNAP


caseworker, either in-person or over the phone. These interviews do not entail a determi-


nation of eligibility, but rather are intended to assist the recipient with the recertication


process, for example, by clarifying documents required for income verication or helping to


complete the recertication forms. At the same time, completion of a caseworker interview


at least once every 12 months is a federal requirement for SNAP recertication  eligible


cases that do not complete the interview cannot successfully recertify.


    Cases that fail recertication, either due to ineligibility or by not completing one of


the steps of the recertication process, are terminated from the program at the end of the


certication period.      Discontinued cases may reapply for the program by initiating a new


application (rather than the streamlined recertication process). Importantly, enrollment is


not retroactive for these cases: benets are prorated from the time the case is discontinued


until the date that the new application is successfully processed and may be received with a


delay. This suggests that even short exit spells could result in substantial benet losses; for


example, a household of four could lose up to $150 in benets in just one week.




II. CalFresh Recertication and Interview Assignment Process

CalFresh, California's SNAP program, served over two million households at an annual cost


of seven billion dollars in 2016. California has one of the lowest SNAP take-up rates in the

   4 Forexample, households in which all residents are either elderly or disabled may receive a longer certi-
cation period of up to 24 months, though the state agency must have contact with the household at least
once every twelve months. Conversely, households determined to be likely to become ineligible in the near
future may be assigned to certication periods as short as one month.

                                                     7
country at 72 percent (Cunnyngham, 2019) while at the same time, California is the second


most administratively costly SNAP agency in the country. Annual certication-related state


administrative expenses, which account for 76 percent of all expenses nationally, are over


$600 per case in California, more than twice the national average (Geller and Isaacs, 2019).

                                                                                                               5
    The majority of CalFresh recipients must recertify for the program every twelve months.


To understand the timing of the recertication process, consider a case whose certication


period ends in June 2016. All certication periods end on the last day of the calendar month,


so in our example, recertication must be completed by June 30, 2016. The recertication


process begins with a Notice of Expiration of Certication which is generated and sent to all


cases 45 days before the end of the certication period, on May 15, 2016 in our example. This


notice alerts cases that the end of their certication period is approaching, briey details the


recertication process, and informs them that they will be receiving a detailed recertication


packet and interview assignment in the mail (See Appendix Figure 1 for an example of this


form and other forms used in the recertication process). Cases that have opted in to receive


text updates, roughly one quarter of all cases in our sample, also receive a communication


within the next few days informing them that their certication period is ending.


    Case workers then assign each case an initial interview date to take place within the rst


four weeks of June. Around the third week of May, case workers send out the Recertication,

                                                           6
Reauthorization, and Renewal (RRR) packets.                    These packets contain the recertication


form (CF-37), an interview appointment letter, and several other unrelated forms such as


voter registration forms. Cases are asked provide detailed information on the income and


expenses for all household members, along with income verication, for the calendar month


prior to the end of the certication period (May 2016 in our example).

    5 Additionally, most households in California must complete a shorter semi-annual report called the SAR-7.
Unlike the annual recertication, this interim reporting requirement does not include a caseworker interview,
hence we focus only on annual recertication cases in this paper.
    6 The vast majority of packets are sent within the week following the Notice of Expiration of Certication.
While the range of possible send dates is not large, we nd that cases with interview assignments received
their packet an average of 2.5 days earlier than those with later dates (see Appendix Figure 2 for a distribution
of sent dates for cases with early versus late interviews). We address this in Section V.


                                                       8
    The appointment letter contains information on the initial interview date assignment


and the interview time. Cases that provided a phone number on the initial application or


subsequent case updates are assigned phone interviews; all other cases are assigned an in-

                                                   7
person interview at the local SNAP oce.                The letter also provides information on how


to reschedule the interview if the recipient has a conict. Recipients may reschedule their


interview or complete an on-demand walk-in interview at the SNAP oces at any time during


the recertication month. If a recipient misses the scheduled interview, the case receives a


notice of missed interview and, if a phone number was provided, a voicemail instructing


them to contact a case worker to reschedule their interview. All cases that place a request


to reschedule before the end of the certication period are granted a new interview, even on


the last day of the recertication month.


    In San Francisco, the county in which our study takes place, program administrators as-


sign interviews throughout the recertication month, staggering them to smooth caseworker


workload. The interview assignment process is as follows. Caseworkers are given the full list


of cases whose certication period ends in the following month. These cases are grouped by


case language and appointment type (phone or in-person). Cases are sorted within group


by Case ID number and, subsequently, the list of available interview dates is repeatedly ap-

                                                                                        8
pended to the case list until all cases are assigned an initial interview date.             For example, if


there are 20 possible interview dates for Spanish language phone interviews in the month of


June 2016, cases 1, 21, and 41 would be assigned to the rst interview date, cases 2, 22, and


42 would be assigned to the second interview date, and so on. As a result, this assignment


process produces as-good-as-random assignment of each case to its initial interview date


conditional on month by case language by interview type (the assignment group).

   7 The San Francisco SNAP oce oers interviews in six languages: English, Spanish, Chinese (Cantonese
and Mandarin), Vietnamese, Tagalog, and Russian. Unsupported languages are served by sta without
multilingual skills, using external translation services.
   8 The list of available interview dates excludes weekends, holidays, and the last two days of the calendar
month with fewer interviews scheduled on the rst day of the month to address increased call volumes
associated with discontinuation of benets. In-person interviews do not meet on Fridays. Lastly, the list
adjusts for non-major language (Vietnamese, Tagalog, and Russian) caseworker availability.


                                                       9
    Figure 1 presents a graph of the distribution of initial interview dates for the recerti-


cation cases in our study population (described in Section III). The distribution is approx-


imately uniform across the rst three weeks of the month with fewer interviews scheduled


after the 23rd of the month. This is largely due to the fact that interviews were not scheduled


after the 24th during the rst few months of our study period, but also partly due to a larger


number of holidays falling at the end of the calendar month.


    Regardless of when a case's initial interview is scheduled, all cases must complete the re-


certication process by the last day of the calendar month of their certication period. While


interviews can be rescheduled for any time within the recertication month, only 6 percent


of cases reschedule their interview prior to the randomly assigned interview date. Therefore,


most cases that are assigned an initial interview date at the beginning of the month have


over four weeks post-interview to complete the process  for example, to reschedule a missed


interview, x errors in the recertication application, or gather valid income verication 


while cases that are assigned an interview at the end of the month may only have a few days.




III. Data

Our data contain the universe of SNAP cases in San Francisco County scheduled for re-


certication between November 2014 and November 2016 provided by the San Francisco

                                         9
Human Services Agency (SF-HSA).              The data include the case's recertication month, the


date the recertication packet was sent, and an indicator for whether the case recertied


or was discontinued from the program. We then combine this data with information on all


interviews scheduled with the SNAP oce, including interviews assigned by the SNAP oce


as well as interviews that were rescheduled by the program participant.                Importantly, the


data also include the date on which the appointment was created, allowing us to determine


the initially assigned interview date. The data include the date and time of all scheduled

   9 We focus on cases that are current SNAP recipients but that are not currently receiving TANF, as the
recertication interview assignment process diers for those cases in order to better align the recertication
process for the two programs.


                                                    10
interviews and whether the interview was successfully completed. We also obtain data on


all walk-in appointments, as cases can complete an on-demand interview by visiting a SNAP


oce. Records on the submission of recertication forms and verication documents, such


as income verication documents were not available.


    We exclude recertication cases that were inconsistent with administrative guidelines


for scheduling interviews.      First, we exclude cases that were sent a recertication packet

                                                          10
but were not assigned a caseworker interview.                  Next, we drop cases in which the rst


interview was assigned in the recertication month or before the 13th of the month prior to


the recertication month as these interviews are typically scheduled around the 15th of the


month prior to recertication and deviations from this schedule suggest that the interview


assignment may not have followed the typical assignment process; for similar reasons, we


also exclude the small number of cases whose interviews were scheduled to take place less


than seven days after the recertication packets were sent.


    We make two additional sample restrictions. Caseworkers are matched to recipients based


on their ability to conduct interviews in the recipient's language. While the interview assign-


ment process for cases speaking non-major languages (Russian, Tagalog, and Vietnamese)


generally follows the process described in Section II, assignment is constrained by the avail-


ability of sta who speak these languages.            As a result, we drop the roughly 3 percent of


cases that were conducted in one of the three non-major case languages. Finally, conversa-


tions with sta suggest that caseworkers experience particularly heavy call volumes on the


rst day the calendar month, the day on which benets to recipients who fail recertication


are discontinued. To avoid potential interactions with increased workload on this date, we


exclude cases assigned to interview dates on the rst of the month, though our results are


robust to including these cases. This leaves us with a nal sample of 39,702 recertication


events across 30,420 unique cases.

  10 The majority of these (roughly 1,800) cases occurred during the rst six months of our sample period
during a time when recertication interviews were waived for cases in which all adults are elderly or disabled
without income.



                                                     11
   To examine the eect of initial interview assignment on post-recertication outcomes,


we merge our sample to data on all subsequent SNAP applications through October 2017.


This data allows us to follow the recertication cases in our sample for a year after the end


of their certication period. From this data, we are able to determine whether a case that


failed recertication rejoined the program within the following months (i.e., churned), or if


the recertication process resulted in a longer-term discontinuance from the program.


   We then link identiers for all individuals associated with a recertication case to admin-


istrative data from the Employment Development Department (EDD). These data contain


individual wage earnings in each quarter provided by employers for all individuals associated


with a case for a year after the end of the certication period. While caseworkers have access


to this data source, the data is provided with a lag and so EDD data is not used as part of


the recertication process to assess eligibility.


   The data also include detailed demographic information on the case and the head of


household.   These data include information that is required as part of the initial SNAP


application process, such as household size and composition, and is updated through prior


recertications or semi-annual reporting. The data also contain information from administra-


tive sources on each case's SNAP participation history including the case's initial enrollment


date and the monthly benet amount at the time of recertication.          Lastly, the data in-


clude information about the head of household including date of birth, gender, ethnicity,


and citizenship status.


   Finally, we collected data on receipt of text communications sent to cases that opted in


to this voluntary program. These communications were used throughout our study period,


however, San Francisco only began collecting individual-level data on receipt of texts for


cases due for recertication in October 2015 and after. As a result, all analyses involving


these data are restricted to this time period.




                                                 12
IV. Descriptive Statistics

A. Demographics and Randomization Checks

Table 1 presents summary statistics of the demographic characteristics of SNAP participants.


Since our study focuses on the county of San Francisco  a large, urban city  we present these


summary statistics for a nationally representative sample of SNAP recipients using data from


the USDA's SNAP Quality Control System (column 1) as well as for our study population


(column 2).   A few characteristics of our sample are worth comparing to this nationally


representative population.   First, the average size of the households in our population is


somewhat smaller than the average SNAP household with just under one third of households


in our sample reporting at least one child compared to 40 percent of SNAP households


nationwide. San Francisco SNAP households are more likely to receive the maximum SNAP


benet (63 versus 39 percent), more likely to be receiving wage earnings (34 versus 28


percent), more racially diverse (79 versus 54 percent non-white), less likely to have a female


head of household (46 versus 68 percent), and less likely to be headed by a US citizen (77


versus 85 percent) than SNAP households nationwide.


   Columns 3 and 4 present demographic characteristics of our sample separately for cases


with early initial interview dates (before the 14th of the month) versus late interview dates


(between the 14th and 29th of the month).       The average demographic make-up of cases


initially assigned to early versus later interview dates are quite similar. Column 5 presents


results from a test for equality of means between these groups. Dierences for most charac-


teristics are small and not statistically signicant, suggesting that interview date assignment


was not correlated with observed case demographics. We do observe small but statistically


signicant dierences in citizenship for those assigned early versus late interview assignments.


We explore the sensitivity of our results to the inclusion of these controls in the following


section.




                                             13
B. Recertication Outcomes

Table 2 presents summary statistics on various outcomes related to the recertication pro-


cess.   Just over three quarters of our sample completed a caseworker interview.        For the


majority of cases, the completed interview was the rst attempted interview, i.e., the ini-


tially assigned interview or, for the small fraction of cases that called to reschedule prior


to the initially assigned date, the reassigned interview date. It is important to note again


that interview completion does not include a determination of eligibility  in other words,


interview completion is necessary to complete recertication, but it is not sucient. Overall,


we nd that 48 percent of cases successfully recertied.


    That over half of all cases fail recertication highlights the potential importance of the


recertication process itself: if a substantial fraction of SNAP recipients have not maintained


eligibility for the program over time, periodic eligibility verication ensures program integrity


and contains the costs of the program.     However, we provide evidence that a substantial


proportion of cases that fail recertication appear to have failed in spite of maintaining


eligibility.


    First, over half of cases that fail recertication successfully reapply for SNAP within the


subsequent months, yielding a 90-day churn rate of 46 percent.        In other words, roughly


one quarter of the cases in our sample failed recertication and were discontinued from


the program, but were deemed eligible within the following months.        These estimates are


consistent with, but somewhat larger than estimates from a recent USDA report on SNAP


churn (Mills et al., 2014). Figure 2 shows that 78 percent of cases that churn within 90 days


of recertication do so within the rst month, many within the rst week. It is certainly


possible that short-term income uctuations may lead to this month-to-month pattern of


SNAP eligibility.   However, our data point to a potentially more plausible story:        cases


remained eligible, but failed recertication due to procedural issues such as failing to complete


a caseworker interview or submit income verication by the recertication deadline.


    Second, we use quarterly administrative wage earnings data to directly estimate the



                                              14
eligibility of recertication cases in our sample. Table 3 presents the fraction of recertication


cases with wage earnings below the gross income limit for SNAP eligibility in California (200


percent FPL) as well as the proportion of cases with no wage earnings at all. We provide these


estimates for the full sample as well as by post-recertication outcome: those that recertied,


churned (both before and after 90 days), and those that remained o the program for at


least 12 months after failing recertication. Figure 3 plots the average quarterly earnings in


the recertication quarter and the four quarters post-recertication for the same groups.


    We nd that estimated eligibility for cases that recertied and those that churned within


90 days are very similar  97 percent of cases that recertify have average monthly wage


earnings below the gross income limit in the quarter of recertication versus 96 percent for


cases that churn. Similarly, the fraction of cases with no wage earnings in the recertication


quarter are 69 percent among cases that recertify and 68 percent for cases that churn. Figure


3 tells a similar story: the average wage earnings of cases that recertify and cases that churn


within 90 days are nearly identical in all quarters.            Average quarterly earnings estimates


are roughly twice as high for longer-term discontinued cases; nonetheless, we estimate that


85 percent of cases that remain o the program for a full year have average quarterly wage


earnings below the SNAP gross income limit during the recertication quarter and 58 percent


have no wage earnings at all.


    Determining eligibility for cases that do not complete the recertication process is chal-


lenging, even with third-party administrative wage data.               One notable limitation is that

                                                                                                          11
our data excludes non-wage income, such as Social Security or self-employment income.


However, our estimates of eligibility are consistent with others found in the literature: for


example, Gray (2019) estimates that roughly half of SNAP cases that exit the program for

  11 Note that even if a case had a substantial amount of unearned income, it would require a change in that
unearned income since the last certication to disqualify a case, which may be unlikely for the case of Social
Security. We do not have data on self-employment income for our sample, however, San Francisco estimates
that only 3 percent of SNAP recipients report self-employment income. Additionally, calculations from the
California Department of Social Services (CDSS) show that only 2 percent of cases that exit SNAP in San
Francisco in a recertication month appear on SNAP in a dierent county the following month, suggesting
that inter-county moves are unlikely to be a large contributor to our estimates.


                                                     15
over a month are still eligible for the program.




V. Eects of Interview Assignment

The descriptive statistics in the prior section suggest that at least a portion of cases that fail


recertication may have maintained eligibility for the program. One possible explanation is


that eligible participants fail recertication because elements of the administrative process


may be dicult to complete. This section looks at the eect of one of the components of the


recertication process  the timing of the initially assigned interview date  to determine its


eect on recertication and subsequent program participation.


    Figure 4 plots the relationship between the recertication rate and the initial interview


day assignment adjusting for assignment group. Cases assigned to an initial interview at the


start of the month have a recertication rate of 52 percent, while cases assigned to the latest


interview dates have only a 44 percent recertication rate. The gure suggests that this gap


in recertication success is not solely driven by cases assigned to interviews at the very end


of the month, but rather shows an approximately linear downward trend in the probability


of recertifying.


    We use the following econometric model to estimate the impact of initial interview day


assignment on recertication and post-recertication outcomes:




                   Yit =  + InterviewDayit + AssignmentGroupit + xit + it                                  (1)

where   Yit is an indicator for whether case i successfully recertied in month t, InterviewDayit
is the calendar day of the assigned interview,          AssignmentGroupit        is a vector of case char-


acteristics used in the interview assignment process (recertication month by case language

                                                                                12
by interview type), and      xit   is a set of demographic characteristics.

  12 Demographic  controls include case-level characteristics (household size and the presence of children), as
well as head-of-household characteristics including sex, age, race, and citizenship.




                                                      16
A. Recertication

Panel A of Table 4 estimates the eect of interview assignment on recertication success.


Column 1 presents the simplest specication, controlling only for the interview assignment


group. This model estimates that a one-day delay in the initially assigned interview reduces


the likelihood of recertifying by 0.37 percentage points (95% CI: -0.44, -0.31).                   Column


2, our preferred specication, includes the additional case demographic controls described


above and yields a very similar estimate of 0.38 percentage points (95% CI: -0.45, -0.32). This


implies that a case assigned to the last interview assignment of the month is 11 percentage


points less likely to recertify than a case assigned an interview on the rst of the month  a


22 percent decline in recertication success o the mean.


    We perform several robustness checks.. First, the characterization of the interview as-


signment process as as-good-as-random relies on the sorting process described in Section II.


Alternative sorting processes or implementation errors may have resulted in a correlation


between Case ID and the assigned interview date. While we do not have access to Case ID,


we do have data on the year in which a case joined the program  the only economically


meaningful information contained in the Case ID itself. To ensure that accidental deviations


from the sort process we describe are not driving our results, column 3 includes xed eects


for the initial application year. We nd that these controls do not impact our estimate of


the eect of interview day assignment on recertication.


    As mentioned in Section II, we observe a correlation between interview assignment and


the recertication packet sent date: on average, cases with assigned interviews in the rst half


of the recertication month receive their recertication packets between two and three days


earlier than those with interview dates assigned in the second half of the month. Column 4


controls for the day on which the recertication packet was sent to the case and shows only a

                                                                                                          13
small decrease in the eect of interview assignment relative to our preferred specication.

  13 Sent date is not separately randomly assigned from the interview date; therefore, to the extent that
receiving a recertication packet earlier increases recertication, our estimates should be interpreted as the
eect of receiving an earlier interview date combined with receiving a recertication packet a few days earlier


                                                     17
    Lastly, to account for potential non-linearities in the eect of interview day on recerti-


cation success, column 5 replaces the linear term for interview day with interview week


dummies.     The results conrm that the likelihood of recertifying monotonically decreases


with interview date assignment.           Cases with initial interviews in the second, third, and


fourth weeks of the month are 1.6, 4.6, and 7.6 percentage points less likely to recertify


relative to cases with initial interviews in the rst week of the month. These estimates are


not only statistically signicantly dierent from the recertication rate of those with initial


interviews in the rst week, but they are also signicantly dierent from each other at the 1

                 14
percent level.




B. Program Participation

The costs of recertication failure induced by interview date assignment depend on if and


when the cases that failed recertication rejoin the program. This section uses data on re-


applications to SNAP in the year following recertication to determine the eect of interview


date assignment on post-recertication program participation.


    Panel B of Table 4 repeats the analyses in Panel A, but considers the eect of interview


date assignment on the likelihood of ever being on SNAP in the year following recertication.


Specically, the outcome variable is an indicator that equals one if the case either recertied


or if the case failed recertication, but successfully reapplied for the program at any point


in the following year. If all cases that fail recertication and remain o the program long


term are ineligible, we would not expect interview date assignment to have an impact on this


outcome. However, if eligible cases that fail recertication due to later interview assignments


do not subsequently reapply for the program, for example, due to costs associated with the


reapplication process or confusion about their continued eligibility, we may observe an eect

on average.
   14 Additionally, specications that add a linear term for interview day to this model no longer yield statis-
tically signicant estimates on any week dummy. As a result, we are unable to reject a linear model for the
relationship between interview assignment date and recertication success.




                                                      18
                                                                         15
of interview assignment on longer-term participation as well.


    We nd evidence that the administrative burden associated with the recertication pro-


cess not only decreases recertication success, but longer-term program participation as well.


Our preferred specication, column 2, shows that a one-day delay in the assigned interview


date leads to a 0.09 percentage point decrease (95% CI: -0.15, -0.04) in the likelihood of


receiving SNAP at any point in the year following recertication. This estimate implies that


a case assigned an initial interview date on the rst of the month versus the end of the


month is 3 percentage points less likely to remain o the program for at least a year post-


recertication o a base of 22 percent.            Our robustness checks in the subsequent columns


yield consistent, yet somewhat smaller estimates.


    Table 5 presents an alternative specication in which we estimate the eect of recerti-


cation failure on SNAP receipt in the post-recertication year using the assigned interview


date as an instrument for recertication failure. If the exclusion restriction holds, in that


interview date assignment only aects SNAP participation through its eect on recertica-


tion success, this analysis can be interpreted as the eect of exogenously decertifying a case


on future benet receipt.


    In column 1, our outcome of interest is the same as in Panel B of Table 4: an indicator


for ever having participated in SNAP in the year following recertication. If all cases that


fail recertication due to later interview assignment churn back onto the program within


the following year, we should observe a coecient of zero; alternatively, if these cases do


not reenter the program after failing recertication, we should observe a coecient of -


100 percentage points. We nd that the marginal case that fails recertication solely due


to receiving a later interview assignment is 25 percentage points less likely to participate


in SNAP at any point during the year post-recertication than a case that did not fail

  15 Forexample, Gray (2019) nds that the introduction of an online SNAP case management system, which
provided a consolidated location for participants to access materials related to recertication and tools to
assess their eligibility, led to a signicant decrease in long-term exits following recertication. Similarly,
Ganong and Liebman (2018) nd that states that allow for recertication interviews to be held over the phone
(reducing application costs relative to the traditional face-to-face interviews) have higher SNAP enrollments.



                                                     19
recertication. In other words, one quarter of these marginal cases remain o SNAP long


term, while the remaining three quarters re-enter the program at some point during the


post-recertication year.


    To investigate the time it takes for these marginal cases to re-enter the program, Figure 5


repeats the analysis in column 2 of Table 4 separately for each week in the year following re-


certication. Specically, each point in the gure represents the coecient on                 InterviewDay
in equation (1) in which the outcome of interest is an indicator for participating in SNAP

                                            16
in the given post-recertication week.            We nd a large eect of interview date assignment


on participation in the rst week post-recertication.This estimate shrinks to roughly one


third of the size in the following weeks, leveling o at around one quarter of the initial size


for most of the rest of the year. This suggests that the marginal cases that churn back onto

                                                                     17
the program do so very shortly after failing recertication.




VI. Welfare Implications

Recertication failure induced by later interview assignment is associated with several costs


including lost benets to participants, additional workload for program administrators, and


the scal externalities associated with labor supply responses. This section estimates several


of these costs to assess the welfare consequences of the timing of interview assignments.




A. Participants

To measure the cost of lost benets to cases that failed recertication, column 2 of Table


5 uses our instrumental variables approach to estimate the eect of recertication failure


on benet receipt in dollars in the post-recertication year. We estimate signicant losses

  16 Our data include information on all reapplications to the program, but does not include information on
subsequent decertications that occur at times other than the annual recertication. As a result, a case that
recertied or successfully reapplied post-failure but was discontinued mid-year would be classied as partici-
pating for the full year. However, since interview date assignment should not impact future decertications,
this data limitation should not bias our estimates.
  17 Appendix Figure 3 plots the raw post-recertication weekly participation rate by early versus late inter-
view date assignment.


                                                     20
in benet dollars: recertication failure induced by later interview assignment leads to an


average loss in annual benets of $579 (95% CI: 97, 1,061).


    However, the costs of recertication failure for individual cases dier substantially de-


pending on the post-recertication outcome.                Specically, the prior section found that 25


percent of cases that fail recertication due to later interview dates remain o SNAP for


at least a full year while the remaining 75 percent churn back onto the program, often


within the rst weeks. While this latter group eventually re-enters the program, enrollment


is not retroactive. This means that cases that are discontinued from the program because


they miss the recertication deadline receive prorated benets even when they successfully


reapply shortly after.


    Figure 6 repeats the analysis in Table 5, column 2 separately for each week in the post-

                      18
recertication year.        We nd that the eect of recertication failure on benet receipt in the

                                          19
rst week post-recertication is $35.            This suggests that the eects of recertication failure


are highly skewed: cases that churn back on the program may lose as little as $35, while


cases that remain o the program for a full year could lose up to $2,300 for a single-person


household or $7,700 for a family of four.


    It is important to note that while the losses to cases that churn may be small in -


nancial terms, they are not without costs to the individual.               Qualitative interviews with


SNAP recipients demonstrate that benet loss associated with recertication failure creates


considerable stress regardless of subsequent reapplication success (Edin et al., 2013). Addi-


tionally, research on the intramonth SNAP benet cycle suggests that recipients experience


nutrition-related health shocks and decreases in caloric intake at the end of the monthly


benet cycle when when many households have exhausted their monthly benets (Shapiro,

  18 Appendix Figure 4 plots the raw means for the outcomes in this Figure 6, weekly benet receipt, as
a dierence between the post-recertication week and the week prior to recertication by early versus late
interview date assignment.
  19 This amount is roughly equivalent to half of the average weekly benet in our sample. This suggests
that a subset of cases re-entered the program in less than one week or, alternatively, that the marginal case
that fails recertication due to interview assignment receives a lower-than-average monthly benet (an issue
that we explore in Section VIII).


                                                     21
2005; Seligman et al., 2014). This suggests that even short-term benet gaps may generate

                                                                                 20
substantial externalities for SNAP recipients and their communities.




B. Program Administrators

Program administrators face costs associated with processing applications, largely in the


form of additional caseworker hours. In the case of recertication, these costs are incurred


regardless of whether the case recerties since caseworkers must attempt to contact all re-


certication cases. Cases that fail recertication, but reapply shortly after, create additional


administrative costs associated with processing new applications that are more in-depth than


those in the recertication process. Mills et al. (2014) estimates that the administrative costs


associated with cases that churn are twice as large as that for cases that successfully recer-


tify.   Using data from six states, they estimate that each case that churns costs program


administrators an additional $80; however, the average certication-related costs in Califor-


nia are over $600 per year, roughly three times as high as those in the states studied in Mills


et al. (2014), suggesting that the costs associated with churn are likely even higher in our

          21
context.


    This highlights an interesting dierence in the distribution of costs for the two groups of


cases that fail recertication  cases that remain o SNAP long term and cases that churn.


Eligible cases that fail recertication and remain o the program incur substantial private


costs in the form of missed benets, however, they do not generate any additional processing


costs for program administrators. In contrast, cases that churn suer smaller losses in benet


receipt, but generate larger costs to program administrators.

  20 For example, this intramonth cyclicality in benet receipt is also associated with increases in crime and
disciplinary infractions (Carr and Packham, 2019; Gennetian et al., 2016).
  21 California has the highest certication-related state administrative expenses in the country, while the
states considered in Mills et al. (2014) (Florida, Idaho, Illinois, Maryland, Texas, and Virginia) include
several of the lowest.




                                                     22
C. Other Fiscal Externalities

Prior literature highlights scal externalities generated by labor supply responses to the


program.    For example, Hoynes and Schanzenbach (2012) nd that the initial roll-out of


SNAP led to decreases in employment and number of hours worked. Using our administrative


wage data, we estimate the eect of recertication failure on wage earnings in the year


following recertication, instrumenting for failure with interview date assignment.                     Table


6 suggests that failing recertication due to later interview assignments does not translate


to signicant changes in wage earnings in the year post recertication (column 1) nor the


likelihood of receiving any wage earnings in the post-recertication year (column 2), though


the estimates are imprecise.




VII. Mechanisms

This section investigates possible mechanisms by which interview assignment impacts recer-


tication. One potential pathway is through interview completion  a necessary step in the


recertication process. Table 2 shows that 11 percent of cases that completed an interview


had missed their rst attempted interview, but successfully rescheduled and completed a later


interview. This suggests that the ability to reschedule missed interviews may be particularly


important in determining recertication success. Cases with earlier interview assignments


that miss their initial interview appointment have more time to reschedule before the end of


the certication period, while cases with later assignments may be unable to nd an alterna-


tive interview date before the recertication deadline. The implications of this relationship


for recertication success depend on the forward-looking nature of the recipient: if recipients


anticipate the diculty of rescheduling an interview later in the month, we would expect


that the likelihood of completing the rst interview attempt will increase if the date is closer


to the end of the month, potentially mitigating the eect of later assignments on interview

                                               22
completion and, in turn, recertication.

  22 Forexample, a case with an unanticipated conict on the day of the assigned interview may strategically
choose to miss the interview and reschedule later in the month if the assigned date is at the beginning of the

                                                     23
    Table 7 estimates the eect of initial interview assignment on the likelihood of complet-


ing the rst attempted interview and any interview (assigned or rescheduled), respectively.


Column 1 shows that the eect of interview assignment on completion of the rst interview


attempt is near-zero and not statistically signicant using a linear specication (95% CI: -


0.05, 0.06). Column 2 repeats this analysis using interview week dummies and demonstrates


that the linear specication is not masking a spike in completion among cases with very


late assignments.     Column 3 shows that cases assigned to interviews at the beginning of


the month are 7 percentage points more likely to complete interview by the recertication


deadline than cases assigned to the last interview date (a 0.24 percentage point decrease


per day; 95% CI: -0.28, -0.19); column 4 conrms that the relationship between interview


assignment and completion increases monotonically by week.


    These results suggest that time to reschedule a missed appointment may play a signicant


role in recertication success: cases assigned to later interviews are less likely to complete


an interview by the recertication deadline.            However, cases do not appear to anticipate


the relationship between assigned interview date and interview completion, possibly due to


overcondence in the ease of rescheduling (Camerer and Lovallo, 1999; Moore and Healy,


2008) or to under-awareness of or inattention to the assigned interview date (Karlan et al.,


2016).


    We nd further evidence that inattention to the recertication process may be driving


our results; specically, we nd evidence that additional early alerts increase recertication


success.   First, while all cases that miss an interview receive a notice in the mail, cases


that are assigned to a phone interview (81 percent of cases) also receive a voicemail asking


the individual to call and reschedule the appointment.                These voicemails may be a key

                                                                                                          23
alternative communication tool to inform cases that the recertication process has begun.


If so, earlier appointments, which allow for more time to complete the recertication steps

month; however, if the interview is at the end of the month, the case may prioritize completing the scheduled
interview in spite of the conict.
  23 For example, this may be particularly important for cases that have moved or cases that use a P.O. Box
as their primary address as they may be less likely to have received the mailed communications.

                                                     24
after the alert, would be particularly helpful for phone interviews. By the same logic, cases


that receive additional early communications about the recertication process may be less


aected by initial interview timing. In our sample, just under one quarter of cases signed


up to receive optional text communications from the program oce about their case status.


These communications included a reminder about the recertication process that noties


cases when the recertication packet has been sent to the case's address. If cases with early


interview dates are more likely to recertify because they are reminded about the process


earlier, then text reminders should moderate the inuence of interview day assignment on


recertication success by providing the same information through an alternative channel.


   Table 8 estimates the eect of interview assignment on recertication success for phone


versus in-person interviews (column 1) and for cases that enrolled in the text messaging


program versus those that did not (column 2). Column 1 shows that while earlier interview


assignments lead to higher rates of recertication success for in-person interviews, the eects


are more than twice as large for phone interviews.      Column 2 shows that interview date


assignment has a smaller impact on cases that receive text messages, though this dierence


is not statistically signicant. It is important to note that assignment to a phone interview


is not random and participation in the text program is voluntary with far from universal


take-up, so these results should be viewed as merely suggestive.


   Overall, our results imply that early interviews are particularly helpful for cases that miss


their initial interview date. Moreover, receiving missed interview voicemails and text message


alerts may partially mitigate the negative eects of late interviews.       This highlights the


potential importance of reminders during the recertication process, and points to inattention


as a possible mechanism driving our results.




VIII. Eect of Interview Assignment by Case Characteristics

Our results thus far have estimated the eect of interview assignment on program partic-


ipation for the universe of recertication cases.    In this section, we estimate whether this



                                               25
specic form of administrative burden varies based on demographic characteristics associ-


ated with higher marginal utility from recertication. This allows us to assess whether later


interview assignments improve or exacerbate targeting eciency.              Nichols and Zeckhauser


(1982) develop a model in which hassles associated with program application (or in our


case, recertication) can improve program targeting by screening out individuals with lower


marginal utility from program benets since these individuals have a higher opportunity cost


of time. In contrast, Deshpande and Li (2019) present an alternative version of the model in


Nichols and Zeckhauser (1982) showing that if application costs are related to cognitive costs,


rather than time costs, then the results reverse and application costs can worsen targeting

            24
eciency.


   The empirical literature on targeting eciency relies largely on estimating the eect of a


change in application costs on program participation by observable characteristics that are


plausibly correlated with marginal utility from program benets. For example, Finkelstein


and Notowidigdo (2019) nd that lowering SNAP application costs by providing information


about application assistance increased take-up, but reduced targeting eciency: marginal


enrollees were more likely to receive lower monthly benets and be in better health.                  In


contrast, Currie and Grogger (2001) nd that single-parent households are disproportion-


ately aected by shorter SNAP recertication periods, Bhargava and Manoli (2015) show


that simplifying EITC notices increase take-up among the very poor, and Deshpande and


Li (2019) show that program oce closures lead to disproportionately large decreases in


applications for disability insurance from low-education applicants.


   Table 9 follows this literature and estimates heterogeneity in the eect of interview date


assignment on recertication success and subsequent program participation by interacting


InterviewDay from equation (1) with case characteristics plausibly associated with marginal
utility from program participation. Specically, we focus on heterogeneity by the case's prior

  24 Theyhighlight that this model is consistent with ndings from Bertrand, Mullainathan and Shar (2004)
which suggests that administrative hassles worsen targeting eciency since poverty may exacerbate various
behavioral biases, such as present bias or attention.



                                                  26
year SNAP benet level. We consider two measures of benet receipt: the benet amount


itself (which is a function of household size and income) and, separately, an indicator for


receiving the maximum benet amount. We estimate heterogeneity in the eect of interview


assignment on an indicator for recertication success and an indicator for ever participating


in the program during the post-recertication year.


   Columns 1 and 2 present the results by benet level for recertication success and pro-


gram participation in the post-recertication year, respectively. We nd that the eects of


interview date assignment on recertication success are signicantly larger for cases receiving


higher benet amounts. However, we nd no dierence in the eect of interview assignment


on the likelihood of ever participating in SNAP in the subsequent year, suggesting that


these additional recertication failures result in churn. Columns 3 and 4 repeat these anal-


yses using an indicator for whether a case received the maximum benet amount (roughly


two-thirds of our sample). Here we nd no evidence of heterogeneity in the eect of interview


assignment on recertication success, but we do nd that the eects on subsequent program


participation are largely driven by cases receiving the maximum benet amount, a dierence


that is signicant at the 10 percent level. To the extent that higher benet levels indicate


higher marginal utility of participation, these results point to the conclusion that the hassle


costs created by later interview dates worsen targeting eciency.




IX. Conclusion

We nd evidence that administrative burden associated with the SNAP recertication pro-


cess in the form of later interview assignments leads to decreases in recertication and pro-


gram participation.   Cases that are assigned to initial interview dates at the beginning of


the recertication month are over 20 percent more likely to recertify than cases assigned to


interviews at the end of the month.     Cases that fail recertication due to later interview


assignments lose an average of almost $600 in benets in the following year.


   Our results suggest that cases are unaware of or inattentive to the timing of interviews 



                                              27
or potentially to the recertication process as a whole. This suggests that improving com-


munication strategies that alert cases to key deadlines in the recertication process may


signicantly increase participation and reduce administrative costs associated with process-


ing cases that churn. For example, Castleman and Page (2016) nd that text communica-


tions signicantly increase Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA) renewals. In


a similar spirit, USDA-FNS, the agency that funds SNAP, recommends a strategy in which


caseworkers cold call SNAP cases to improve interview completion rates FNS (2018).


   These results also provide direct implications for the design of the SNAP interview assign-


ment process. Current federal law requires that SNAP recipients must complete a caseworker


interview to recertify, but the scheduling and timing of these interviews is not federally reg-


ulated, allowing considerable exibility for SNAP administrators.        One simple policy im-


plication is to schedule caseworker interviews earlier in the recertication process; if our


estimates hold out of sample to the month prior, this suggests that a one-week shift in the


recertication process would lead to a 3 percentage point increase in recertication success.


Alternatively, if stang availability allowed, scheduling all initial interviews to be conducted


on the rst day of the recertication month would lead to a 5 percentage point increase in


the recertication rate.


   Lastly, we nd that of the cases that fail recertication due to later interview assignment,


one quarter remain o the program for at least a full year post-recertication while the rest re-


enter the program, many within the rst weeks after failing recertication. This implies that


the costs to participants of failing to recertify are highly skewed, with some cases losing only


a week of benets while others have benet dollar losses in the thousands. Extrapolating


the economic implications of our ndings to dierent policy contexts yields more or less


extreme consequences depending on the exibility of the policy's reapplication process. For


example, while SNAP recipients who fail recertication may reapply for the program at


any time, students who miss the FAFSA renewal deadline are ineligible for nancial aid


until the following year.   Recipients of Unemployment Insurance must le weekly claims




                                              28
to receive benets following a strict timetable  late submissions result in the loss of that


week's benets, while repeated missed deadlines lead to case closure.        In contrast, while


Medicaid recipients must complete a periodic recertication process, the program provides


retroactive enrollment allowing eligible individuals to re-enroll at the time they are receiving


medical care (Pei, 2017).   Our results suggest that incorporating exibility or minimizing


reapplication hurdles may decrease costs associated with program integrity policies for both


participants and program administrators.




                                              29
References
Alatas, Vivi, Ririn Purnamasari, Matthew Wai-Poi, Abhijit Banerjee, Ben-
  jamin A Olken, and Rema Hanna. 2016. Self-targeting:        Evidence from a eld exper-


  iment in Indonesia.   Journal of Political Economy, 124(2): 371427.

Armour, Philip. 2018. The Role of Information in Disability Insurance Application:        An


  Analysis of the Social Security Statement Phase-In.   American Economic Journal: Eco-
  nomic Policy, 10(3): 141.

Barr, Andrew, and Sarah Turner. 2018. A Letter and Encouragement:           Does Informa-


  tion Increase Postsecondary Enrollment of UI Recipients?   American Economic Journal:
  Economic Policy, 10(3): 4268.

Bertrand, Marianne, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Eldar Shar. 2004. A Behavioral
  Economics View of Poverty.    American Economic Review, 94(2): 419423.

Bettinger, Eric P, Bridget Terry Long, Philip Oreopoulos, and Lisa Sanbon-
  matsu. 2012. The Role of Application Assistance and Information in College Decisions:
  Results from the H&R Block FAFSA Experiment.       The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  127(3): 12051242.



Bhargava, Saurabh, and Dayanand Manoli.             2015. Psychological frictions and the


  incomplete take-up of social benets: Evidence from an IRS eld experiment.     American
  Economic Review, 105(11): 34893529.

Camerer, Colin, and Dan Lovallo. 1999. Overcondence and excess entry:          An experi-


  mental approach.    The American Economic Review, 89(1): 306318.

Carr, Jillian B, and Analisa Packham.         2019. SNAP Benets and Crime: Evidence


  from Changing Disbursement Schedules.     Review of Economics and Statistics, 101(2).



                                            30
Castleman, Benjamin L, and Lindsay C Page.            2016. Freshman year nancial aid


  nudges: An experiment to increase FAFSA renewal and college persistence.      Journal of
  Human Resources, 51(2): 389415.

CBO. 2018. Federal Mandatory Spending for Means-Tested Programs, 2008 to 2028. Con-
  gressional Budget Oce.



Chetty, Raj, John N Friedman, and Emmanuel Saez.                2013. Using Dierences in


  Knowledge across Neighborhoods to Uncover the Impacts of the EITC on Earnings.


  American Economic Review, 103(7): 26832721.

Cunnyngham, Karen E. 2019. Reaching Those in Need:       Estimates of State Supplemental


  Nutrition Assistance Program Participation Rates in 2016.   Mathematica Policy Research.

Currie, Janet, and Jerey Grogger.         2001. Explaining recent declines in food stamp


  program participation.   Brookings-Wharton papers on urban aairs, 203244.

Deshpande, Manasi, and Yue Li.        2019. Who is screened out? Application costs and


  the targeting of disability programs.   American Economic Journal: Economic Policy,
  11(4): 21348.



Edin, Kathryn, Melody Boyd, James Mabli, Jim Ohls, Julie Worthington, Sara
  Greene, Nicholas Redel, and Swetha Sridharan.          2013. SNAP Food Security In-


  Depth Interview Study. Mathematica Policy Research.



Finkelstein, Amy, and Matthew J Notowidigdo. 2019. Take-up and targeting:          Exper-


  imental evidence from SNAP.    The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 134(3): 15051556.

FNS. 2018. SNAP Recertication Toolkit.      USDA.



Ganong, Peter, and Jerey B. Liebman. 2018. The Decline, Rebound, and Further Rise
  in SNAP Enrollment: Disentangling Business Cycle Fluctuations and Policy Changes.


  American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 10(4): 15376.

                                            31
Geller, Daniel, and Julia Isaacs. 2019. Exploring the Causes of State Variation in SNAP
  Administrative Costs.    USDA.

Gennetian, Lisa A, Roopa Seshadri, Nathan D Hess, Aaron N Winn, and
  Robert M Goerge.        2016. Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) ben-


  et cycles and student disciplinary infractions.   Social Service Review, 90(3): 403433.

Gray, Colin. 2019. Leaving benets on the table:      Evidence from SNAP.   Journal of Public
  Economics, 179: 104054.

Hastings, Justine, and Jesse M Shapiro. 2018. How are SNAP benets spent?               Evi-


  dence from a retail panel.   American Economic Review, 108(12): 34933540.

Heinrich, Carolyn J. 2015. The bite of administrative burden: A theoretical and empirical
  investigation.   Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory, 26(3): 403420.

Herd, Pamela, and Donald P Moynihan. 2019. Administrative burden: Policymaking
  by other means. Russell Sage Foundation.

Hoynes, Hilary Williamson, and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach. 2012. Work in-
  centives and the food stamp program.    Journal of Public Economics, 96(1-2): 151162.

Kabbani, Nader S., and Parke E. Wilde. 2003. Short Recertication Periods in the
  U.S. Food Stamp Program.      The Journal of Human Resources, 38: 11121138.

Karlan, Dean, Margaret McConnell, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Jonathan Zin-
  man. 2016. Getting to the top of mind:     How reminders increase saving.    Management
  Science, 62(12): 33933411.

Madrian, Brigitte C, and Dennis F Shea.             2001. The Power of Suggestion:   Inertia


  in 401(k) Participation and Savings Behavior.       The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  116(4): 11491187.




                                             32
Mills, Gregory, Tracy Vericker, Heather Koball, Kye Lippold, Laura Wheaton,
  and Sam Elkin.      2014.   Understanding the rates, causes, and costs of churning in the
  Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program.       United States Department of Agriculture,


  Food and Nutrition Service, Oce of Policy Support.



Mott, Robert. 1983. An economic model of welfare stigma. American Economic Re-
  view, 73(5): 10231035.

Moore, Don A, and Paul J Healy. 2008. The trouble with overcondence. Psychological
  Review, 115(2): 502.

Nichols, Albert L, and Richard J Zeckhauser.             1982. Targeting Transfers through


  Restrictions on Recipients.   American Economic Review, 72(2): 372377.

Pei, Zhuan.   2017. Eligibility Recertication and Dynamic Opt-in Incentives in Income-


  tested Social Programs: Evidence from Medicaid/CHIP.         American Economic Journal:
  Economic Policy, 9(1): 24176.

Ribar, David C, Marilyn Edelhoch, and Qiduan Liu.               2008. Watching the Clocks:


  The Role of Food Stamp Recertication and TANF Time Limits in Caseload Dynamics.


  Journal of Human Resources, 43(1): 208238.

Rossin-Slater, Maya. 2013. WIC in Your Neighborhood:           New Evidence on the Impacts


  of Geographic Access to Clinics.   Journal of Public Economics, 102: 5169.

Seligman, Hilary K, Ann F Bolger, David Guzman, Andrea López, and Kirsten
  Bibbins-Domingo. 2014. Exhaustion of food budgets at months end and hospital ad-
  missions for hypoglycemia.    Health aairs, 33(1): 116123.

Shapiro, Jesse M. 2005. Is There a Daily Discount Rate?       Evidence from the Food Stamp


  Nutrition Cycle.   Journal of Public Economics, 89(2): 303325.



                                              33
                     Figure 1: Distribution of Initial Interview Assignments




                                      2,000
                       Number of Recertification Cases
                       500        1,000
                                      0          1,500




                                                         0        5            10          15          20             25        30
                                                                                 Assigned Interview Day


Source: SF-HSA. This gure plots the number of recertication cases assigned an initial interview on each
calendar day of the recertication month.




               Figure 2: Number of Prorated Benet Days Among Churn Cases
                                      600
                       Number of Churn Cases
                       200            0400




                                                         0   10       20       30      40       50      60       70        80   90
                                                                           Days Since Recertification Deadline


Source: SF-HSA. This gure plots the number of recertication cases that churn (i.e., fail recertication but
subsequently re-enter the program) within 90 days by the number of days the case was o SNAP following
recertication failure.




                                                                                       34
                                                      Figure 3: Earnings by Recertication Outcome




                                                            4,000
                        Quarterly Household Wage Earnings ($)
                              1,000     2,000
                                           0     3,000




                                                                    Recertification       Q1           Q2         Q3             Q4
                                                                    Quarter (Q0)

                                                                             Recertified                       Churned (1 - 90 Days)
                                                                             Churned (91 - 365 Days)           Discontinued (12 months+)


Source: EDD quarterly wage data. This gure plots quarterly average wage earnings for the recertication
quarter and the subsequent four quarters for four groups: cases that successfully recertied, cases that failed
recertication but re-enrolled in SNAP, i.e., churned, within 90 days, cases that failed recertication but
re-enrolled in SNAP within 90 to 365 days post-recertication failure, and cases that failed recertication
and remained o SNAP for at least one full year.



                     Figure 4: Recertication Rate by Interview Assignment
                        44% 46% 48% 50%      54%
                                             52%
                          Recertification Rate
                                             42%
                                             40%




                                                                    0   2    4    6   8    10 12 14 16 18 20          22   24   26   28   30
                                                                                             Assigned Interview Day


Source: SF-HSA. This gure presents the recertication rate by initial interview assignment day where the
recertication rate is demeaned by interview assignment group (month by case language by interview type).
The size of each circles indicates the relative number of observations per calendar day. The dashed line is a
linear best t from regressing an indicator for recertication success on the assigned interview day controlling
for assignment group xed eects.



                                                                                                  35
          Figure 5: Eect of Interview Assignment on SNAP Participation by Week




                        Effect of One-Day Interview Delay on Participation
                        -0.5      -0.4    -0.3     -0.2     -0.1      0.0




                                                                             0       4       8        12     16 20 24 28 32 36                 40    44   48   52
                                                                                                              Weeks Since Recertification

                                                                                                     95% Confidence Interval     Interview Day Coefficient


Source: SF-HSA. This gure presents regression estimates from a linear probability model that regresses
initial caseworker interview assignment day on an indicator for participating in SNAP in a given week for
each week in the post-recertication year. Cases are assumed to participate in each week following successful
recertication or reapplication. All regressions include controls for interview assignment group (month by
case language by interview type xed eects) and demographic characteristics (household size, presence of
children, and sex, age, race, and citizenship of the head of household). Units are in percentage points (0-100).
Bars represent the 95% condence interval.

              Figure 6: Eect of Recertication Failure on SNAP Benet Receipt
                                                                  0
                        Effect of Recertification Failure on Weekly

                                                        -10
                                      Benefit Receipt
                                  -30        -20                       -40




                                                                                 0       4       8      12    16 20 24 28 32 36                40    44   48   52
                                                                                                               Weeks Since Recertification

                                                                                                             95% Confidence Interval        Coefficient


Source: SF-HSA. This gure presents regression estimates from an instrumental variables regression that
estimates the eect of recertication failure, using interview assignment calendar day as an instrument, on
SNAP benet dollars received in each week of the post-recertication year. Cases are assumed to partici-
pate in each week following successful recertication or reapplication. Estimates of monthly benet receipt
are based on the benet level in the recertication quarter. All regressions include controls for interview
assignment group (month by case language by interview type xed eects) and demographic characteristics
(household size, presence of children, and sex, age, race, and citizenship of the head of household). Bars
represent the 95% condence interval.

                                                                                                                      36
                            Table 1: Recertication Case Characteristics


                                            QC Data          Full        Early          Late
                                          Nationwide       Sample     Interview      Interview     prob>F
                                               (1)           (2)          (3)            (4)          (5)
  Case Characteristics
      Household Size                           1.97          1.55         1.55          1.55         0.99
      Any Children (%)                         40.0          32.1         32.4          31.9         0.27
      Years Since First on SNAP                              4.82         4.79          4.85         0.12
      Monthly Benets                          $241          $229         $230           $229         0.28
      Max SNAP Benets (%)                      38.8          63.3         63.4          63.2         0.75
      Quarterly Wage Income                  $1,049        $1,695       $1,689        $1,701         0.72
      No Wage Income (%)                       71.7          65.6         65.8          65.3         0.27
      Non-English Speaking (%)                               30.7         31.0          30.4         0.22


  Household Head Demographics
      Female (%)                               68.3          46.3         46.1          46.5         0.35
      Age                                      45.6          42.6         42.5          42.6         0.50
      US Citizen (%)                           84.6          77.0         76.6          77.5         0.03
      Non-White (%)                            53.6          78.9         78.8          78.9         0.68
  Total Cases                                44,494        39,702       19,672        20,030

Source: USDA's 2016 SNAP Quality Control System and SF-HSA. Table reports means of SNAP case demo-
graphic characteristics for a nationally-representative sample of SNAP cases (column 1) and for our sample
of recertication cases (column 2). Nationwide estimates exclude households participating in TANF for com-
parability to our sample. Columns 3 and 4 reports means for our population separately for cases assigned
to interviews in the rst half of the month (before the 14th) and in the second half of the month. Column
5 presents the p-value associated with a test for equality of means from columns 3 and 4. Recertication
cases characteristics include case-level characteristics (household size, presence of children, years since rst
SNAP application, prior year monthly SNAP benet and an indicator for receiving the maximum SNAP
benet, quarterly wage earningsin the recertication quarter and an indicator for receiving any wages, and
non-English case language), as well as head-of-household characteristics (sex, age, citizenship, and race).
Statistics on race exclude the 5,880 cases in the nationwide data and 3,125 cases in our sample for which
ethnicity is unknown.




                                                      37
                    Table 2: Summary Statistics of Recertication Outcomes


                                                                           Full Sample
                     Recertication Process Outcomes
                         Completed First Attempted Interview                  67.8
                         Completed Any Interview                              76.3
                         Recertied                                            48.3


                     Post-Recertication Outcomes
                         Churned (1 - 90 days)                                23.7
                         Churned (91 - 365 Days)                               5.7
                         Discontinued (12 months+)                            22.4
                     Total Cases                                             39,702

Source: SF-HSA. This table reports sample means for each outcome as a percent of the full recertication
case sample. The table includes completion of recertication process steps as well as post-recertication
outcomes for cases that failed including whether a case churned (i.e., failed recertication, but successfully
re-enrolled in SNAP within the following 1-90 or 91-365 days post-recertication, respectively) or whether
the case failed recertication and remained o the program for at least one full year.




                           Table 3: Earnings by Recertication Outcome


                                    (1)             (2)              (3)                 (4)               (5)
                               Full Sample      Recertied         Churned             Churned        Discontinued
                                                               (1 - 90 days)     (91 -365 days)      (12 months+)
 Earnings   <   200% FPL           94.0             97.5            96.3               88.9                85.3
 No Wage Earnings                  65.6             68.6            68.1               58.9                57.9
 Total Cases                      39,702          19,157            9,414              2,252              8,879

Source: EDD quarterly wage earnings data. This table reports the fraction of cases that had wage earnings
below 200 percent FPL (the California gross income limit for SNAP eligibility) or no wage earnings at all,
respectively, in the quarter of recertication for the following samples: all recertication cases (column 1),
cases that successfully recertied (column 2), cases that failed recertication but re-enrolled in SNAP within
90 days (column 3), cases that failed recertication but re-enrolled in SNAP within 91 to 365 days post-
recertication failure (column 4), and cases that failed recertication and remained o SNAP for at least
one full year (column 5).




                                                     38
    Table 4: Eect of Interview Assignment on Recertication and SNAP Participation


                                             (1)            (2)          (3)            (4)           (5)


  Panel A: Recertied
  Interview Day                          -0.37***      -0.38***       -0.37***      -0.33***
                                           (0.03)          (0.03)       (0.03)        (0.04)
  Interview Week 2                                                                                 -1.58**
                                                                                                    (0.64)
  Interview Week 3                                                                                -4.59***
                                                                                                    (0.65)
  Interview Week 4                                                                                -7.64***
                                                                                                    (0.74)


  Panel B: Ever on SNAP in Year Post-Recertication
  Interview Day                          -0.08***      -0.09***       -0.07***      -0.07**
                                           (0.03)          (0.03)       (0.03)        (0.03)
  Interview Week 2                                                                                  -0.10
                                                                                                    (0.55)
  Interview Week 3                                                                                -2.39***
                                                                                                    (0.56)
  Interview Week 4                                                                                 -1.09*
                                                                                                    (0.63)


  Case Randomization Controls                 X              X            X             X              X
  Demographics                                               X            X             X              X
  Initial Year                                                            X
  Sent Day                                                                              X
  Total Cases                              39,702          39,702      39,702         39,702        39,702

Source: SF-HSA. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1. Standard errors clustered at the case level in
parentheses. All regressions are linear probability models that regress initial caseworker interview assignment,
either a linear term for calendar day or interview week dummies, on an indicator for successful recertication
(Panel A) or an indicator for whether the case ever participated in SNAP in the post-recertication year
(Panel B). Units are in percentage points (0-100). Interview assignment group controls include recertication
month by case language by interview type (phone versus in-person) xed eects. Demographic controls
include household size xed eects, an indicator for any children, as well as controls for the sex, age, race,
and citizenship of the head of household. Initial year controls are xed eects for the year in which the
case rst enrolled in the program. Sent day is a linear control for the date the caseworker sent a case's
recertication packet.




                                                      39
    Table 5: Eect of Recertication Failure on Post-Recertication SNAP Participation


                                                             (1)              (2)
                        Outcome:                      Post-Recert           SNAP
                                                     Participation      Benets ($)


                        Failed Recertication            -24.8***           -579**
                                                            (6.6)           (246)


                        Outcome Mean                        77.6            2,105
                        Total Cases                        39,702          39,699

Source: SF-HSA. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1. Standard errors clustered at the case level in
parentheses. Analyses use an instrumental variables regression to estimate the eect of recertication failure
on post-recertication SNAP receipt using interview assignment calendar day as an instrument for recerti-
cation failure. Outcomes are an indicator for ever participating in SNAP in the post-recertication year
(column 1) and the SNAP benets dollars received in the post-recertication year (column 2). Estimates of
monthly benet receipt are based on the benet level in the recertication quarter; column 2 excludes the
three cases that are missing this information. Units in column 1 are in percentage points (0-100). All regres-
sions include controls for interview assignment group (month by case language by interview type xed eects)
and demographic characteristics (household size, presence of children, and sex, age, race, and citizenship of
the head of household).




          Table 6: Eect of Recertication Failure on Post-Recertication Earnings


                                                            (1)                 (2)
                     Outcome:                     Annual Earnings        Any Earnings


                     Failed Recertication                   47                  3.8
                                                        (2,259)                (8.1)


                     Outcome Mean                          7,622               44.2
                     Total Cases                        39,702                39,702

Source: SF-HSA and EDD quarterly wage earnings data. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1. Standard
errors clustered at the case level in parentheses. Analyses use an instrumental variables regression to estimate
the eect of recertication failure on post-recertication wage earnings using interview assignment calendar
day as an instrument for recertication failure. Outcomes are annual wage earnings in the post-recertication
year (column 1) and an indicator for receiving any wage earnings in the post-recertication year (column 2).
Units in column 2 are in percentage points (0-100). All regressions include controls for interview assignment
group (month by case language by interview type xed eects) and demographic characteristics (household
size, presence of children, and sex, age, race, and citizenship of the head of household).




                                                      40
                Table 7: Eect of Interview Assignment on Interview Completion


                                   (1)                  (2)                   (3)                 (4)
   Outcome:                Complete First        Complete First         Complete Any       Complete Any
   Interview Day                  0.01                                    -0.24***
                                 (0.03)                                     (0.02)
   Interview Week 2                                    -0.65                                  -1.23***
                                                       (0.51)                                   (0.43)
   Interview Week 3                                    -0.08                                  -2.92***
                                                       (0.52)                                   (0.44)
   Interview Week 4                                     0.44                                  -4.42***
                                                       (0.59)                                   (0.51)


   Outcome Mean                   67.9                  67.9                 76.3                 76.3
   Total Cases                   39,702               39,702               39,702               39,702

Source: SF-HSA. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1. Standard errors clustered at the case level in
parentheses. All regressions are linear probability models that regress initial caseworker interview assignment,
either a linear term for calendar day or interview week dummies, on an indicator for completion of the rst
attempted caseworker interview (columns 1 and 2) or any caseworker interview (columns 3 and 4). Units
are in percentage points (0-100). All regressions include controls for interview assignment group (month by
case language by interview type xed eects) and demographic characteristics (household size, presence of
children, and sex, age, race, and citizenship of the head of household).


               Table 8: Eect of Interview Assignment by Communication Alert


                                                                (1)          (2)
                                                               Phone        Text


                           Interview Day                    -0.17**       -0.43***
                                                               (0.07)       (0.05)
                           Interview Day X Phone            -0.26***
                                                               (0.08)
                           Interview Day X Text                              0.15
                                                                            (0.10)


                           Outcome Mean                         48.3         49.0
                           Total Cases                         39,702      22,657

Source: SF-HSA. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1. Standard errors clustered at the case level in
parentheses. All regressions are linear probability models that regress initial caseworker interview assignment
day, an indicator for receiving a phone interview (column 1) or an indicator for enrolling to receive case status
text communications (column 2), and their interaction on an indicator for recertication success. Units are
in percentage points (0-100). All regressions include controls for interview assignment group (month by
case language by interview type xed eects) and demographic characteristics (household size, presence of
children, and sex, age, race, and citizenship of the head of household). Data on whether a case was enrolled
in the text messaging program was available for cases with a certication period ending in October 2015 or
after.


                                                       41
                    Table 9: Eect of Interview Assignment by SNAP Benet


                                                 (1)              (2)              (3)               (4)
 Outcome:                                   Recertied        Post-Recert       Recertied       Post-Recert
                                                            Participation                      Participation


 Interview Day                               -0.26***           -0.10*          -0.42***           -0.03
                                               (0.07)           (0.06)            (0.05)           (0.04)
 Benet Amount                                 4.57***          5.09***
                                               (0.45)           (0.37)
 Interview Day X Benet Amount                 -0.05**             0.00
                                               (0.03)           (0.02)
 Max Benet                                                                        1.83*           6.29***
                                                                                  (1.07)           (0.91)
 Interview Day X Max Benet                                                         0.06           -0.10*
                                                                                  (0.07)           (0.06)


 Outcome Mean                                   48.3              77.6             48.3             77.6
 Total Cases                                   39,696           39,696           39,696            39,696

Source: SF-HSA. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1. Standard errors clustered at the case level in
parentheses. All regressions are linear probability models that regress initial caseworker interview assignment
day, a measure of prior year SNAP benet receipt (either monthly benet amount in hundreds of dollars or an
indicator for receiving the maximum benet amount), and their interaction on an indicator for recertication
success (columns 1 and 3) or an indicator for ever receiving SNAP in the post-recertication year (columns
2 and 4). Analyses exclude the six cases missing benet level information. Units are in percentage points (0-
100). All regressions include controls for interview assignment group (month by case language by interview
type xed eects) and demographic characteristics (household size, presence of children, and sex, age, race,
and citizenship of the head of household).




                                                       42
Appendix Figure 1a: Notice of Expiration of Certication (CF-377.2)




                               43
Appendix Figure 1b: Recertication Appointment Letter (CF-29C)




                             44
                                                Appendix Figure 1c: Missed Interview Letter (CF-386)




       Appendix Figure 2: Recertication Packet Sent Day by Interview Assignment
                        3,000




                                                                                                             3,000
            1,000 1,500 2,000 2,500




                                                                                                 1,000 1,500 2,000 2,500
         Number of Recertification Cases




                                                                                              Number of Recertification Cases
                        500




                                                                                                             500
                        0




                                                                                                             0




                                           15             20                  25    30                                          15           20                  25    30
                                                  Recertification Packet Sent Day                                                    Recertification Packet Sent Day


               (a) Early Interview Assignments                (b) Late Interview Assignments
Source: SF-HSA. This gure is a histogram of the calendar day on which a case was sent a recertication
packet separately for cases with an initial interview in the rst half of the recertication month (before the
14th) or in the second half of the month. All recertication packets are sent during the calendar month prior
to the recertication month.



                                                                                         45
Appendix Figure 3: Post-Recertication SNAP Participation Rate by Interview Assignment




                                                75%
                                                  70%
                        Fraction of Cases on SNAP
                          55%       60%    65%  50%




                                                                                                                  Early      Late
                                                45%




                                                                            0   4    8         12           16         20   24
                                                                                    Weeks Since Certification Deadline


Source: SF-HSA. This gure presents the unadjusted SNAP participation rate in each week post-
recertication for cases assigned to early (2nd to 13th) versus late (14th to 29th) initial interviews days
of the recertication month. Cases are assumed to participate in each week following successful recertica-
tion or reapplication.




 Appendix Figure 4: Post-Recertication SNAP Benet Receipt by Interview Assignment
                                                                     -$10
                           Average Change in Weekly SNAP Benefit Amount
                                       -$20           -$15




                                                                                                                  Early      Late
                        -$25




                                                                            0   4    8         12           16         20   24
                                                                                    Weeks Since Certification Deadline


Source: SF-HSA. This gure presents the unadjusted average weekly benet receipt as a dierence between
the post-recertication week and the week prior to recertication for cases assigned to early (2nd to 13th)
versus late (14th to 29th) initial interviews days of the recertication month. Cases are assumed to participate
in each week following successful recertication or reapplication. Estimates of benet levels are based on the
benet level in the recertication quarter.



                                                                                               46
