                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




PREDICTING SOCIAL TIPPING AND NORM CHANGE IN CONTROLLED EXPERIMENTS

                                         James Andreoni
                                        Nikos Nikiforakis
                                       Simon Siegenthaler

                                      Working Paper 27310
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27310


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2020




The authors gratefully acknowledge research assistance of Vincent Leah-Martin, Seung-Keun
Martinez, and Alex Kellogg. The authors thank Andrea Baronchelli, Cristina Bicchieri, Eugen
Dimant, Ernst Fehr, Karine Nyborg, Antonio Penta, Blaine Robbins and Martin Scheffer for
helpful comments. Andreoni gratefully recognizes the financial support of the National Science
Foundation, Grant 1658952. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by James Andreoni, Nikos Nikiforakis, and Simon Siegenthaler. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Predicting Social Tipping and Norm Change in Controlled Experiments
James Andreoni, Nikos Nikiforakis, and Simon Siegenthaler
NBER Working Paper No. 27310
June 2020
JEL No. D03,D91,H00

                                           ABSTRACT

The ability to predict when societies will replace one social norm for another can have significant
implications for welfare, especially when norms are detrimental. A popular theory poses that the
pressure to conform to social norms creates tipping thresholds which, once passed, propel
societies toward an alternative state. Predicting when societies will reach a tipping threshold,
however, has been a major challenge due to the lack of experimental data for evaluating
competing models. We present evidence from a large-scale lab experiment designed to test the
theoretical predictions of a threshold model for social tipping. In our setting, societal preferences
change gradually, forcing individuals to weigh the benefit from deviating from the norm against
the cost from not conforming to the behavior of others. We show that the model predicts
accurately social tipping and norm change in 96% of experimental societies. Strikingly, when
individuals determine the cost for non-conformity themselves, they set it too high, causing the
persistence of detrimental norms. We also show that instigators of change tend to be more risk
tolerant and to dislike conformity more. Our findings demonstrate the value of threshold models
for understanding social tipping in a broad range of social settings and designing policies to
promote welfare.

James Andreoni                                    Simon Siegenthaler
Department of Economics                           Jindal School of Management
University of California, San Diego               University of Texas at Dallas
9500 Gilman Drive                                 800 W. Campbell Road
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508                           Richardson, TX 75080
and NBER                                          s.siegenthaler@gmail.com
andreoni@ucsd.edu

Nikos Nikiforakis
New York University Abu Dhabi
Social Science Division
P.O. Box 129 188
Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates
nikos.nikiforakis@nyu.edu




An appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w27310
Introduction

Norms form the basis for all social interactions in human societies (1-4). By prescribing what
behaviors should be rewarded and what should be punished, social norms often serve the purpose
of promoting welfare by discouraging harmful behaviors (e.g., smoking in public places) and
encouraging beneficial ones (e.g., helping others who need assistance). Sometimes, however,
norms seem to have the opposite effect. Examples include discriminatory norms (1, 3), norms that
curtail female labor-force participation (5, 6), norms of personal revenge (7), and norms against
same-sex marriage (8). This observation raises two critical questions: When do societies fail to
abandon detrimental norms? How can policy increase the probability of abandoning such norms?
The answers to these questions depend critically on understanding the nature of spontaneous
social change, i.e., change that occurs without external intervention.


A popular paradigm for modeling spontaneous change when behaviors are interdependent ­ as is
the case when social norms exist ­ involves tipping points (8-16). The central idea is that social
norms are backed by sanctions, which create pressure for individuals to conform to an established
behavior (17-21). The pressure to conform is an essential ingredient for tipping points (13, 22).
Many individuals prefer to conform if they expect others will do the same to avoid the sanctions,
even if a norm change would be socially beneficial. If a critical number of individuals abandons the
norm, however, the social incentives will reverse and propel rapid change towards an alternative
state. From this perspective, the crucial question relating to norm change is the following: What is
the critical number (or proportion) of individuals that must deviate from a norm before social
incentives reverse? Put differently, when should we expect societies to reach this threshold
spontaneously? The aim of this paper is to identify a theoretical model that can help answer this
question thus improving our understanding of the process of norm change.


Predicting when social tipping and norm change will occur has posed a major challenge for social
scientists (15, 16): "Anyone claiming to know for sure when a particular tipping point will be reached
should be treated with suspicion" (23). A striking example is the sudden disappearance of the
gender gap in American higher education in the early 1970s: "The speed at which women moved
from the margins to the mainstream of higher education took even knowledgeable observers by
surprise" (24). While social and economic theories have identified a number of factors that can
incrementally affect the likelihood of tipping, determining precisely when social tipping will occur
spontaneously is difficult as the theories either predict multiple outcomes ­ where both norm
abandonment and norm persistence are possible ­ or require specific parametric assumptions that
require empirical validation (3, 8, 10-13, 25-28). In other words, the difficulty of predicting social
tipping stems from the lack of an empirically-validated model for understanding change. Identifying
                                                                                                    2
such a model seems to be vital at a time in which many consider norm change as being essential
for addressing critical global challenges such as global warming and loss in biodiversity (15, 22).


Empirical analysis of tipping phenomena has traditionally relied on historical (24, 28, 29) or survey
data (30, 31). These studies clearly document instances of sudden social change in daily life, but
the data do not permit us to identify models that can predict social tipping. Here, we present
evidence from a large-scale lab experiment designed to test the theoretical predictions of a social-
tipping model. As a setting for our test, we consider one in which societal preferences change over
time. As we discuss in more detail below, the cause for this change in daily life may be the arrival
of new information about the alternatives, migration, or generational shifts. Irrespective of the
cause, the change in societal preferences forces individuals to weigh their benefit from deviating
from the social norm against the cost from not conforming to the behavior of others. We are
interested to know under what conditions the change in societal preferences will lead to behavioral
changes in societies, and under what conditions detrimental norms will persist.


To derive testable predictions, we build on threshold models that are widely used in the theoretical
literature to study norm change (8-13). A significant advantage of threshold models is that they are
more tractable when it comes to analyzing dynamic systems with substantial heterogeneity of
preferences, e.g., for risk or conformity, than game-theoretic models (8, 10). Our model allows us
to derive precise predictions about when a society will abandon a detrimental norm that we can
confirm or reject using lab experiments. The advantage of the laboratory environment is that it
allows us to create the conditions necessary to test the theoretical predictions by controlling the
benefit for change (e.g., how detrimental a certain norm is) as well as the cost for failing to conform
to the behavior of others. In addition, laboratory experiments enable us to exogenously vary these
incentives and other factors that are predicted to affect the likelihood of norm change, such as
factors influencing individual beliefs without affecting incentives. Importantly, the laboratory
environment also allows us to replicate the same social system to ensure outcomes are not due to
chance or idiosyncratic factors.


Experimental Setting
We design a novel experimental setting around four properties that are commonly discussed in the
theoretical literature of norm change (8, 10). First, a social norm must exist before it can be
abandoned. Second, pressure must exist to conform to the norm, so deviating from a norm must
be costly (17-21). Third, the cost of deviating must be larger for instigators of change, generating a
first-mover dilemma: even if everyone prefers change, tipping may not occur due to an incentive to
wait for others to deviate first from the norm. Finally, societal preferences must evolve over time,

                                                                                                      3
creating an impetus for change. The lab environment allows us to ensure that these conditions are
common knowledge and apply to all individuals (32).

Our laboratory sample comprises of 1,020 participants divided into 54 experimental societies and
9 experimental conditions. Each society consists of 20 individuals (except in one condition) that
interact over multiple periods. In every period, each individual is randomly matched with another
and has to choose between two alternatives: "blue" or "green". At the start of the experiment, all
subjects are induced to prefer blue, as they receive a higher monetary reward for choosing blue
than for choosing green. This is done for blue to emerge as a social norm. Specifically, following
(1, 8), we define a social norm as a behavioral pattern that individuals prefer to conform to on the
condition that most people (i) are likely to conform to it, and (ii) believe that others ought to conform
to it as well. Blue satisfies condition (ii) at the start of the experiment as all individuals prefer blue
to green (4). To satisfy condition (i) and to model the pressure to conform, if two matched individuals
fail to coordinate on the same color, they suffer a penalty. The penalty is increasing in the number
of people in the society selecting the other color. Therefore, instigators of norm abandonment suffer
a disproportionate cost (see SI Appendix, section 1 for details).

To generate the impetus for change, individuals' preferences shift gradually over time. In particular,
in each period, each individual has a probability of experiencing a preference switch ­ from blue to
green ­ such that after a number of periods everyone prefers green. That is, after a preference
switch individuals receive a higher monetary reward for choosing green. The blue norm, therefore,
becomes detrimental (inefficient), in the sense that societies would benefit from change. In other
words, the change in societal preferences gradually reverses the normative injunction of choosing
blue (4). If a sufficient number of people deviate from blue by choosing green, then the latter can
emerge as a new social norm. To ensure we obtain precise predictions, in line with (10), the process
and rate at which preferences switch is public knowledge, thus ruling out pluralistic ignorance as a
reason for detrimental norm persistence (8, 10, 33). Despite this, we expect the emergence of
green as a social norm will be difficult given the pressure to conform to the old norm, the
disproportionate cost suffered by instigators of change, and the history of adherence to the old
norm which affects individual expectations (1, 3).

Like with all models, different meaning can be attached to the variables in our setting. The most
natural interpretation of changing preferences in our setting is to think of them as modeling the
gradual arrival of new information about better social alternatives. An obvious example is smoking,
where individuals over time learn about the adverse effects of cigarette consumption. A different
interpretation is to think of changing preferences resulting from migration, such as individuals
arriving in a society thus altering either directly or indirectly (through communication/imitation) the

                                                                                                        4
distribution of societal preferences over outcomes. Yet another interpretation is to think of them as
reflecting changes due to generational shifts in preferences. Older citizens are gradually replaced
with younger ones who may have greater access or openness to more recent information.
Irrespective of the interpretation, however, the change of societal preferences creates the need for
norm change. A similar point can be made about the interpretation of incentives in the model. The
desire to conform, for example, can be due to individuals fearing sanctions, because of social image
concerns, or because they have internalized the norm. Although important, this distinction is moot
in our setting where our primary interest is to ensure that the four properties listed at the start of
this section are satisfied such that we can test our theoretical predictions in a relevant setting.

Finally, we note that our setting induces convergence to a norm that is initially seen as beneficial
prior to becoming perceived as detrimental. This is consistent with situations in which a certain
behavior was considered desirable/justified when it first emerged; a behavior which by today's
standards seem undesirable e.g., smoking, discriminatory norms, bans on same-sex marriage. Our
comparative statics would not be affected if we allowed a minority of citizens to hold opposing views
either initially or later on. Of course, some norms emerge even though they are detrimental for a
majority of citizens (1, 7). While our study does not help explain why such norms emerge, our
findings will still be informative about the process of change in such cases as long as norm
persistence is linked to concerns for conformity and high costs for initial transgressors.

Theoretical Framework
To derive testable predictions for social tipping, we build on threshold models (8-13). Threshold
models are based on the assumption that an individual's willingness to deviate from a norm
depends on the number (or proportion) of others in the society that previously deviated from it (the
individual's threshold). Individuals are assumed to have different thresholds due to differences in
personality traits, e.g., attitudes toward risk and conformity. This heterogeneity is at the heart of the
model as it influences who is willing to instigate change and who is willing to follow. Indeed, the
literature has emphasized the key role played by the former ­ "the instigators" (10), "the norm
entrepreneurs" (3), "the trendsetters" (8), "the committed minority" (14), "the great" (34) ­ and the
need to understand what drives them (8).

We use a rational-choice framework to derive individual thresholds. Specifically, we assume that
individuals will deviate from the blue norm as soon as their incentives for choosing green exceed
those for choosing blue. Incentives depend on the net benefit, b, from choosing their preferred color
and on the (maximum) penalty, p, for failing to conform to the norm. Incentives also depend on
expectations about how one's deviation from the norm affects the likelihood of successful change.
The latter is sometimes referred to in the literature as "self-efficacy" (8, 35, 36). In particular, each

                                                                                                       5
individual  is characterized by a variable  which captures their belief about the number of rounds
by which their deviation will expedite change, compared to a situation in which they continue to
abide to the norm. In other words,  captures the expected benefit from instigating change. We
follow previous authors in assuming  ~( ,  ) as this approximates the random variation of many
natural processes (8, 10). Intuitively, we expect  > 0 for most individuals, which implies that  >
0.

By comparing the incentives for choosing blue and green, we can derive for each individual  a
switching threshold  . This threshold corresponds to the proportion of others who must deviate
from an established norm before individual  is willing to do so as well. In SI Appendix, section 3
we provide mathematical expressions for the expected payoffs and use them to derive the switching
thresholds. We show that an individual's switching threshold is given by  = 0.5 - 0.5(1 +  ) /.
Thus, the switching threshold decreases in (i) the benefit-cost ratio of norm abandonment,  /, and
(ii) self-efficacy,  . In the context of detrimental norms we have  > 0, implying that  is below
50% of the population. For large values of  , the switching threshold can become negative, which
indicates that an individual is willing to be the first to deviate from the norm.

Given a distribution of switching thresholds, we can take advantage of the elegance of threshold
models. The dynamics of change can be described by a simple rule: if  ( ) is the proportion of
individuals who are believed to have abandoned the norm at the end of period , then in period  +
1, all individuals with a threshold   () abandon the norm as well. A society reaches a tipping
threshold when the number of people who are deviating from the norm becomes large enough such
that even individuals who do not believe they can expedite change have an incentive to follow suit.
Since these individuals are characterized by  = 0, the tipping threshold is given by  = 0.5 -
0.5 /. As above, if  > 0, the tipping threshold is below 50% of the population and is decreasing
in the benefit-cost ratio of norm change /. The tipping threshold provides us with a standardized
measure for evaluating the prospects for change across different environments.

Figure 1A shows that, under plausible assumptions about  , the probability of social tipping in our
experiment is predicted to be 100% when the tipping threshold is below 35%. When the threshold
exceeds 35%, the probability of norm abandonment is predicted to quickly drop to 0%. In other
words, increases in the benefit-cost ratio of change are predicted to have non-linear effects on the
probability of social change (9, 12, 15). Note that norm change would be socially beneficial even
when the threshold is below 35%, but the cost of miscoordination is such that societies are
predicted to be locked into what could be described as a conformity trap. The predictions illustrate
that, apart from increasing the benefits and reducing the costs, policies can aim to promote social
change by inducing a collective change of expectations (8). Figures 1A and 1B show, respectively,
                                                                                                  6
that an increase in the mean  and the standard deviation  of the distribution of  increases the
probability of social tipping. However, the increase is relatively small, suggesting that the predicted
drop in the probability of norm abandonment at the 35% tipping threshold is robust to small changes
in expectations. Figure 1B also establishes the robustness of the predictions for different population
sizes.




Fig. 1. Theoretically predicted norm abandonment. A) Probability of norm abandonment for different
tipping thresholds. The predictions are given for  = 1 (solid line),  = 2 and  = 3 (dashed lines) assuming
 = 1. For all cases, successful change is predicted for tipping thresholds below 35%. The case  = 1 is
intuitive as most individuals have neutral beliefs in the sense that they expect their deviation from the norm
does not shift others' switching thresholds. B) Robustness of predictions to different variability in  (measured
by ) given  = 1. The minimum tipping threshold preventing change corresponds to the tipping threshold
above which the probability of change is less than 50%. It generally lies between 30% and 40%, though the
increasing trend shows that change is more likely in more heterogeneous societies. Inset) Robustness of
predictions to different population sizes. Shaded area shows the 99% confidence interval based on 1,000 trials
for each population size. Variations in the probability of change due to the stochastic nature of the model are
small when   10.


Experimental Conditions
To provide a thorough test of the theoretical predictions, we implemented nine experimental
conditions. We describe them below (see SI Appendix, section 1 for details). The first four
conditions explore the influence of varying the tipping threshold on the likelihood of social tipping.
In particular, the baseline condition TT-43 implements a tipping threshold of 43% for which the
model predicts no social tipping. Condition TT-30 implements a tipping threshold of 30% due to a
higher benefit of change, , and condition TT-23 implements a tipping threshold of 23% due to a
lower miscoordination penalty, . Since the latter thresholds are below 35%, the model predicts
social tipping will occur in both conditions. In contrast, in TT-Endo, subjects set the tipping threshold
endogenously by choosing how much others are penalized when failing to coordinate. This is a key

                                                                                                              7
condition, as social norms are backed by informal sanctions (1-4, 17-21), and if individuals fail to
reduce sanctions sufficiently to achieve change, it would further emphasize the need for policy
intervention.

Apart from varying benefit and costs, our experiment offers an opportunity to test the efficacy of
interventions that could affect expectations about change (i). The second set of conditions does
this while holding the tipping threshold fixed at 43%. First, we study whether social tipping is more
likely in smaller societies (Small Society) and when subjects receive instant information about each
other's behavior (Fast Feedback): in Small Society each individual represents a larger part of
society than in the baseline condition (TT-43) and deviations are more impactful; in Fast Feedback
norm deviations are rapidly observed by others ­ mimicking an effect of modern-day
communications. While both conditions are expected to increase self-efficacy, we anticipate that
their effect on the likelihood of tipping will be limited as social norms involve interdependent
behaviors. Hence, social change requires a coordinated change of expectations (8). To that end,
we consider two additional conditions. In Public Awareness we highlight the impetus for change by
providing public information in the experimental instructions about the predominant preferences in
society in any given period. Specifically, we provide information about the realized preferences in
other experimental societies. In Preference Poll individuals can express their preferred social
alternative (blue or green) via a poll taking place in period 14, i.e., when a clear majority is expected
to prefer to abandon the blue norm.

Finally, we consider an experimental condition in which we offer a reward to the four subjects in
the society that chose the "color" that dominated at the end of the experiment (i.e., blue or green)
for the longest time (any ties are broken randomly). The reward is designed to model social rewards
commonly afforded to leaders of successful change. Accordingly, we name this condition Incentive
for Instigators. The tipping threshold is again fixed at 43%. What makes this treatment particularly
interesting is that it is difficult to predict the outcome. On the one hand, individuals have a greater
incentive to instigate norm change, all else equal. On the other hand, they may be less willing to
follow a leader that derives a greater benefit from change than they do. In all of the experimental
conditions, we also measured participants' attitudes toward risk and conformity (see SI Appendix,
section 1 for details).

Results
Figure 2 depicts time series of behavior in each society for the conditions that vary the tipping
threshold. All experimental societies started by coordinating on the initially preferred behavior
(blue). Thus, blue emerges as a social norm in all societies. In line with the predictions, when the
tipping threshold was high in TT-43, all six societies failed to reach it and norm change was never

                                                                                                       8
observed. In contrast, in the conditions with lower tipping thresholds, the fraction of individuals
deviating from the established norm increased over time until the tipping threshold was reached, in
which case rapid change followed: 5/6 and 6/6 societies achieved change in TT-23 and TT-30,
respectively. Strikingly, when subjects set the tipping threshold themselves by selecting the
miscoordination penalty, they set it too high, on average, at 40%, and fail to achieve change in 5/6
societies in TT-Endo. In fact, we observe an increase in the miscoordination penalty over time in
TT-Endo. This is at odds with a willingness to facilitate norm change. Our analysis suggests that
individuals increased the penalty over time to prevent the costs associated with transitioning to the
new norm (SI Appendix, Fig. S1). We also find evidence for indirect negative reciprocity as
individuals are particularly likely to raise penalties after having themselves incurred large
miscoordination costs.




Fig. 2. Time series of norm abandonment for different tipping thresholds. Norm abandonment is shown
as the line with circled markers. The tipping threshold is given by the horizontal line. The dashed concave line
indicates the theoretically expected fraction of subjects preferring to abandon the norm; the solid increasing
line the corresponding realized fraction. Conditions TT-30 and TT-23 allow for fast and efficient change relative
to TT-43, (P=.001 and P=.008, one-sided Fisher exact test). Condition TT-Endo leads to an average tipping
threshold of 40% and allows for change in only 1/6 experimental societies (P=0.500, one-sided Fisher exact
test).


                                                                                                               9
How well does our threshold model predict social tipping? Figure 3 juxtaposes the theoretical
predictions against the data. The model correctly predicts when social tipping will occur in 96% of
instances, that is, in 23 of the 24 experimental societies. We observe a sharp drop in the likelihood
of change beyond a tipping threshold of 35%. This constitutes direct evidence in support of
threshold models and that varying tipping thresholds critically affects the probability of change. We
also performed out-of-sample predictions to test the model. Specifically, we calibrate the model
based on data from half of our experimental conditions (estimation samples) and then show that
the calibrated model continues to predict behavior accurately in the other societies (SI Appendix,
Fig. S2).




Fig. 3. Norm abandonment as a function of the tipping threshold. The tipping threshold is a critical
determinant of the likelihood to observe change. Each marker represents the percentage of subjects in the
last five periods that abandoned the "blue norm" for a given experimental society. Also shown is the
theoretically predicted frequency of norm abandonment (solid line) and 99% confidence interval (shaded area)
from 10,000 simulated trials per tipping threshold based on the estimated parameters  = 1.73 and  = 1.91
(Probit model with society random effects, see SI Appendix, section 3). The theoretical predictions correctly
anticipate norm abandonment in 23 of the 24 societies, i.e., in 96% of instances. The model provides a similarly
good fit when using a subset of the conditions to estimate  and  and use them to perform out-of-sample
predictions (SI Appendix, section 4).


What kind of interventions are most effective at affecting individuals' expectations for change?
Figure 4A shows that these are interventions which help societies coordinate expectations: in
Preference Poll, 5/6 societies achieved change; in Public Awareness, 4/6 societies achieved
change. In terms of our model, this implies an increase in  (the variable measuring the expected

                                                                                                             10
benefits from instigating change) of 345% in Preference Poll and 258% in Public Awareness relative
to the baseline conditions (SI Appendix, Fig. S3). As anticipated, the other two interventions were
less effective at altering expectations. Whereas change was more likely in smaller societies (Small
Society, 3/6 societies achieved change), this was not the case when societies received accelerated
feedback about others' behavior (Fast Feedback, 1/6 societies achieved change). The implied
increase in  is noticeably smaller in these conditions: 189% in Small Society and 39% in Fast
Feedback. It is worth noting that Small Society yielded the lowest average earnings of all conditions
as the transition period lasts longer than in the other conditions (SI Appendix, Figs. S3, S4). Also,
while Fast Feedback led to a rapid change in one experimental society, in the other societies it
reduced the number of attempts to instigate change compared to the baseline condition (P<.001,
SI Appendix, Fig. S3). This suggests that rapid feedback can discourage instigators of change by
quickly informing them that most others adhere to the existing norm.




Fig. 4. Expectations and the willingness to instigate change. A) Bars show the probability of norm
abandonment in the last five periods in the conditions aimed to induce change via expectations. P-values are
from linear panel regressions with society-clustered standard errors, where the comparison is with TT-43 (see
supplementary text). In all these conditions the tipping threshold is identical to TT-43 (43%), showing that
expectations are a crucial determinant of change. B) Shown are the average marginal effects and 99%
confidence intervals for the probability of deviating from the norm when the tipping threshold has not been
reached (random effect Probit model with society-clustered standard errors). Only individuals who have
already experienced a preference switch are included, as individuals who prefer the status quo rarely attempt
to instigate change (SI Appendix, Fig. S5). The higher the tipping threshold the less likely individuals are to
deviate from the norm. Instigators of change tend to be more risk tolerant and more non-conformist.


Finally, in Fig. 4B, we present our analysis on the factors that influence individuals' willingness to
act as instigators of change. In each experimental session, we elicited subjects' risk tolerance and
preference for nonconformity (SI Appendix, section 1). Both measures are found to be highly
                                                                                                            11
correlated with one's willingness to deviate from the blue norm in the experiment. On the other
hand, there is no significant difference between men and women in their willingness to deviate from
the blue norm. Condition Incentive for Instigators generated more deviations from the norm and led
to the formation of a group of instigators in all experimental societies. However, only 3/6 societies
eventually crossed the tipping threshold (SI Appendix, Fig. S3). This points to an important issue
with individualized incentives to lead change: providing such incentives may motivate early
instigators of change, but neglects the people with a slightly lower willingness to abandon a norm.
However, both are needed for social tipping. Viewed over all conditions, instigating change was a
costly endeavor: the large majority of change instigators, even when change occurred, would have
earned more if everyone chose blue in all periods (SI Appendix, Fig. S5). This suggests that
instigators of change were motivated by a personal preference for social tipping, corroborating the
finding that nonconformity preferences are a crucial factor for triggering change.

Discussion
Predicting social tipping has been a long-standing problem for social scientists due to the lack of
empirically-validated models. Our experimental data shows both instances of norm persistence and
norm tipping. The threshold model correctly predicts the occurrence of tipping in 23 of our 24
experimental societies, i.e., in 96% of the cases. Our findings indicate that the benefit-cost ratio of
norm change is a key determinant of the probability of social tipping. In addition, our experiment
has provided clear evidence that societies can fail to abandon detrimental norms without policy
intervention, even under favorable conditions such as when the impetus for change is public
knowledge. The evidence also indicates that effective interventions, apart from altering the benefits
and cost associated with change, should aim to coordinate social expectations for change.

Although our analysis is conducted in the context of social norms, the insights obtained have broad
implications for predicting tipping in other social settings. Threshold models have been used to
study problems of collective action and also social conventions (10-12). In SI Appendix, section 4
we show that our model correctly predicts the occurrence of tipping for all experimental societies
in (14) who explore the evolution of social conventions. This analysis underscores how our model
and experimental setting can be used for understanding social change broadly. Our study is related
to (14), but differs in several important dimensions, including the social domain and scope.
Regarding the social domain, we explore tipping in social norms. In addition to the coordination
incentives, in our setting there is a clear normative dimension as one of the actions leads to higher
returns for everyone (4). It is in these instances in which the lack of social tipping is most puzzling
and troubling. Regarding the scope, we provide the first clear evidence illustrating the need for and
desirability of policy interventions to facilitate beneficial norm change. Unique to our study is also
the fact that instigators of change emerge endogenously, allowing us to study their individual
                                                                                                    12
characteristics as well as the examination of different interventions for affecting expectations for
social change.


Our study suggests interesting avenues for future research. First, it will be interesting to test
experimentally the accuracy of novel theoretical predictions of our model about the likely impact on
social change of conflicting interests (9), ingroup favoritism (37), the complexity of change when
different problems compete for attention (38), and different network structures (12, 13, 39). Second,
our threshold model can be used to study social change "in the wild". Specifically, it highlights what
information one needs to collect to predict change. This seems like an important continuation of
our work. Third, our new experimental setting can be used to rigorously evaluate the predictive
power of statistical models for providing "early warning signals". There is an emerging field trying
to identify signs of eminent tipping in ecosystems through such models (15, 16, 40, 41): "Some
extremely important systems, such as the climate or ocean circulation, are singular and afford us
limited opportunity to learn by studying many similar transitions" (16). The same applies to social
systems (15, 23, 28). Controlled experiments are thus critical for improving our ability to detect
signs that a social system is likely to tip.

Materials and Methods
The experiment was conducted at the economics laboratory of the University of California, San
Diego (UCSD). The experimental protocol was approved by the IRB at NYU Abu Dhabi (#049-
2016) and the IRB at UCSD (#150689). A total of 54 sessions was run with 1020 subjects. Each
subject participated in one session only. Subjects were students at UCSD from various disciplines.
The mean age was 20 years and 54% of the participants were female.

Upon arriving at the laboratory, written instructions on how to make decisions in the experiment
were distributed to the subjects. The experiment started once all subjects had correctly answered
a number of comprehension questions included at the end of the instructions sheet. Subjects
interacted via computer terminals. We implemented nine experimental conditions, whose main
features are described above. After the main experiment, we continued by eliciting subjects' risk
and nonconformity preferences. At the end of a session, subjects were privately paid in cash.
Payments averaged $36.10 per subject, including a show up fee of $10. Sessions lasted less than
75 minutes. In SI Appendix, section 1 we provide the details of the experimental procedures,
subjects' experience during the experiment and the different experimental conditions.


Acknowledgments
The authors gratefully acknowledge research assistance of Vincent Leah-Martin, Seung-Keun
Martinez, and Alex Kellogg. The authors thank Andrea Baronchelli, Cristina Bicchieri, Eugen
                                                                                                   13
Dimant, Ernst Fehr, Karine Nyborg, Antonio Penta, Blaine Robbins and Martin Scheffer for helpful
comments. Andreoni gratefully recognizes the financial support of the National Science
Foundation, Grant 1658952.


References
1. C. Bicchieri, The grammar of society: the nature and dynamics of social norms (Cambridge
University Press, 2006).


2. E. Fehr, U. Fischbacher, Social norms and human cooperation. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences 8, 185-190 (2004).


3. P. Young, The evolution of social norms. Annual Review of Economics 7, 359-387 (2015).


4. E. Fehr, I. Schurtenberger, Normative foundations of human cooperation. Nature Human
Behaviour 2, 458-468 (2018).


5. M. Bertrand, E. Kamenica, J. Pan, Gender identity and relative income within households. The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 130, 571-614 (2015).


6. L. Bursztyn, T. Fujiwara, A. Pallais, Acting wife: marriage market incentives and labor market
investments. American Economic Review 107, 3288-3319 (2017).


7. J. Elster, Social norms and economic theory. Journal of Economic Perspectives 3, 99-117
(1989).


8. C. Bicchieri, Norms in the wild: how to diagnose, measure, and change social norms (Oxford
University Press, 2016).


9. T. Schelling, Micromotives and macrobehavior (WW Norton & Company, New York, 1978).


10. M. Granovetter, Threshold models of collective behavior. American Journal of Sociology 83,
1420-1443 (1978).


11. P. Oliver, G. Marwell, R. Teixeira, A theory of the critical mass: I. interdependence, group
heterogeneity, and the production of collective action. American Journal of Sociology 91, 522-556
(1985).

                                                                                                    14
12. M. Macy, Chains of cooperation: threshold effects in collective action. American Sociological
Review 56, 730-747 (1991).

13. C. Efferson, S. Vogt, E. Fehr, The promise and the peril of using social influence to reverse
harmful traditions. Nature Human Behaviour 4, 55-68 (2020).

14. D. Centola et al., Experimental evidence for tipping points in social convention. Science 360
1116-1119 (2018).

15. M. Scheffer et al., Anticipating critical transitions. Science 338, 344-348 (2012).

16. M. Scheffer et al., Early-warning signals for critical transitions. Nature 461, 53-59 (2009).

17. E. Fehr, S. Gächter, Altruistic punishment in humans. Nature 415, 137-140 (2002).

18. Ö. Gürerk, B. Irlenbusch, B. Rockenbach, The competitive advantage of sanctioning
institutions. Science 312, 108-111 (2006).

19. S. Gächter, E. Renner, M. Sefton, The long-run benefits of punishment. Science 322, 1510
(2008).

20. L. Balafoutas, N. Nikiforakis, B. Rockenbach, Direct and indirect punishment among strangers
in the field. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111, 15924-15927 (2014).

21. L. Balafoutas, N. Nikiforakis, B. Rockenbach, Altruistic punishment does not increase with the
severity of norm violations in the field. Nature Communications 7, 1-6 (2016).

22. K. Nyborg et al., Social norms as solutions. Science 354, 42-43 (2016).

23. Nature Editorial, Reaching a tipping point. Nature 441, 785 (2006).

24. S. Jones, Dynamic social norms and the unexpected transformation of women's higher
education, 1965-1975. Social Science History 33, 247-291 (2009).

25. W. Brock, S. Durlauf, Discrete choice with social interactions. The Review of Economic
Studies 68, 235-260 (2001).

26. L. Blume, W. Brock, S. Durlauf, R. Jayaraman, Linear social interactions models. Journal of
Political Economy 123, 444-496 (2015).

                                                                                                    15
27. D. Acemoglu, M. Jackson, History, expectations, and leadership in the evolution of social
norms. The Review of Economic Studies 82, 423-456 (2014).

28. T. Kuran, The East European revolution of 1989: is it surprising that we were surprised?
American Economic Review 81, 121-125 (1991).

29. R. Amato, L. Lacasa, A. Diaz-Guileara, A. Baronchelli, The dynamics of norm change in the
cultural evolution of language. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 115, 8260-8265
(2018).

30. R. Kanter, Some effects of proportions on group life: skewed sex ratios and responses to
token women. American Journal of Sociology 82, 965-990 (1977).

31. J. Castilla-Rho et al., Social tipping points in global groundwater management. Nature Human
Behaviour 1, 640-649 (2017).

32. V. Smith, Experimental economics: Induced value theory. The American Economic
Review 66, 274-279 (1976).

33. D. Smerdon, T. Offerman, U. Gneezy, `Everybody's doing it': on the persistence of bad social
norms. Experimental Economics, 1-29 (2019).

34. M. Olson, The logic of collective action: public goods and the theory of groups (Harvard
University Press, 1965).

35. B. Klandermans, Mobilization and participation: social-psychological expansions of resource
mobilization theory. American Sociological Review 49, 583-600 (1984).

36. A. Bandura, Self-efficacy: the exercise of control (Macmillan, 1997).

37. C. Efferson, R. Lalive, E. Fehr, The coevolution of cultural groups and ingroup favoritism.
Science 321, 1844-1849 (2008).

38. M. Scheffer, F. Westley, W. Brock, Slow response of societies to new problems: causes and
costs. Ecosystems 6, 493-502 (2003).

39. D. Centola, A. Baronchelli, The spontaneous emergence of conventions: an experimental
study of cultural evolution. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 112, 1989-1994
(2015).


                                                                                                  16
40. V. Dakos et al., Slowing down as an early warning signal for abrupt climate change.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 105, 14308-14312 (2008).

41. J. Jiang et al., Predicting tipping points in mutualistic networks through dimension reduction.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 115, E639-E647 (2018).




                                                                                                17
