                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




NO FIRM IS AN ISLAND? HOW INDUSTRY CONDITIONS SHAPE FIRMS' AGGREGATE
                             EXPECTATIONS

                                     Philippe Andrade
                                      Olivier Coibion
                                       Erwan Gautier
                                    Yuriy Gorodnichenko

                                     Working Paper 27317
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27317


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2020




This work is supported by a public grant overseen by the French National Research Agency
(ANR) as part of the "Investissements d'Avenir" program (reference: ANR-10-EQPX-17 ­
CASD). Coibion and Gorodnichenko thank NSF (SES # 1530467) for financial support. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research, the Banque de France, the Eurosystem, the Federal
Reserve Bank of Boston, or the Federal Reserve System.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Philippe Andrade, Olivier Coibion, Erwan Gautier, and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
No Firm is an Island? How Industry Conditions Shape Firms' Aggregate Expectations
Philippe Andrade, Olivier Coibion, Erwan Gautier, and Yuriy Gorodnichenko
NBER Working Paper No. 27317
June 2020
JEL No. E2,E3,E4

                                          ABSTRACT

We study how firms' expectations and actions are affected by both aggregate and industry-
specific conditions using a survey of French manufacturing firms. We document two novel
features. First, the adjustment of firms' expectations is more rapid after industry-specific shocks
than aggregate shocks. This is consistent with rational inattention models which predict that firms
should pay more attention to industry variation than aggregate conditions. Second, in response to
industry shocks that have no aggregate effects, firms' aggregate expectations respond. This is
consistent with "island" models in which firms use the specific prices they observe to make
inferences about broader aggregate conditions. We also study how these results vary across
industries.

Philippe Andrade                                 Erwan Gautier
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston                   Banque de France
philippe.andrade@bos.frb.org                     31 rue Croix des Petits-Champs
                                                 75049 PARIS Cedex 01
Olivier Coibion                                  France
Department of Economics                          and University of Nantes
University of Texas at Austin                    erwan.gautier@banque-france.fr
2225 Speedway
Austin, TX 78712                                 Yuriy Gorodnichenko
and NBER                                         Department of Economics
ocoibion@gmail.com                               530 Evans Hall #3880
                                                 University of California, Berkeley
                                                 Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
                                                 and IZA
                                                 and also NBER
                                                 ygorodni@econ.berkeley.edu
          "Information on the price expectations of businesses who are, after all, the price setters in the first
          instance (...) is particularly scarce. ... How do changes in various measures of inflation
          expectations feed through to actual pricing behavior? ... What factors affect the level of inflation
          expectations...?" Ben Bernanke (2007)1



1.        Introduction
Most modern business cycle models are built on the idea that economic agents have full-information
rational expectations (FIRE). While most humans lack the ascribed FIRE abilities, one might think
that firms' executives are much more informed and educated than a typical consumer or worker in
the economy so that the central theoretical tenet of the current business cycle research program still
serves as a reasonable approximation. As observed by Bernanke (2007), we clearly need more facts
to establish empirical support for this notion but the growing evidence appears to be discouraging.
For example, disagreement among firms about future aggregate conditions is pervasive and large,
much larger than disagreement among professional forecasters. Coibion et al. (2020) report results
from a U.S. survey of firms' inflation expectations that reveals a level of disagreement which is close
to the high levels observed for households and far greater than anything observed among informed
professional. Where does this disagreement stem from? In principle, firms should be observing
similar aggregate statistics and therefore forming similar beliefs about the future, much like
professional forecasters. In this paper, we provide new evidence documenting how conditions in a
firm's industry play an important role in shaping their view of broader macroeconomic conditions.
          This evidence is two-fold. First, we show that consistent with a prediction of rational
inattention models (Mackowiak and Wiederholt 2009), firms' expectations respond much more
rapidly to industry-specific shocks than they do to aggregate shocks. This indicates that firms are
deliberately choosing to be less informed about aggregate conditions. With less precise information,
we should therefore naturally expect substantial disagreement among them about future aggregate
conditions. Second, we show that consistent with island-type models (in which firms form beliefs
about the aggregate using the industry-specific information they are exposed to), firms' expectations
about aggregate economic conditions respond to shocks to their industry even though these shocks
have no aggregate effects. This indicates that firms treat the signals they receive about their industries
as informative about the aggregates and, in part, rely on these to form beliefs about broader economic


1
    https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bernanke20070710a.htm
                                                                                                               1
conditions. Jointly, these two facts provide a simple explanation for high and volatile disagreement
among firms about aggregate beliefs. They have a strong incentive to focus on information about their
industry as this affects their profits more and rely on this information to form beliefs about the broader
economy. But because industry volatility is so high, this will contribute to significant and volatile
disagreement among firms about the state of the economy.
       We establish these facts using a little-used survey of French manufacturers. This survey has
both a large cross-section of firms (~3,000) that are repeatedly surveyed over time as well as a long
time series duration: it has been running quarterly since 1992. Firms are asked both about their own
conditions and actions (e.g. recent price and production changes) as well as their expectations about
the future (both about their own decisions and the broader economic outlook). This makes it an ideal
survey to study how firms' expectations and decisions respond to both industry-specific and aggregate
shocks. We verify the quality of firms' answers by comparing averages across the survey to broader
macroeconomic aggregates and find striking overlap between the two. We can also verify that firms'
reported expectations of their future decisions, on average, line up closely with their subsequent
actions. In other words, the quality of the expectations responses appear to be high as well.
       To characterize how firms' decisions and expectations respond to industry and aggregate
shocks, we use a local projections specification which jointly estimates the dynamic response of
firms' expectations and decisions to variation in industry and aggregate conditions. The latter two are
measured using aggregate inflation and industry inflation, although similar results obtain when we
use production data instead. This provides a tractable approach to address a number of related
questions.
       We first consider the response of firms' expected prices and production to each type of shock.
It has been well-documented in prior work that prices tend to respond much more rapidly to industry-
level shocks than aggregate shocks (Boivin et al. 2009, Mackowiak et al. 2009). We find a similar
pattern. Importantly, we show that firms' expectations about their future price changes also respond
more rapidly. After an industry-specific shock, firms immediately anticipate that they will raise
prices, whereas very little adjustment in expectations takes place after an aggregate shock. This
supports the rational inattention mechanism emphasized in Mackowiak and Wiederholt (2009) and
Mackowiak et al. (2009). These studies argue that because aggregate shocks play a relatively small
role in firm profits compared to idiosyncratic or industry variation, firms choose to devote little
attention to tracking aggregate shocks. The result of this mechanism is that one should observe rapid
price adjustment after industry shocks that firms pay attention to but much more gradual adjustment
                                                                                                        2
of prices to aggregate shocks since firms only gradually learn about them. Our results support this
mechanism and provide direct evidence for this differential learning behavior using surveys of firms'
expectations.
       We then consider how firms' aggregate expectations respond to industry vs aggregate shocks.
The survey includes qualitative questions to firms about whether they expect broader prices and
production to increase/decrease or stay the same. While qualitative questions prevent us from drawing
clear quantitative conclusions about the magnitudes of firms' responses, we can still characterize the
qualitative patterns in their expectations. We find a striking result: industry-level variation that is
orthogonal to aggregate conditions has a pronounced and persistent effect on firms' aggregate
expectations. This is striking because our empirical specification includes aggregate variables, so our
identifying variation in industry variables is one that has no aggregate effects. Yet firms' beliefs about
the aggregate respond to this industry-specific variation.
       One interpretation of this result could be that firms are correctly anticipating that
contemporaneous industry variation may have delayed aggregate effects, e.g. through input-output
structures, even though they have no contemporaneous aggregate effects. We control for this
possibility in a number of ways: dropping sectors for which we can reject the null that industry shocks
have zero aggregate effects at different horizons, including a more extensive array of lags in the
empirical specification to control for dynamic effects, including time fixed effects to soak up all
aggregate variation, etc. Our result is impervious to these changes. We find systematic evidence that
firms' aggregate expectations respond to industry shocks that have no aggregate effects, a clear
violation of the full-information rational expectations (FIRE) hypothesis.
       While at odds with FIRE, this result is consistent with a long line of "island" models in
macroeconomics in which firms observe only a subset of prices in the economy with which they
transact and use these prices to inform their beliefs about aggregate shocks (e.g. Lucas 1972,
Lorenzoni 2009, Angeletos and Lao 2013, Nimark 2014, Afrouzi 2016). These models have been
influential in providing potential explanations for monetary non-neutrality or expectations-driven
shocks, but there has been little to no empirical evidence on the mechanism underlying these models.
To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to provide direct evidence of this type of learning taking
place among firms.
       Evidence of learning from observed prices does exist for households. For example, Coibion
and Gorodnichenko (2015) emphasize the role played by gasoline prices in shaping households'
inflation expectations. Cavallo et al. (2017) and D'Acunto et al. (2019) study how the prices faced by
                                                                                                        3
households on a frequent basis in their shopping affect their inflation expectations. They find that
frequently purchased (salient) goods' price changes map clearly into households' beliefs about
broader price movements. Kumar et al. (2015) similarly note that some firm managers in New Zealand
identify the prices faced in their shopping as being a primary determinant of their inflation
expectations. But direct evidence of firms' learning from their industries is missing.
        Our paper builds on a much broader literature studying the expectations formation of
economic agents and how those expectations affect their decisions. This literature has primarily
focused on characterizing how expectations respond to aggregate shocks (e.g. Coibion and
Gorodnichenko 2012), the predictability of expectations (e.g. Coibion and Gorodnichenko 2015), or
the characteristics of forecast revisions (e.g. Andrade and Le Bihan 2013). We differ from this earlier
line of work by studying in particular how firms' expectations respond to industry conditions. We
document a significantly lower degree of inattention to industry conditions using the conditional
response of forecasts to industry variation. In addition, we show that firms' aggregate expectations
respond not just to aggregate shocks but also to industry ones.



2.      Data

Our analysis exploits a unique survey of French firms known as the Enquete Trimestrielle de
Conjoncture dans l'Industrie (ETCI; the English translation is "Quarterly Survey of Economic
Conditions in the Industry"). This survey is managed and implemented by the French economic
statistics institute (Institut National de la Statistique et des Etudes Economiques (INSEE)) and it is a
part of surveys conducted by national statistical offices for the European Commission. Micro-data
from the survey is available to researchers after approval from the INSEE and via a restricted access
to a secure data hub (Secure Data Access Center ­ CASD).
        This specific survey has been ongoing on a quarterly basis since 1992 and is conducted via
postal mail or internet.2 It covers firms in the French manufacturing sector, which accounted for 17%
of total employment in France (on average between 2010 and 2018). The sample of firms is meant to
be nationally representative, excluding small firms of less than 20 employees. Every quarter about
4,000 firms are sampled but firms with more than 500 employees or firms with revenues higher than
150 million euros are all surveyed. Approximately 10,000 firms participated in the survey over our

2
  https://www.insee.fr/en/metadonnees/source/operation/s1498/presentation for a full description of the methodology of
the survey.
                                                                                                                     4
sample period, with on average 2,500 firms reporting per quarter. While participation in the survey is
not mandatory, response rates are very high, more than 60% on average (since the sample size is
about 4,000 firms). Larger firms are over-represented in the sample: the average number of employees
by firm is about 450 whereas the median is only 150. Sampling weights are available to ensure that
the sample is representative. Total employment by firms in the survey is approximately 1 million,
which represents about one third of total employment in the manufacturing sector. The long panel
dimension of the survey allows us to follow firms over extended durations of time: on average, a firm
is present in the sample over a period of 7 years. This is especially true for larger firms. In addition,
the survey asks firms questions about the overall firm but also about their main products. Our data set
contains about 16,000 different products over the sample period and the median number of products
for a given firm is 2. We also have information on the share of revenues coming from exports: on
average, the mean share of exports is about 25% but for about one third of products the share of
exports over sales is less than 5% (see Appendix Table 1). Overall, our data set contains more than
360,000 individual product-specific observations (time×firm×product) and approximately 270,000
firm-level observations (time×firm).
        Surveys are meant to be filled out by top executives in the firm. To ensure high response rates,
the survey is deliberately designed to be easy for these executives to fill out. Respondents are asked
a variety of mostly qualitative questions about their firm and broader economic conditions.3 The
survey questionnaire is reported in Appendix B. The scope of questions is quite extensive, covering
areas such as prices, employment, production, wages, factors constraining production, the economic
outlook, etc. In contrast to other firm surveys (e.g., IFO in Germany) in the European Commission
framework, this French survey contains qualitative questions not only about firm-level outcomes and
projections but also quantitative questions on firm-level variables (e.g., percent changes in prices)
and qualitative questions on aggregate expectations (price, production, export and wages), a critical
element for our analysis.4
        While most questions are qualitative, the survey does include several quantitative questions.
For example, firms are asked whether/how they changed their prices over the last three months,
including in both qualitative and quantitative form. In the survey, prices can be provided for different
products among the main products sold by the firm. All firm products are classified in the CPF/CPA

3
  The French survey is part of the harmonized European Commission framework of business surveys since 2004. A
majority of questions asked are common over different surveys across EU countries.
4
  A recent exception is Dovern, Muller, and Wohlrabe (2020) in which they combine German business survey info (IFO)
with new questions on aggregate expectations on GDP, but this survey covers only three quarters between 2018 and 2019.
                                                                                                                    5
2008 classification at level 4, there is a direct mapping of this product classification with the
classification of firms into sectors (NACE classification).
        Table 1 provides descriptive statistics on the answers to price questions. Overall, the average
quarterly price change is 0.08%, implying an annual rate of about 1% whereas the average PPI
quarterly inflation is 0.18% (when excluding energy and food prices). In a typical quarter, about one
third of firms adjust their prices, which is consistent with Gautier (2008) and Vermeulen et al. (2012)
documenting frequency of price changes for French and euro area PPI and with Berardi, Gautier and
Le Bihan (2015) documenting the frequency of price changes for French CPI. Among price changes,
two thirds of price changes are increases with the average price change being about 3%. Figure 1
(Panel B) plots the average price change reported over the last three months across firms in each wave
of the survey since 1992 (with sampling weights), as well as the official PPI inflation rate for France
for comparison. The two line up quite closely, indicating that the survey is indeed fairly representative
and firms are providing factually correct answers about their price changes.
        Respondents are also asked about their expected price changes over the next three months.
The average expected price change is higher than the average past price change but the main average
statistics are in line with what we obtain on past price changes. The time series for average responses
for expected price changes are also plotted in Figure 1 (Panel A) with PPI inflation. The two also line
up quite closely. The main swings in PPI inflation over time are well-captured in the survey answers.
There is greater volatility in reported price changes from the survey than in PPI inflation. Figure 1
(Panels C and D) also reports the comovement of PPI inflation with the share of firms reporting that
they increased prices in the last three months or expect to increase prices over the next three months.
Here and henceforth, we compute these shares as the number of firms reporting an actual (expected)
price increases divided by the number of firms reporting any actual (expected) price change.5 The
correlation with PPI inflation is very high, indicating that using qualitative responses is informative.
        Because firms' reported expected price changes will play an important role in our analysis,
we want to ensure that the quality of these expectations data is high. The strong correlation between
these average expectations and the time series of PPI inflation is consistent with this. Figure 2 presents
additional evidence supporting the quality of these data. It plots the binned scatter plot of answers to
expected price changes versus the actual price changes by firms. There is a strong positive relationship
between firms' anticipated price changes and ex-post actual price changes. This is consistent with

5
 The results are similar when we use the balance, i.e, the share of firms reporting an actual (expected) price increase
minus the share of firms reporting an actual (expected) price decrease.
                                                                                                                     6
other survey evidence on firms' expected price changes (e.g. Coibion, Gorodnichenko and Kumar
(2018) for firms in New Zealand, Coibion, Gorodnichenko and Ropele (2020) for firms in Italy) and
how closely these line up with ex-post price changes.
       Another quantitative question asked of firms is by how much did hourly wages of their
workers change over the last quarter. While we will not focus on firms' wage changes, this provides
another metric for assessing whether firms are providing high-quality answers to survey questions.
When the average wage growth reported by firms in the survey is compared to official estimates of
wage growth in manufacturing (Panel C in Appendix Figure 1), we find that both series display the
same strong seasonal pattern, as well as very similar time series variation at lower frequencies. Again,
this supports the notion that survey answers are in general of high quality. Another set of questions
for firms focuses on their production levels, both past and future. Unlike pricing questions however,
these are only qualitative in nature with firms being asked to state whether their production is
"higher", "lower" or "about the same". Since few firms report declining levels of production, we also
examine the time series for the average fraction of firms reporting that their production increased over
the last three months as well as the fraction of firms reporting that they expect their production to
increase over the next three months. Both series track the aggregate measure of manufacturing
production in France very closely, even though the quantities in the two series cannot be directly
compared (Panels A and B in Appendix Figure 1). We find similar results for the share of firms
expecting an increase in aggregate inflation, output, wages and export growth (Appendix Figure 2).
This close alignment between official statistics and the survey results again confirm that expectations
data (even if they are qualitative) from this survey are informative.



3.     Firms' Beliefs and Actions in Response to Industry and Aggregate Shocks
A key stylized fact about pricing behavior documented in previous work (e.g., Boivin et al. 2009) is
that price rigidity is high after aggregate shocks but is much weaker after industry-specific shocks.
Specifically, using a factor decomposition of industry-level prices, Boivin et al. (2009) show that
aggregate shocks have very persistent effects on prices for most industries, consistent with the gradual
response of the aggregate price level to monetary shocks documented using aggregate time series
(e.g., Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans 2005). However, shocks that are specific to industries,
identified using factor decompositions of the panel of industry price levels, are followed by a much
more rapid adjustment of prices, consistent with the micro evidence on the frequency of price

                                                                                                      7
adjustment (Bils and Klenow 2004). Because industry-level shocks explain most of the volatility in
prices over time, this finding can reconcile the micro-level evidence on rapid price adjustment with
the macro-level evidence of gradual price adjustment.
       This fact still requires an explanation however: why would prices respond so differentially to
industry vs. aggregate shocks? Building on earlier work in Mackowiak and Wiederholt (2009),
Mackowiack et al. (2009) provide one potential explanation for this using a model of rational
inattention in which firms optimally choose how much of their limited information processing
capacity to devote to learning about industry shocks vs aggregate shocks. In their frameworks, both
shocks affect a firm's ideal price (under full-information) but information frictions prevent firms from
learning fully about these shocks. Firms must instead optimally allocate their information across the
different shocks in whatever way maximizes profits. Mackowiak et al. (2009) note that since industry
level shocks are so much more volatile empirically, firms should optimally choose to devote more of
their information capacity to learning about shocks to their industries than about aggregate shocks. In
other words, firms should rationally choose to be inattentive to aggregate shocks. Such a division of
attention by firms would then naturally imply that prices should respond more rapidly to industry
shocks than to aggregate shocks. They provide empirical evidence using pricing dynamics of different
sectors consistent with rational inattention motives.
       What remains to be established however is whether firms really do track information about
industry shocks more closely than they do about the aggregate. Doing so requires direct measures of
firms' expectations to assess the relative attention that they devote to different types of shocks. The
extensive panel of firms' expectations in the French survey of firms therefore presents an ideal setting
to directly test the hypothesis that inattention is greater after aggregate shocks than industry ones.
       To assess how firms' expectations respond, we use local projections to trace out the dynamic
response of firms' expectations of their own future price changes to both industry and aggregate
shocks. Specifically, we regress:
             
                     ,   ,                              
                + ++1 = , +                      +   + ,                                         (1)
             =0
         ,      ,
where + ++1 is the expectation at time  +  of firm  in industry  for their price changes over
                     
the next quarter,        denotes aggregate inflation (aggregate producer price index for manufacturing
                                           
goods (production sold in France)), and  is inflation in industry  for each horizon  (in our baseline
regression the sector is defined at the 4-digit level of the product classification (CPF/CPA) which is
the most disaggregated level for PPI indices (a little more than 150 different sectors), for each product,
                                                                                                         8
we compute sectoral inflation using 4-digit product price indices (domestic market).6 The dependent
variable is the cumulative sum of (expectations of) price changes over time, and therefore the
coefficients  and  trace out the response of expected level of prices over time. Note that these
expectations of price changes are based on quantitative questions, so the response provides a
quantitative estimate of cumulative expected price changes. We do not attempt to identify the
structural sources of innovations to either aggregate or industry inflation. Instead, we view this simple
specification as providing a tractable, "model-free" approach to characterizing the dynamics of
expectations after each type of innovation, regardless of the fundamental source of these innovations.
The fact that aggregate inflation is included as a regressor implies that  identifies the response of
expectations to industry-level inflation that is orthogonal to contemporaneous changes in aggregate
inflation, which is similar in spirit to the factor decomposition used in Boivin et al. (2009). The
baseline specification includes firm-specific fixed effects to capture the unobserved time-invariant
firm characteristics that can affect average pricing behavior. To account for cross-sectional and time
series correlation of the error term, we cluster standard errors by time and firm. We later consider a
wide range of robustness checks to this baseline specification.
           We present results in Panel A of Figure 3. In response to aggregate inflation, we find a
relatively muted and delayed response of firms' expectations of their subsequent price changes. The
pricing response is gradually increasing over the first four quarters and continues on another few
quarters. In other words, we find a similar delayed response of expected price changes in response to
aggregate inflation as was documented by Boivin et al. (2009) for aggregate prices. This gradual
adjustment of firms' expectations to aggregate innovations in inflation is also consistent with
empirical evidence that documents pervasive information rigidities after aggregate shocks, be it for
professional forecasters, firms, households or central bankers (Coibion and Gorodnichenko 2012).
           Panel A of Figure 3 also plots the dynamic response of firms' expected price changes to
industry level variation in inflation. In contrast to what we find with aggregate inflation, the response
of firms' expected price changes to industry-level variation is much more rapid. There is very little
building up of firms' price changes over time: instead, large price changes happen contemporaneously
with the shock, continue for a few quarters, then rapidly begin to dissipate. We view this as providing
direct evidence for the mechanism described in Mackowiak et al. (2009): firms' expectations adjust




6
    All product-level price series are available from INSEE website (https://insee.fr/en/statistiques/series/108665892).
                                                                                                                           9
more rapidly to industry shocks than to aggregate shocks, which provides a direct explanation for the
well-known empirical facts reported in Boivin et al. (2009).7
         We can also identify industry versus aggregate shocks using quantities produced rather than
prices. We do so using the following specification:
              
                     ,        ,                                     
                  + ++1 = , +                               +   + .                                             (2)
              =0

This specification is identical to equation (1) except for the fact that we now use aggregate production
    
(        ) (measured using the aggregate French industrial production index (seasonally and working
                                                         
days adjusted)) and industry production ( ) growth rates (measured using sectoral industrial
production indices at the 4-digit NACE classification (seasonally and working days adjusted)) as
regressors.8 Results are in Panel B of Figure 3 and are qualitatively similar to what we find in Panel A,
with expected prices responding relatively more rapidly in response to industry fluctuations in output
than aggregate ones, although the difference is somewhat more muted than when identification is
based on prices.
         We find similar results when we use firms' qualitative responses to price expectations.
Specifically, before being asked to provide quantitative answers about their future price changes,
respondents were asked whether their prices were going to rise, fall or stay the same. We assign values
to each of 1, -1 and 0 respectively and use the same cumulative sum approach for the dependent
variable as with prices. Checking whether these qualitative responses are consistent with quantitative
ones is useful because many other expectations in the survey are measured only using qualitative
questions. Since price expectations are asked both ways, they provide a particularly useful way to
assess whether the two approaches provide similar results. Specifically, we now estimate
              
                          ,       ,                                 
                  + ++1  = , +                              +   +                                               (1')
              =0
                                                                                                                (2')
                          ,       ,                                    
                  + ++1  = , +                                +   + 
              =0
         , ,
where =0 + ++1  is the cumulative sum between time t and t+k of firms' qualitative

answers about their expected price changes. We report results in panels A and B of Figure 4 for
equations (1') and (2') respectively. Strikingly, the results are indistinguishable from those in Figure



7
  We find similar results when we consider the (qualitative) response of firms' expected and actual output change to
industry versus aggregate shocks (Appendix Figures 3 and 4).
8
  All industrial production indices are available on the INSEE website https://insee.fr/en/statistiques/series/108695026
                                                                                                                       10
3, with only the scales being different. Qualitatively, we find the same faster reaction of firms' price
expectations to industry variation relative to aggregate variation whether expectations are measured
using quantitative or qualitative questions.
         While these results focus on the speed of the response of expectations, we can also assess
whether similar results obtain when looking at actual price changes. This can help verify two issues.
The first is whether changes in expectations of future price changes are reflected in ex-post price
changes, not just unconditionally (as in Figure 2) but also conditional on industry and aggregate
shocks. Second, it allows us to verify that the stylized facts of Boivin et al. (2009), namely that
industry prices respond more rapidly to industry shocks than aggregate shocks, also hold in France
during our time sample. We implement this test using an equivalent empirical specification applied
to actual price changes using either inflation or production to measure industry vs. aggregate
variation:
              
                      ,                                  
                  + = , +                        +   + ,                                                           (3)
              =0
                                                                                                                   (4)
                      ,                                      
                  + = , +                          +   + .
              =0

We report results in Figure 5. Results are qualitatively similar to those found for expectations. Hence,
we find that ex-post price changes are consistent with the ex-ante beliefs reported by firms not just
unconditionally but also conditional on identifying industry and aggregate fluctuations. These
findings also confirm the results of Boivin et al. (2009) that industry shocks lead to more rapid
responses of prices than aggregate ones.9
         Jointly, these results confirm a central prediction of rational inattention models, namely that
firms should be more attentive to conditions that affect their profits most, which in this case consist
of industry over aggregate conditions as proposed in Mackowiak and Wiederholt (2009). This

9
  Since we can estimate the response of both actual prices and expectations to industry and aggregate shocks, we could
also estimate the response of ex-post forecast errors to these same innovations, as in Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2012).
They argue that the response of forecast errors to identified shocks can identify the degree of information rigidity in
expectations. In principle, one could implement a similar test here to assess whether information frictions are higher for
aggregate variation than industry variation, as would be the case in the rational inattention setting of Mackowiak and
Wiederholt (2009). However, there is an important distinction between the two settings. In Coibion and Gorodnichenko
(2012), the variable being forecasted is an aggregate one that is taken as evolving exogenously. Here, the variable being
forecasted is the firm's own price. One can show analytically that the response of forecast errors with respect to one's
own price, once normalized by the speed of the response of the variable being forecasted as in Coibion and Gorodnichenko
(2012), is no longer a monotonic function of the degree of information rigidity but instead becomes a highly-nonlinear
function of it. As a result, the speed of the response of forecast errors is not as directly informative about the degree of
information rigidity as is the case with forecasts of aggregate variables. However, predictable forecast errors are consistent
with information rigidity. We discuss this in more detail in Appendix C. We are very grateful to Mirko Wiederholt for
making this suggestion.
                                                                                                                           11
differential attention across shocks implies that firms should respond more rapidly to industry-level
shocks, as was documented empirically by Boivin et al. (2009). Furthermore, it also explains why
firms might choose to be uninformed about aggregate conditions, a feature which is consistent with a
wealth of empirical data on the aggregate expectations of firms and other economic agents (Coibion
and Gorodnichenko 2012, 2015, Coibion et al. 2018).


4.     Firms Aggregate Beliefs after Industry Shocks
The previous section focused on how rapidly firms learn about and respond to different shocks,
particularly as viewed through the prism of rational inattention theories. A broader issue is
understanding how firms interpret different kinds of innovations. For example, can they distinguish
between shocks that have aggregate effects and those that don't? In this section, we provide additional
evidence that firms set prices under an imperfect knowledge of their underlying fundamentals, in
particular their aggregate or sectoral nature.
       A large class of island models, following the celebrated model of Lucas (1972), posits that
firms are inherently unable to distinguish between different shocks and are therefore likely to
confound industry and aggregate shocks. In these models, agents are located on separate islands and
trade with only a subset of islands in the economy. From these trades, they can in general observe
prices on the other islands but they cannot observe the entirety of what is happening in the economy.
These models capture the intuitive conundrum of firms that observe some other firms raising their
prices: is this happening because of an aggregate shock or because of something specific to these few
firms. The uncertainty about underlying forces in such an environment induces firms to put some
weight on the possibility of an aggregate shock and some weight on the alternative possibility of
idiosyncratic or industry factors, leading to a muted reaction of their own prices. Is the data consistent
with this type of confusion or is it more consistent with the view that firms understand the nature of
different shocks but are simply unable to observe each of them fully at all times?
       The French survey ETCI is also remarkably well-suited to answer this closely related question.
As firms are asked about what they expect to happen to aggregate prices and production along with
those for their own firms, we can in principle distinguish what they believe will happen to them vs
what they think is happening to the aggregate economy. Specifically, we can assess whether their
expectations about the aggregate respond to both aggregate shocks as well as industry-specific ones
that have no aggregate effects. Finding that firms' beliefs about the aggregate change in response to


                                                                                                       12
industry-specific shocks would be direct evidence for the type of confusion about underlying shocks
that is the key mechanism in island models.
       To implement this test, we run regressions of the same type as before. Specifically, we regress
for each time horizon h:
              
                     ,                                    
                 + ++1  =  , +                     +   +                                         (5)
              =0
          ,      
where + ++1 represents the expectations at time  +  of firm  in industry  over aggregate
inflation () over the subsequent quarter, {} takes values {-1,0,1} for aggregate prices expected to
decrease, stay the same, and increase respectively. Thus, rather than tracking firms' expectations of
their own price changes as in section 3, we now characterize the dynamics of their expectations of
aggregate prices in response to changes in industry vs aggregate inflation. As noted in section 2
however, the expectations of aggregate inflation are only qualitative in nature. The cumulative
summation in the LHS can still be interpreted as speaking to the degree to which expectations respond
to each form of inflation, but the quantitative values do not have a direct interpretation.
       The results of these regressions are plotted in Panel A of Figure 6. This panel includes the
estimated  , which indicate the response of firms' aggregate inflation expectations to aggregate
inflation variation, and the estimated  , which indicate the response of firms' aggregate inflation
expectations to industry inflation variation. An increase in aggregate inflation is followed by a pattern
of gradually increasing aggregate inflation expectations, as one would expect. With industry-level
inflation, we also find a gradually increasing response of inflation expectations. Note that because we
explicitly control for aggregate inflation, the changes in industry-specific inflation that are identified
from  are ones that are orthogonal to aggregate inflation and therefore should not be associated
with changes in the aggregate beliefs of agents under full-information. Instead, we find precisely the
result that underlies island models like Lucas (1972): the beliefs of agents about aggregates respond
even to innovations that have no aggregate effects.
       This result is quite robust and holds under a number of alternative specifications and
identifications. For example, Panel B plots the equivalent responses of firms' aggregate inflation
expectations to aggregate vs industry shocks but identifying the latter using output measures. That is,
we replace aggregate inflation and industry inflation in equation (5) above with aggregate output and
industry output:
              
                     ,                                       
                 + ++1  =  , +                      +   +                                        (6)
              =0

                                                                                                       13
We find equivalent results: changes in industry output that are orthogonal to aggregate output affect
firms' aggregate inflation expectations. Appendix Figure 5 presents equivalent results for firms'
expectations of future aggregate output. Panel A documents that these respond to changes in industry
inflation orthogonal to aggregate inflation, while Panel B documents that firms' expectations of
aggregate output respond also to changes in industry output that are orthogonal to aggregate output
changes.
           These results are robust to a variety of alternative specifications and additional controls. For
example, in Panel B of Figure 7, we present estimates of equation (5) augmented to included controls
for four-digit industry and aggregate production growth rates: we find almost identical effects. In
Panel C of Figure 7, we plot the same impulse responses but also controlling for inflation and output
at the two-digit industry. Again, we find the same qualitative dynamics of firms' aggregate inflation
expectations to industry inflation. Panel D of Figure 7 includes time fixed effects along with four-
digit industry production growth rate. Time fixed effects soak up all aggregate variation, not just that
coming from aggregate inflation. We continue to find a significant response of firms' aggregate
inflation expectations to industry inflation. Panel E of Figure 7 further augments the specification by
also controlling for lags of four-digit industry inflation and production growth rates. Again, the results
are qualitatively unchanged.10
           Jointly, these results are strongly supportive of the mechanism underlying island models:
firms confound shocks to industry and aggregate conditions. However, this interpretation of the
empirical results hinges on whether industry variation in inflation really has no effect on aggregate
inflation, making the apparent response of firms' aggregate inflation expectations at odds with
underlying shocks. While our empirical specification restricts industry variation inflation to be
orthogonal to aggregate conditions, it does not necessarily satisfy the restriction that
contemporaneous variation in industry inflation has no effects on aggregate inflation in later periods,
which could happen via e.g. input-output linkages.
           To assess to what extent this possibility exists in our data, we run the following empirical tests
on aggregate prices and output:
                
                                                      
                    + =  +   +                             +                                          (7)
                =0
                                                                                                      (8)
                                                           
                    + =  +   +                                  + 
                =0


10
     Appendix Figure 6 shows that our conclusions for Figure 3 are also robust to these variations.
                                                                                                            14
These regressions assess whether subsequent changes in aggregate inflation and production are
predictable using contemporaneous changes in industry inflation and output after conditioning on
contemporaneous aggregate conditions. These regressions are run industry by industry for each
forecasting horizon from 1 quarter to 8 quarters ahead. The results are reported in Appendix Table 2.
At short horizons, there is some evidence of predictability of subsequent aggregate inflation from
industry level variation in inflation: we can reject the null of no predictability for about one in four
industries at the one-quarter horizon. Predictability is lower for output, with a little over ten percent
of industries displaying predictability for subsequent aggregate changes in output at the one quarter
ahead horizon. This predictability falls sharply at longer horizons: down to less than ten percent of
industries at a horizon of two years for inflation and around two percent for output.
        While this predictability in aggregates from industry-specific conditions is therefore limited,
it nonetheless presents an alternative explanation for our empirical results. To assess whether this is
behind the estimated responses of firms' aggregate expectations, we reproduce our baseline results
dropping all industries for which we can reject the null of no predictability at the five percent level
for a given horizon. The results for the response of firms' aggregate inflation expectations to industry
inflation are presented in Panel A of Figure 8. The results are nearly indistinguishable from our
baseline estimates.
        We also verify the robustness of our empirical strategy by running a placebo test. Specifically,
for a firm in industry j, we consider all other industries    and regress, one by one, those industries'
                                                                       ()        ()
inflation rates on the inflation rate in industry j:  = 0 + 1  +  where ,  index
                                                                                        ()
industries. We then identify the industry   that has the smallest value of 1 . This is the industry

whose inflation rate has the least predictive power for inflation in industry j.11 Given this other
industry's inflation rate, we then reproduce our baseline estimates but replacing the inflation rate of
the industry to which the firm belongs with the inflation rate of the industry with which it is least
correlated:
              
                       ,                                                    
                 + ++1  =  , +                          +   +   + .                                        (9)
              =0




                                                             ( )
11
  We have similar results when we use   = arg min ( ,   ) . The advatange of the regression approach is that it
                                                                                                    ( )
does not depend on the variance of  and 1 can be interpreted as the sensitivity (a unit increase in   translates into
                   
1 unit increase in  ).
                                                                                                                  15
We then plot the impulse response of firms' aggregate inflation expectations to innovations in the
inflation of these other industries in Panel B of Figure 8. What one would expect this placebo test to
yield is an absence of predictive power on firms' aggregate expectations: this is precisely what we
find. This result illustrates that our finding of predictive power running from firms' industries'
inflation to their aggregate inflation expectations is not an artifact of the empirical procedure but truly
captures the fact that firms are forming beliefs about the aggregate based on what they observe in
their own industries.
         In short, we present novel direct evidence on two theoretical hypotheses. First, as described
in section 3, firms devote relatively more information processing capacity to tracking industry
conditions than aggregate conditions as displayed by the differential speed of response of their
expectations to each. Second, this large weight that firms implicitly assign to variation originating in
their industry shapes not just their expectations about their industry but also their expectations about
the broader economy, as suggested by island models.


5.       Heterogeneity
While these results largely conform to the predictions of rational inattention and island-type models
in the aggregate, these models also make additional predictions in terms of cross-sectional
heterogeneity. For example, under rational inattention models in which firms choose how much
attention to allocate to industry vs aggregate shocks, attention to industry conditions should be greater
when industry volatility is relatively high or when it is more persistent. By the same logic, one would
expect firms' extrapolation of industry conditions to aggregate conditions to be larger when their
industry conditions are more volatile or more persistent.
         In this section, we assess whether firms' extrapolations of industry variation to their
expectations about the aggregate vary along any observable characteristics.12 To this end, we estimate
                                                                                1                   1
equation (5) for each industry  separately and study variation in 13 12           12
                                                                     =0  , and 13 =0 , across

industries. Table 2 documents that there is indeed quite a bit of cross-industry variation in how firms'
aggregate expectations respond to industry shocks on average. Then, we match the French survey
with administrative balance-sheet data set (covering the universe of French firms), providing us with
detailed annual information on the total wage bill, values of intermediate inputs (materials), and value


12
  We find very similar results when we study heterogeneity in the relative adjustment of firms' expected prices to industry
vs aggregate variation, so we focus on the response of aggregate expectations to industry shocks in the interest of space.
                                                                                                                        16
added to construct cost shares. As a result, the French survey and administrative data provide
extensive information about firms and their industries, allowing for a relatively rich analysis of the
amount of heterogeneity underlying our aggregated results in previous sections. For example, in
addition to cost shares, we observe the importance of exports as a share of total sales, the number of
employees firms have, how many products they sell, and their capacity utilization. Table 2 documents
both average levels of these across all firms in the sample as well as some of the heterogeneity present
in the data. We can also assess characteristics of the industries in which firms reside. For example,
we can regress industry prices on aggregate prices to measure the degree of comovement of a specific
industry with broader price movements. We also measure the degree to which an industry's price
level comoves with commodity prices, providing a simple metric for the likelihood of more volatile
prices. Finally, we also measure the volatility and persistence of an industry's price. We do so by
running an AR(4) on each industry's inflation rate and measure persistence via the sum of the AR(4)
coefficients and volatility via the standard deviation of residuals.
       Figure 9 presents simple scatterplots that compare both industry price persistence and
volatility to the average response within each industry of firms' aggregate price expectations to
industry variation. Panel A shows that there is a weak unconditional negative relationship between
the size of innovations to industry prices and the average response of firms' aggregate expectations.
In contrast, Panel B documents a positive correlation between the persistence of industry prices with
the response of aggregate expectations. While the latter is consistent with rational inattention type
motives, the former is not. Of course, there could be many other firm and industry characteristics that
affect firms' incentives to track aggregate vs industry conditions, and since the characteristics can be
correlated with either persistence or volatility of industry prices, these unconditional correlations are
only suggestive.
       To assess the role of different characteristics in determining the speed of expectations
adjustments, we run a sequence of cross-sectional regressions. Specifically, we first estimate the
average response of aggregate expectations to industry variation for each industry (row 1 of Table2
shows the distribution of the resulting cross-section). Second, we regress these industry level
estimates of industry characteristics. For example, column 1 of Table 3 plots regressions of the
response of aggregate expectations on the volatility of innovations to that industry's price level. The
results confirm the scatterplot in Figure 3: there is a negative, albeit statistically weak, correlation
between them. Column 2 presents the equivalent regression for industry price persistence, yielding a


                                                                                                      17
strong positive relationship. When both variables are included in the same regression (column 3), the
results for each are unchanged.
        Column 4 augments this empirical specification with three additional control variables. The
first is the average response of firms' aggregate expectations to aggregate inflation variation.
Intuitively, this is to control for the possibility that firms in some industries face lower attention costs,
and therefore pay more attention to all variables. This would make the interpretation of baseline
regressions in columns 1-3 problematic since a higher response of firms' aggregate expectations to
industry shocks could reflect not just an extrapolation property on the part of firms but also a more
systematic higher elasticity of expectations to new information. We find no evidence for the latter:
including the average response of firms' aggregate expectations to aggregate inflation does not affect
the results. We also include the elasticity of industry prices to both aggregate inflation and commodity
prices. We estimate these objects by regressing industry-level inflation on aggregate inflation and by
regressing industry-level inflation on commodity price inflation. Including these additional controls
adds no predictive power and does not affect the estimated coefficients on industry price persistence
or volatility.
        We then consider an additional set of industry characteristics, specifically the average cost
shares of both labor and materials. Intuitively, a higher cost of materials could be indicative of more
volatility in costs and prices, which could induce firms to allocate more attention to industry
conditions relative to aggregates and therefore also induce to extrapolate more from their industry's
prices to aggregate conditions. This is indeed what we observe: adding this variable (column 5 of
Table 3) yields a positive and statistically significant coefficient. In addition, the coefficient on
industry price volatility becomes statistically insignificant. In contrast, including the labor cost share
does not add any predictive power for the average response of firms' aggregate expectations to
industry price variation. As documented in columns 6 and 7 of Table 3, including the average share
of exports, the number of products, firm size or capacity utilization has no effect on these results. The
only characteristics that are robustly associated with the average response of firms' aggregate
expectations to industry price variation are the persistence of industry prices and the share of materials
in firms' costs. We interpret these results as broadly consistent with predictions of rational inattention
models.




                                                                                                          18
6.     Conclusion
Recent work has increasingly turned to understanding how agents form their expectations and how
those expectations affect economic decisions. Most of that work has focused on the aggregate
expectations of agents and how those respond to aggregate shocks (e.g., Coibion and Gorodnichenko
2012). Much less effort has been devoted to understanding how expectations respond to more firm-
specific factors. We provide two new empirical results in this spirit that should provide guidance to
future research.
       The first is that firms' expectations respond more strongly to industry shocks than aggregate
shocks. This is consistent with rational inattention theories in which agents decide where to allocate
their information processing capacity: aggregate shocks are much less volatile and affect profits less
than industry or idiosyncratic shocks and therefore warrant less attention on the part of firms. The
second is that firms' aggregate expectations respond to industry shocks that have no aggregate effects.
This implies that firms confound underlying sources of volatility: they attribute some of the industry
variation they observe to aggregate forces that in fact are not underlying their sectoral volatility. This
is consistent with island models in the spirit of Lucas (1972) in which firms observe signals which
are combinations of idiosyncratic or industry shocks and aggregate shocks.
       While macroeconomic models in this spirit are not uncommon (e.g., Lorenzoni 2009,
Angeletos and La'O 2013, Nimark 2014), empirical work testing this learning mechanism has been,
to the best of our knowledge, non-existent. As our results strongly support this type of inference
problem on the part of firms, we hope it will stimulate additional work on these channels. In addition,
our empirical results can potentially provide a novel set of empirical facts that can be used to
discipline this class of models.
       More generally, these results also provide a potential lens through which to explain the
puzzling amount of disagreement among firms about aggregate economic conditions. Rational
inattention motives can explain why firms would devote little attention to aggregate conditions,
meaning the signals they receive about the aggregate are very noisy. This noise implies that aggregate
beliefs should respond little to these signals, consistent with the gradual response of firms' beliefs to
aggregate shocks, but it also implies that disagreement about the aggregate need not be high since
firms' beliefs will not respond strongly to these signals. But they will respond strongly to signals from
their industries. If they then attribute an aggregate component to this information, as they seem to in
section 4, then this informational response combined with the high level of industry volatility can
potentially deliver a powerful quantitative force to explain the magnitude of cross-sectional
                                                                                                       19
disagreement observed among firms. While we are not able to quantify this mechanism here due to
the qualitative nature of the aggregate expectations in this survey, we hope future work will ascertain
the quantitative importance of this channel.
       More broadly, our results speak to the large divide between full-information macroeconomic
models and the growing empirical evidence of pervasive information rigidities on the part of
economic agents. In these models, expectations about the future adjust immediately to shocks and can
provide a powerful propagation mechanism for even small aggregate shocks into the decisions of very
forward-looking agents. Evidence of information frictions suggests that these expectational effects
are likely much weaker, at least when it comes to macroeconomic shocks. Indeed, our results support
a growing literature focusing on granularity and network structures in the economy (e.g. Gabaix
2011). This work has emphasized the potential importance of idiosyncratic shocks to specific firms
in the economy who play a disproportionate role either through their size or network linkages. Our
results imply that expectational forces are likely to be much stronger in response to these types of
"local" shocks than they are in response to aggregate ones.


References
Afrouzi, Hassan, 2016. "Strategic Inattention, Inflation Dynamics, and the Non-Neutrality of
       Money," manuscript.
Andrade, Philippe, and Hervé Le Bihan, 2013. "Inattentive professional forecasters," Journal of
       Monetary Economics 60(8): 967-982.
Angeletos, Georges-Marios, and Jennifer Lao, 2013. "Sentiments," Econometrica 81(2): 739­779.
Berardi, Nicoletta, Erwan Gautier, and Herve Le Bihan, 2015. "More Facts about Prices: France Before
       and After the Great Recession," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 47(8): 1465-1502.
Bils, Mark, and Pete J. Klenow, 2004. "Some Evidence on the Importance of Sticky Prices," Journal
       of Political Economy, 112, 947-985.
Boivin, Jean, Marc Giannoni, and Ilian Mihov, 2009. "Sticky Prices and Monetary Policy: Evidence
       from Disaggregated US Data," American Economic Review 99(1): 350-84.
Cavallo, Alberto, Guillermo Cruces, and Ricardo Perez-Truglia, 2017. "Inflation Expectations,
       Learning and Supermarket Prices: Evidence from Survey Experiments," American Economic
       Journal: Macroeconomics 9(3): 1-35.
Chahrour, Ryan, Kristoffer Nimark, and Stefan Pitschner, 2019. "Sectoral Media Focus and
       Aggregate Fluctuations", manuscript.
                                                                                                    20
Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles Evans, 2005. "Nominal Rigidities and the
       Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy," Journal of Political Economy.
Coibion, Olivier, and Yuriy Gorodnichenko, 2012. "What Can Survey Forecasts Tell Us about
       Information Rigidities?" Journal of Political Economy 120(1): 116-159.
Coibion, Olivier, and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. 2015. "Information Rigidity and the Expectations
       Formation Process: A Simple Framework and New Facts." American Economic Review
       105(8): 2644-78.
Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Saten Kumar, 2018. "How Do Firms Form Their
       Expectations? New Survey Evidence," American Economic Review 108(9): 2671-2713.
Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Tiziano Ropele, 2020. "Inflation Expectations and Firm
       Decisions: New Causal Evidence," Quarterly Journal of Economics 135(1): 165­219.
Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Saten Kumar, and Mathieu Pedemonte, 2020. "Inflation
       Expectations as a Policy Tool?" forthcoming in Journal of International Economics.
D'Acunto, Francesco, Ulrike Malmendier, Juan Ospina, and Michael Weber, 2019. "Exposure to
       Daily Price Changes and Inflation Expectations," NBER Working Paper No. 26237.
Dovern, Jonas, Lena Sophia Müller, and Klaus Wohlrabe, 2020. "How Do Firms Form Expectations
       of Aggregate Growth? New Evidence from a Large-Scale Business Survey," CESifo Working
       Paper Series 8179.
Gabaix, Xavier, 2011. "The Granular Origins of Aggregate Fluctuations," Econometrica 79: 733-772.
Gautier, Erwan, 2008. "The Behaviour of Producer Prices. Evidence from French PPI Micro-data,"
       Empirical Economics, 35(2): 301-332.
Kumar, Saten, Hassan Afrouzi, Olivier Coibion, and Yuriy Gorodnichenko, 2015. "Inflation
       Targeting Does Not Anchor Inflation Expectations: Evidence from Firms in New Zealand,"
       Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (Fall), 151-225.
Lorenzoni, Guido, 2009. "A Theory of Demand Shocks," American Economic Review 99(5): 2050-84.
Lucas, Robert Jr., 1972. "Expectations and the Neutrality of Money," Journal of Economic Theory
       4(2): 103-124.
Mackowiak, Bartosz, and Mirko Wiederholt. 2009. "Optimal Sticky Prices under Rational
       Inattention," American Economic Review 99(3): 769-803.
Mackowiak, Bartosz, Emanuel Moench, and Mirko Wiederholt. 2009. "Sectoral Price Data and
       Models of Price Setting," Journal of Monetary Economics 56(S): 78-99.


                                                                                              21
Nimark, Kristoffer, 2014. "Man-Bites-Dog Business Cycles," American Economic Review 104(8):
      2320-2367.
Vermeulen, Philip, Daniel Dias, Maarten Dossche, Erwan Gautier, Ignacio Hernando, Roberto
      Sabbatini, and Harald Stahl. 2012 "Price Setting in the Euro Area: Some Stylised Facts from
      Individual Producer Price Data," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 44(8):1631-1650.




                                                                                               22
                                                  Figure 1. Expected and Actual Price Changes by Firms Compared to Aggregate Inflation.

                                            Panel A: Expected price changes                                            Panel C: Share with exp. price increases




                                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                   Actual 
                                                                                                                                   Share
         -1.5 -1 -.5 0 .5 1 1.5




                                                                                            -1.5 -1 -.5 0 .5 1 1.5




                                                                                                                                                                         .8
                     percent




                                                                                                        percent




                                                                                                                                                                         share
                                                                                                                                                                         .4.6
                                              Actual 




                                                                                                                                                                         .2
                                              Ave. dP

                                    1990   1995     2000     2005     2010     2015     2020                         1990   1995     2000    2005   2010   2015   2020
                                              Panel B: Past price changes                                              Panel D: Share with past price increases
         -1.5 -1 -.5 0 .5 1 1.5 2




                                                                                                                                                                         .8
                                                                                            -1.5 -1 -.5 0 .5 1 1.5




                                                                                                                                                                               .6
                     percent




                                                                                                        percent




                                                                                                                                                                         share
                                                                                                                                                                          .4
                                                                                                                                                                         .2
                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                    1990   1995     2000     2005     2010     2015     2020                         1990   1995     2000    2005   2010   2015   2020

Notes: Panel A plots actual quarterly PPI inflation (excluding food and energy) in France and the average expected price changes reported by firms in the survey. Panel B compares
actual PPI inflation to the average share of firms reporting that they expect to raise prices in next three months. Panel C presents the PPI inflation and the average price changes over
the last three months reported by firms. Panel D reports the fraction of firms that claim to have increased prices over the preceding three months in the survey.
                                                                                                                                                                                      23
                                      Figure 2. Past and Expected Future Price Change Distribution.

              10
              8
              6
   Actual price change, %
   -4 -2      0
              -6
              -8
              -10  2    4




                            -5   -4    -3      -2     -1     0      1    2          3      4      5       6
                                                    Expected price change, %


Notes: The figure plots a binscatter of expected future price changes over the following three months reported by firms
across all quarters of the survey against ex-post actual price changes over the previous three months reported by firms across
all quarters of the survey.




                                                                                                                           24
     Figure 3. Response of Firms' Expected Price Changes to Industry vs. Aggregate Inflation and Output.

                                     Panel A: Response of own price expectations to inflation




                            .6
                            .4
                  percent
                            .2
                            0




                                 0   1    2    3     4     5      6     7      8     9     10     11    12

                                         Response to agg.                      90% confidence interval
                                         Response to industry                  90% confidence interval

                                     Panel B: Response of own price expectations to output
                        .3
                        .2
                 percent
                   .1   0
                        -.1




                                 0   1    2    3     4    5       6     7     8      9     10     11    12

                                         Response to agg. Y                    90% confidence interval
                                         Response to industry Y                90% confidence interval


Notes: Panel A plots the cumulative response of firms' expectations of their own price changes to changes in aggregate
inflation (blue line) and industry inflation (red lines); specification (1). Panel B plots the corresponding impulse responses
for firms' expectations their own price changes to changes in aggregate output (blue line) and industry output (red lines);
specification (2). The horizontal axis shows the impulse-response horizon measured in quarters.

                                                                                                                           25
Figure 4. Response of Firms' Expected (Qualitative) Price Changes to Industry vs. Aggregate Inflation and Output.

                                     Panel A: Response of own price expectations to inflation




                         .2
                         .15
                   share
                     .1  .05
                         0




                                 0   1    2    3      4     5      6      7      8     9     10     11     12

                                         Response to agg.                        90% confidence interval
                                         Response to industry                    90% confidence interval

                                     Panel B: Response of own price expectations to output
                        .08
                        .06.04
                      share
                   .02  0
                        -.02




                                 0   1    2    3      4     5      6      7     8      9     10     11     12

                                         Response to agg. Y                      90% confidence interval
                                         Response to industry Y                  90% confidence interval


 Notes: Panel A plots the cumulative response of firms' qualitative expectations of their own price changes to changes in
 aggregate inflation (blue line) and industry inflation (red lines); specification (1'). Panel B plots the corresponding impulse
 responses for firms' qualitative expectations their own price changes to changes in aggregate output (blue line) and industry
 output (red lines); specification (2'). The horizontal axis shows the impulse-response horizon measured in quarters.

                                                                                                                             26
       Figure 5. Response of Firms' Actual Price Changes to Industry vs. Aggregate Inflation and Output.

                                    Panel A: Response of own price changes to inflation




                     .8
                     .6
                 percent
                   .4.2
                     0




                           0    1      2     3     4      5      6     7      8      9    10     11     12

                                      Response to agg.                        90% confidence interval
                                      Response to industry                    90% confidence interval

                                    Panel B: Response of own price changes to output
                    .3
                    .2
                 percent
                   .1
                    0
                    -.1




                           0    1      2     3     4      5      6     7      8     9     10     11     12

                                     Response to agg. Y                        90% confidence interval
                                     Response to industry Y                    90% confidence interval


Notes: Panel A plots the cumulative response of firms' actual price changes to changes in aggregate inflation (blue line) and
industry inflation (red lines); specification (3). Panel B plots the corresponding impulse responses for firms' actual price
changes to changes in aggregate output (blue line) and industry output (red lines); specification (4). The horizontal axis
shows the impulse-response horizon measured in quarters.

                                                                                                                          27
 Figure 6. Response of Firms' Aggregate Inflation Expectations to Industry vs Aggregate Inflation and Output.

                              Panel A: Response of aggregate inflation expectations to inflation




                    .4
                    .3
                 share
                 .2 .1
                    0




                          0       1    2     3     4      5      6     7      8      9    10     11     12

                                      Response to agg.                        90% confidence interval
                                      Response to industry                    90% confidence interval

                              Panel B: Response of aggregate inflation expectations to output
                    .2
                    .15
                 share
                    .1
                    .05
                    0




                          0       1    2     3     4      5      6     7      8     9     10     11     12

                                      Response to agg. Y                       90% confidence interval
                                      Response to industry Y                   90% confidence interval


Notes: Panel A plots the cumulative response of firms' expectations of aggregate inflation to changes in aggregate inflation
vs. changes in industry inflation; specification (5). Panel B plots the equivalent responses to changes in aggregate vs.
industry output; specification (6). 95% confidence intervals are indicated by dotted lines in each panel. The horizontal axis
shows the impulse-response horizon measured in quarters.

                                                                                                                          28
                                                         Figure 7. Robustness: responses of aggregate inflation expectations to industry-level inflation shocks.
                                                         Panel A: Baseline                                                            Panel B: +production                                      Panel C: +production +2-digit controls




                                                                                                                                                                   .02 .04 .06 .08 .1 .12 .14
          -.02 0 .02 .04 .06 .08 .1 .12 .14




                                                                                        -.02 0 .02 .04 .06 .08 .1 .12 .14
                        share




                                                                                                      share




                                                                                                                                                                          share
                                                                                                                                                                               -.02 0
                                              0      2      4     6     8    10    12                                        0    2       4    6    8    10   12                                 0     2    4       6      8        10   12
                                                  Panel D: +production +time FE                                             Panel E: +production +time FE +lags
          .02 .04 .06 .08 .1 .12 .14




                                                                                        .02 .04 .06 .08 .1 .12 .14
                 share




                                                                                               share




                                                                                                                                                                                                            Response to industry 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            90% confidence interval
                           -.02 0




                                                                                                      -.02 0




                                              0      2      4     6     8    10    12                                       0     2      4     6    8    10   12

Notes: Each panel plots the impulse response of firms' aggregate inflation expectations to industry variation in inflation. Panel A is the baseline specification
(specification 5), panel B includes four-digit industry and aggregate production growth rate as an additional control, panel C adds two-digit industry inflation and
output growth rate, panel D includes four-digit industry production and time fixed effects as controls, while panel E includes time fixed effects as well as current
values and lags of four-digit industry production growth rate and inflation. The horizontal axis shows the impulse-response horizon measured in quarters.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              29
                                                 Figure 8. Additional robustness checks.

                                        Panel A: Exclude industries predicting aggregate inflation




                          .12 .14
                          .1
                  .02 .04 .06 .08
                          share
                          0
                          -.02




                                    0   1    2       3      4       5      6       7       8    9   10       11       12

                                              Response to industry                                           90% CI
                                              Response to industry  (excl. predictive indus.)                90% CI

                                                 Panel B: own-industry vs. placebo industry
                     .04  .12
                          .08
                  share
                          0
                          -.04
                          -.08




                                    0   1    2       3      4       5      6       7       8    9   10       11       12

                                                     Response to industry                           90% CI
                                                     Response to placebo industry                   90% CI


Notes: Panel A plots the average response of all firms' aggregate inflation expectations to industry inflation variation as
well as the response for firms that are specifically in industries for which industry inflation has no predictive power for
subsequent periods of aggregate inflation; specification (5). Panel B again plots the average response of all firms' aggregate
inflation expectations to industry inflation variation as well as a response of firms' aggregate inflation expectations to a
placebo industry's inflation; specification (9). See section 4 for construction of placebo industries. The horizontal axis shows
the impulse-response horizon measured in quarters.
                                                                                                                              30
Figure 9. Sensitivity of Aggregate Inflation Expectations to Volatility and Persistence of Industry-Level Inflation.

                                                                                      Panel A: Sensitivity to volatility of industry-level shocks


                  Average response agg. E to industry-level inflation
                                                                   .8
                                                                                 1729

                                                        .6

                                                                               2830
                                              .4



                                                                               2219
                                                                                             2452

                                                                                                     1511
                                                                                                        2410
                                     .2




                                                                                                                      2017
                                                                                                                  2442    2016
                                                                                                              2420       2017
                                                                                                                              2016
                             0




                                                                                                                                     2443 2444           1920
                                                                                2530                   1414
                                                                             3312 2822                    1041
                   -.2




                                                                         0                     2                  4                   6                           8
                                                                                      Standard deviation of innovations to industry-level inflation
                                                                                 Panel B: Sensitivity to persistence of industry-level shocks
                  Average response agg. E to industry-level inflation
                                                                   .8




                                                                                                                              1729
                                                        .6




                                                                                                                                      2830
                                                                                                                                         3020
                                                                                                                                            2594
                                                                                                                        811
                                              .4




                                                                                                                                 1071
                                                                                                                                    2550
                                                                                                                     1722                         2219
                                                                        1031                           2319
                                     .2




                                                                                                                       2895
                                                                                             2920
                                                                                              2812
                                                                          2712
                             0




                                                                                      3250                                                                 2059
                                                                        1412                                                               2051
                                                                                         1414
                                                                                                                       2932
                                                                                                                                                  2822
                   -.2




                                                                                                       2530          3312
                                                                                                                              1392

                                                                        -1            -.75      -.5     -.25       0        .25       .5         .75              1
                                                                                          Persistence of innovations to industry-level inflation

Notes: The top figure is a scatter plot of each industry's average impulse response of firms' expectations of aggregate price changes to
changes in their industry's prices (vertical axis) versus the standard deviation of innovations to that industry's inflation rate. The bottom
figure is a scatter plot of each industry's average impulse response of firms' expectations of aggregate price changes to changes in their
industry's prices (vertical axis) versus the persistence of that industry's inflation rate.

                                                                                                                                                                      31
                                              Table 1. Descriptive Statistics.
                                                          Firm specific outcomes                 Aggregate
                                                        Expectations           Past             Expectations
                                                             (1)               (2)                  (3)
            Panel A. Prices
            Average price change, %                            0.15              0.08                  -
            Average non-zero price change, %
                Increase                                       3.04              3.15                  -
                Decrease                                      -3.21             -3.55                  -
            Price change, share (%)
                All                                          34.1              32.7                 35.7
                Increases                                    19.5              20.2                 21.1
                Decreases                                    14.6              12.5                 14.6

            Panel B. Production
            Change in production
               All                                           52.5              44.7                 42.4
               Increases                                     28.8              25.6                 22.3
               Decreases                                     23.4              19.1                 19.1

Notes: The table reports descriptive statistics from the survey of French firms. Panel A focuses on price statistics, Panel B
on statistics about production. For Panel A, statistics are provided for quantitative responses from firms about their price
changes over the previous three months as well as their expected price changes over the next three months. All other statistics
are based on qualitative responses regarding whether they expect variables to increase, decrease or stay the same.




                                                                                                                            32
                                                    Table 2. Industry heterogeneity, descriptive statistics.
                                                                                                  Huber-
                                                                                                                25th       50th       75th
                                                                                       mean       robust                                          St.Dev.
                                                                                                             percentile percentile percentile
                                                                                                  mean
                                                                                         (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)
        Responses of expectations
           Average response of    to                                                    0.078       0.065     -0.007       0.050        0.142       0.134
           Average response of    to                                                    0.281       0.265      0.159       0.271        0.376       0.182
        Industry characteristics
           St.Dev. of innovations to                                                    1.351      1.050       0.724       1.016       1.521        1.064
           Persistence of                                                               0.131      0.171      -0.048       0.173       0.377        0.349
           Loading of   on                                                              0.318      0.101       0.018       0.105       0.347        0.606
           Loading of   on ( )                                                          0.023      0.005      -0.004       0.005       0.025        0.068
           Median labor cost share                                                      0.493      0.502       0.443       0.503       0.567        0.104
           Median material cost share                                                   0.797      0.844       0.685       0.874       0.986        0.232
           Median export share                                                          0.297      0.290       0.110       0.262       0.456        0.209
           Median number of products                                                    1.312      1.227       1.089       1.217       1.413        0.332
           Log(Median firm size)                                                        4.920      4.907       4.636       4.910       5.225        0.606
           Median capacity utilization rate                                            81.397     81.599      78.755      81.734      83.642        5.087


Notes: The first two rows are the average impulse response for each industry of firms' aggregate inflation expectations to industry inflation (Average response of
   to   ) or aggregate inflation (Average response of    to   ). St.Dev. of innovations to   and Persistence of   are estimated
using Huber-robust regression of AR(4) processes. Loadings are estimated Huber-robust regressions. Industry-level characteristics such as labor share, number of
products, etc. are taken from the EITC survey. These characteristics are computed using sampling weights.




                                                                                                                                                                 33
                              Table 3. Determinants of sensitivity of aggregate inflation expectations to industry-level inflation.
                                                                            Dependent variable: Ave. response of    to  
                                                            (1)           (2)          (3)            (4)           (5)       (6)                 (7)
                                        
           St.Dev. of innovations to                      -0.015*                   -0.017*       -0.015         -0.027    -0.024              -0.025
                                                          (0.009)                   (0.009)       (0.018)        (0.017)   (0.018)             (0.018)
           Persistence of                                               0.087***     0.094***      0.089***       0.069**   0.068**             0.064**
                                                                       (0.031)      (0.031)       (0.032)        (0.030)   (0.031)             (0.031)
           Ave. response of   to                                                                   0.013          0.074     0.072               0.072
                                                                                                  (0.060)        (0.059)   (0.061)             (0.061)
           Loading of   on                                                                         0.030          0.030     0.027               0.026
                                                                                                  (0.040)        (0.037)   (0.039)             (0.039)
           Loading of   on ( )                                                                    -0.298         -0.208    -0.205              -0.223
                                                                                                  (0.279)        (0.260)   (0.279)             (0.277)
           Labor cost share                                                                                       0.055     0.060               0.050
                                                                                                                 (0.095)   (0.101)             (0.101)
           Material cost share                                                                                    0.159***  0.159***            0.168***
                                                                                                                 (0.044)   (0.045)             (0.046)
           Export share                                                                                                    -0.022              -0.027
                                                                                                                           (0.051)             (0.051)
           Number of products                                                                                               0.004              -0.005
                                                                                                                           (0.055)             (0.057)
           Log(Median firm size)                                                                                            0.000               0.001
                                                                                                                           (0.017)             (0.017)
           Capacity utilization rate                                                                                                            0.002
                                                                                                                                               (0.002)

           Observations                                     134          134            134           134           134            134           134
           R-squared                                       0.021        0.057          0.088         0.092         0.192          0.190         0.196


Notes: The table plots results from cross-sectional regressions. The dependent variable is each industry's average response of firms' aggregate inflation
expectations to variation in that industry's inflation rate after conditioning on aggregate inflation.




                                                                                                                                                            34
        Appendix A
Additional Tables and Figures




                                35
                                       Appendix Table 1. Sample characteristics.

                                                                                                Duration of
                                                                            Share of
                                  Number of              Sales                                participation in
                                                                         exports in total
                                  employees            (million )                               the survey,
                                                                            sales, %
                                                                                                   years
              Average                 435                 332.6                19.9                 6.75

              Percentiles
               P10                     32                   6.6                  0                  0.50
               P25                     60                  17.5                  0                  1.75
               P50                    146                  51.3                 8.6                 5.25
               P75                    350                 165.5                31.8                 10.0
               P90                    810                 477.0                60.8                 15.5

Notes: the table reports sample unweighted statistics. The number of employees is reported by firms when they answer for
the first time to the survey and then this number is updated every year. Sales corresponds to total sales of a firm in a given
year (for all products sold by this firm). Share of exports is calculated as the ratio between export sales (in millions euros)
over total sales (for all products). Duration is calculated as the number of quarters the firm answers to the questionnaire
divided by 4.



  Appendix Table 2. Share of industries with industry-level inflation predicting aggregate inflation at a given
                                                   horizon.

                                      HORIZON          PRICES           PRODUCTION
                                        H=1             0.27               0.13
                                        H=2             0.22               0.09
                                        H=3             0.15               0.06
                                        H=4             0.13               0.04
                                        H=5             0.10               0.03
                                        H=6             0.09               0.03
                                        H=7             0.09               0.02
                                        H=8             0.09               0.02


Notes: The table reports the fraction of industries for which one can reject the null (at the 95% level) that industry-level
variation in either prices (column 1) or production 2 (column 2) has predictive content for subsequent aggregate price
changes (column 1) or subsequent aggregate production changes (column 2) after conditioning on either current and lagged
aggregate prices or production. H indicates the horizon over which we test for predictive power of contemporaneous industry
level variation. See section 4 for details.




                                                                                                                            36
                         Appendix Figure 1. Firms' Expected Production and Wage Changes vs. Aggregate Production and Wage Changes.

                              Panel A: Past output increases                                              Panel B: Expected output increases
              10




                                                                                             10
                                                                                      1




                                                                                                                                                                    1
                                                                                        .4 .6 .8




                                                                                                                                                                    .8
                   0




                                                                                               0
            percent




                                                                                        percent
                                                                                         share




                                                                                                                                                                    share
                                                                                                                                                                      .6
          -10




                                                                                      -10




                                                                                                                                                                    .4
                                                                                      .2




                                                                                                                                                                    .2
              -20




                                                                                             -20
                                                                                      0
                       1990   1995    2000     2005      2010      2015      2020                  1990    1995     2000       2005      2010      2015      2020

                                  Agg. prod. growth                Share (past)                                 Agg. prod. growth                 Share (future)

                                       Panel C: Wage growth
                1.5
                  1
            percent
          .5    0




                       1990    1995     2000          2005    2010        2015        2020

                                       Aggregate                    Ave. firm level


Notes: Panel A plots the fraction of firms in the survey who report that they increased their production over the previous three months as well as a seasonally adjusted measure of
industrial production in France. Panel B plots the fraction of firms in the survey who expect to increase their production over the following three months. Panel C plots the average
growth in wages reported by firms in the survey versus a measure of wage growth in industry in France.
                                                                                                                                                                                  37
                                        Appendix Figure 2. Firms' Aggregate Price and Output Expectations vs Aggregate Price and Output Changes.


                                 Panel A: Share expecting agg. prices increase                        Panel C: Share expecting agg. wages increase




                                                                                                1.5
                                                                                        1




                                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                         Actual growth
                                                                                                                                         Share
        -1.5 -1 -.5 0 .5 1 1.5




                                                                                        .8




                                                                                                                                                          .8
                                                                                                1
                                                                                             .6
                    percent




                                                                                        percent
                                                                                         share




                                                                                                                                                          share
                                                                                                                                                            .6
                                                                                        .4


                                                                                                .5




                                                                                                                                                          .4
                                                                                        .2




                                                                                                                                                          .2
                                                                                        0


                                                                                                0
                                 1990    1995    2000    2005    2010    2015    2020                 1990   1995   2000   2005   2010    2015     2020
                                 Panel B: Share expecting agg. output increase                        Panel D: Share expecting agg. export increase
                  10




                                                                                                20
                                                                                        1




                                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                        .8




                                                                                                                                                          .8
                                                                                                10
                  0




                                                                                                 .6




                                                                                                                                                               .6
          percent




                                                                                            percent
                                                                                             share




                                                                                                                                                           share
                                                                                               0
                                                                                            .4




                                                                                                                                                          .4
        -10




                                                                                        -10
                                                                                        .2




                                                                                                                                                          .2
                  -20




                                                                                                -20
                                                                                        0




                                                                                                                                                          0
                                 1990    1995    2000    2005    2010    2015    2020                 1990   1995   2000   2005   2010    2015     2020

Notes: Each panel compares the share of firms in the survey reporting increases for specific variables (Prices in panel A, Wages in Panel B, Production in Panel C,
and Exports in Panel D) to growth rates of corresponding measures for total industry in France.
                                                                                                                                                                    38
Appendix Figure 3. Response of Firms' Expected Output Changes to Industry vs. Aggregate Inflation and Output.

                                     Panel A: Response of own output expectations to inflation



                           .2
                           .1
                   share
                     0     -.1
                           -.2




                                 0   1     2    3     4     5      6      7      8      9     10    11     12

                                         Response to agg.                        90% confidence interval
                                         Response to industry                    90% confidence interval

                                     Panel B: Response of own output expectations to output
                           .15
                           .1
                   share
                           .05
                           0




                                 0   1    2     3     4     5      6      7      8      9     10    11     12

                                         Response to agg. Y                       90% confidence interval
                                         Response to industry Y                   90% confidence interval


 Notes: Panel A plots the cumulative response of firms' expectations of their own output changes to changes in aggregate
 inflation (blue line) and industry inflation (red lines); specification (1') with output expectations as the regressand. Panel B
 plots the corresponding impulse responses for firms' expectations their own output changes to changes in aggregate output
 (blue line) and industry output (red lines); specification (2') with output expectations as the regressand. The horizontal axis
 shows the impulse-response horizon measured in quarters.
                                                                                                                              39
Appendix Figure 4. Response of Firms' Actual Output Changes to Industry vs. Aggregate Inflation and Output.

                                       Panel A: Response of own actual output to inflation



                         .3
                         .2
                         .1
                 share
                         0
                         -.1
                         -.2




                               0   1     2     3    4     5      6     7      8      9    10     11     12

                                        Response to agg.                      90% confidence interval
                                        Response to industry                  90% confidence interval

                                       Panel B: Response of own actual output to output
                         .2
                         .15
                 share
                  .1     .05
                         0




                               0   1     2     3    4     5      6     7      8     9     10     11     12

                                        Response to agg. Y                     90% confidence interval
                                        Response to industry Y                 90% confidence interval

Notes: Panel A plots the cumulative response of firms' expectations of firm's own output to changes in aggregate inflation
vs. changes in industry inflation; specification (3) with output expectations as the regressand. Panel B plots the equivalent
responses to changes in aggregate vs. industry output; specification (4) with output expectations as the regressand. 95%
confidence intervals are indicated by dotted lines in each panel. The horizontal axis shows the impulse-response horizon
measured in quarters.
                                                                                                                          40
Appendix Figure 5. Response of Firms' Aggregate Output Expectations to Industry vs Aggregate Inflation and Output.

                                     Panel A: Response of aggregate output expectations to inflation



                           .2
                           0
                   share
                    -.2    -.4
                           -.6




                                 0      1    2     3    4     5      6   7      8      9    10     11     12

                                            Response to agg.                    90% confidence interval
                                            Response to industry                90% confidence interval

                                     Panel B: Response of aggregate output expectations to output
                           .3
                           .2
                   share
                           .1
                           0




                                 0      1    2     3    4     5      6   7      8     9     10     11     12

                                            Response to agg. Y                   90% confidence interval
                                            Response to industry Y               90% confidence interval


  Notes: Panel A plots the cumulative response of firms' expectations of aggregate output to changes in aggregate inflation
  vs. changes in industry inflation; specification (5) with aggregate output expectations as the regressand. Panel B plots the
  equivalent responses to changes in aggregate vs. industry output; specification (6) with aggregate output expectations as the
  regressand. 95% confidence intervals are indicated by dotted lines in each panel. The horizontal axis shows the impulse-
  response horizon measured in quarters.
                                                                                                                            41
            Appendix Figure 6. Robustness for Response of Firms' Expected Price Changes to Industry vs. Aggregate Inflation and Output.

                                     Panel A: Baseline                               Panel B: +production                      Panel C: +production +2-digit controls
                         .6




                                                                         .6




                                                                                                                          .6
                                                                                                                          .4
                         .4




                                                                         .4
               percent




                                                               percent




                                                                                                                    percent
                                                                                                                          .2
                         .2




                                                                         .2




                                                                                                                          0
                         0




                                                                         0
                              0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12                     0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12                     0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
                               Panel D: +production +time FE                  Panel E: +production +time FE +lags
                         .6




                                                                     .6
                                                                     .4
                         .4




                                                                                                                                           Response to agg. 
               percent




                                                               percent




                                                                                                                                           90% confidence interval
                                                                                                                                           Response to industry 
                                                                     .2
                         .2




                                                                                                                                           90% confidence interval
                                                                     0
                         0




                              0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12                    0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12

Notes: This figure demonstrates robustness of responses in Figure 3 to variation in the set of controls. Panel A is the baseline specification (specification 5), panel
B includes four-digit industry and aggregate production growth rate as an additional control, panel C adds two-digit industry inflation and output growth rate, panel
D includes four-digit industry production and time fixed effects as controls, while panel E includes time fixed effects as well as current values and lags of four-digit
industry production growth rate and inflation. The horizontal axis shows the impulse-response horizon measured in quarters.
                                                                                                                                                                        42
                                              Appendix B
    Translation of the Questionnaire sent to firms Enquête
        Trimestrielle de Conjoncture dans l'Industrie
    I.     YOUR FORECASTS ON THE FRENCH INDUSTRY AS A WHOLE
This is your opinion on the entire French industry. Please circle the arrow corresponding to
your answer

PROBABLE EVOLUTION IN THE NEXT 3 MONTHS:
1. The volume of industrial production

2. The volume of exports of products manufactured abroad

3. General level of prices of industrial products

4. Hourly wages ............................................. significant increase // low rise // stability


    II.      QUESTIONS ABOUT THE PRODUCTS OF YOUR COMPANY (if necessary,
             update the list of pre-printed products, please)

     1. PRODUCT DESIGNATION (several products here, in different columns, separate
        answers for each product)
Please tick the appropriate box or circle the arrow corresponding to your reply.
All the questions asked below concern your production units located in France:

Approximate amount of total sales in France and abroad in 2013 (excluding taxes) ...............
.......... thousands of euros
Approximate amount of sales abroad in 2013 ............................ .......... thousands of euros

a. Evolution during the last 3 months .................................

b. Probable evolution over the next 3 months ....................


2. GLOBAL ORDERS (OR DEMAND) (from all sources)
a. Evolution during the last 3 months .................................


b. Probable evolution over the next 3 months .....................


c. On the basis of the recorded orders still to be delivered and the current rate of manufacturing,
for how many weeks do you think your business is guaranteed?
about ............ weeks

d. Do you consider that given the season, your order book                                               (or   your
addressed demand) is currently higher than usual normal lower than usual

       3. FOREIGN ORDER (S)
a. Evolution during the last 3 months .....................



                                                                                                               43
b. Probable evolution over the next 3 months


c. Do you consider that, given the season, your foreign order book (or
addressed foreign demand) is currently higher than average / normal / lower than average

4. YOUR COMPETITIVE POSITION
Evolution in the last 3 months:
a. On the national market .....................

b. In foreign markets within the European Union ..................

c. Outside the European Union .....................


5. DELIVERY TIMES
Evolution during the last 3 months .....................


6 YOUR FINAL PRODUCT STOCKS (products ready for sales
If the nature of your production is that you are still working without stock of manufactured
products, check the box opposite .............................................

a. Evolution during the last 3 months .....................


b. Do you consider that, given the season, your current level of inventories of manufactured
products is higher than average / average / lower than average

7. YOUR SELLING PRICES
Evolution of your sales prices (excluding taxes) during the last 3 months


Please also indicate their approximate variation .over the last 3 months in % ...

Evolution of your export sales prices expressed in euros during the last 3 months ...
                                                           .
Please also indicate their approximate variation in %

Probable evolution of your sales prices (excluding taxes) over the next 3 months
                                                     .

Please also indicate their approximate variation           in %

    III.   NATURE AND IMPORTANCE OF THE COMPANY
The       data     below        relates     to      your      production          in     France:
1. Order of magnitude of your turnover (excluding taxes) in 2013 ........... thousands of euros

2. Number of employees employed by the company as of December 31, 2013..........
employees

3. Approximate amount of your foreign sales in 2013.... .. thousands of euros

    IV.      SOME INDICATIONS ON THE CURRENT SITUATION IN YOUR COMPANY
                                                                                             44
All the questions asked below concern your production units located in France:

     1. Factors currently limiting your production (Place a cross in the appropriate box)
Are you currently prevented from developing your production as you would like because:
- insufficient demand? .................................................. ..................................................
- the inadequacy of your equipment or material? ..................................................
- the inadequacy of a staff that you have difficulties to increase?
- financial constraints? .................................................. ..................................................
- supply difficulties? .................................................. ..................................................
- other factors (specify)? .................................................. ..................................................
- not applicable (you are currently able to develop your production as you wish)

     2. Bottlenecks and use of production capacities
If you receive more orders, could you produce more, with your current means? YES - NO

If YES what could be the increase of your production with the existing capital and without
hiring additional staff? ................................. about .............. %

Could you produce more by hiring additional staff? .......... YES ? NO ?

Your company currently operates at ...................% of its overall capacity.

This is the ratio (in%) of your current production to the maximum production you could get by
hiring possibly additional staff.

     3. Based on your current order backlog and likely future orders over the next few
        years/months, do you consider that your current production capacity:
        Is more than enough? is sufficient ? it's not enough ?

     4. Are you currently experiencing cash flow difficulties? ............................. YES ? NO

    V.     QUESTIONS CONCERNING THE LABOR
Please tick the appropriate box or circle the arrow corresponding to your answer.
1. Are you currently experiencing recruitment difficulties? .................................... YES ? NO?

If YES, for which types of personnel? laborers and specialized workers? skilled workers and
foremen? technicians or executives?

     2. Total number of employees and weekly hours of work

Number of employees
a. Evolution during the last 3 months ...........................................

b. Probable evolution over the next 3 months .............................

Hours of work
a. Evolution during the last 3 months ...........................................

b. Probable evolution over the next 3 months .............................

3. Rate of pay (put 0 if they have not changed)
On average, how much did hourly wages vary in your business during the fourth quarter of
2014? ..............%


                                                                                                                                   45
                                               Appendix C:
             Forecast Errors for Firms' Own Price Changes

In this appendix, we characterize the properties of forecast errors for firms' own price changes.

                                                          #
Suppose firms have optimal price equal to marginal cost:    =  . Marginal cost follows an AR(1):  = -1 +
 . Firms don't observe marginal cost but receive signal each period:  =  + 

                                                                                 (1- )
Beliefs about marginal cost follow:   =  + (1 -  )-1  =  +                               -1 -1
                                                                                   


Firms set prices for that period after receiving signal so  =   and their expected price for the next period is
 +1 =  +1 =   =  . To know prices and expected prices, we just need to track evolution of beliefs
about marginal costs.

These follow:
                                    (1 -  )
                       =  +                   -1 -1 =  + (1 -  )-1 -1 + 
                                       
Dynamics of perceived marginal costs after a shock to actual marginal costs are:
                                                     
                                                             = 
                                                      
                                         +1 +1
                                                       =  + (1 -  )
                                              
            +2 +2
                        = 2 + (1 -  )[ + (1 -  ) ] = 2 + (1 -  )2  + (1 -  )2 2 
                 
...
       + +                                                         1 - (1 -  )+1
                     =  1 + (1 -  )+. . +(1 -  )  =                               = 1 - (1 -  )+1 
                                                                           
And

                                       + ++1
                                             = 1 - (1 -  )+1 +1
                                        

Since  =   it follows that the impulse response of prices is given by
                                    + + +
                                           =            = 1 - (1 -  )+1 
                                                  
And the impulse response of expected prices is given by
                             + ++1 + ++1
                                            =             = 1 - (1 -  )+1 +1
                                                    
So the impulse response of forecast errors    - -1  follows
    + + -1 +
           =         -              = 1 - (1 -  )+1  - 1 - (1 -  )  =  [-(1 -  )+1 + (1 -  ) ]
                           
                   =  (1 -  )  =  [(1 -  )]

This is the same result as in Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2012): forecast errors converge due to learning (1-G) and
transitory nature of shock (rho). In CG (2012), we then normalize by response of fundamental (here marginal cost),
which captures the effect of rho and leaves only 1-G.

                                                                                                                     46
Here, we do not observe fundamental marginal cost. If we normalize forecast error response by response of actual
prices:
                                +
                                                [(1 -  )]              (1 -  )
                                         =                       =
                                 +         (1 - (1 -  )+1 ) 1 - (1 -  )+1
                                       
                                     
Which is highly nonlinear in Kalman gain. For example, these are normalized impulse responses for different values
of the Kalman gain:
                                                         2
                                                        1.8
                                                        1.6
                                                        1.4
                                                        1.2
                                                         1
                                                        0.8
                                                        0.6
                                                        0.4
                                                        0.2
                                                         0
                                                                      1       2       3          4               5                             6             7             8         9       10

                                                                                      0.1            0.25                 0.3                                0.4               0.5



In practice, if we estimate impulse responses of forecast errors for firms' own prices in the French survey of firms, we
get the following IRFs:

                                      Panel A: (Unaccumulated) Response of forecast errors to inflation                                                Panel B: (Unaccumulated) Response of forecast errors to output
                 .06




                                                                                                                                 .03
                            .04




                                                                                                                                         .02
     Forecast error, percent




                                                                                                                     Forecast error, percent
                   .02




                                                                                                                              .01
           0




                                                                                                                     0
 -.02            -.04




                                                                                                                                 -.01




                                  0      1     2    3         4   5       6   7   8    9    10       11     12                                     0     1         2   3        4    5   6    7   8    9    10   11     12

                                              Response to aggregate               Response to industry                                                        Response to aggregate Y             Response to industry Y




When we estimate Kalman gain after normalizing by the IRF of own-price responses, results are exceedingly sensitive
to all empirical choices (e.g. control variables, length of IRF etc) and do not point to any clear result for associated
Kalman gains other than that they are systematically below 1, consistent with the presence of imperfect information.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             47
