                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  MONETARY POLICY WITH OPINIONATED MARKETS

                                      Ricardo J. Caballero
                                          Alp Simsek

                                      Working Paper 27313
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27313


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                           June 2020, Revised December 2020




We thank Chris Ackerman, Marios Angeletos, Ben Bernanke, Jonathan Brownrigg, Anthony
Diercks, Tishara Garg, Ozer Karagedikli, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Yueran Ma, Guillermo
Ordonez, Alexi Savov, Jaume Ventura, Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, Christian Wolf, and seminar
participants at Bilkent, Bocconi, Chicago, Columbia, CREI, Dallas Fed, Duke, ECB, NBER SI,
NYU Stern, Richmond Fed, Stanford GSB, and Yale SOM, for their comments. Caballero and
Simsek acknowledge support from the National Science Foundation (NSF) under Grant Numbers
SES-1848857 and SES-1455319, respectively. First draft: 10/07/2019. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Ricardo J. Caballero and Alp Simsek. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Monetary Policy with Opinionated Markets
Ricardo J. Caballero and Alp Simsek
NBER Working Paper No. 27313
June 2020, Revised December 2020
JEL No. E00,E12,E21,E32,E43,E44,G11,G12

                                         ABSTRACT

Central banks (the Fed) and markets (the market) often disagree about the path of interest rates.
We develop a model where these different views stem from disagreements between the Fed and
the market about future aggregate demand. We then study the implications of these disagreements
for monetary policy, the term structure of interest rates, and economic activity. In our model,
agents learn from the data but not from each other--they are opinionated. In this context, the
market perceives monetary policy "mistakes" and the Fed partially accommodates the market's
view to mitigate the impact of perceived "mistakes" on output and inflation. The Fed plans to
implement its own view gradually, as it expects the market to receive more information and move
closer to the Fed's belief. Disagreements about future demand, together with learning, translate
into disagreements about future interest rates. Disagreements also provide a microfoundation for
monetary policy shocks: after a surprise policy announcement, the market (partially) learns the
Fed's belief and the extent of future "mistaken" interest rate changes. We categorize these shocks
into three groups: Fed belief shocks, market reaction shocks, and tantrum shocks, and analyze
their impact on forward interest rates and economic activity. Tantrum shocks are the most
damaging, as they arise when the Fed fails to forecast the forward rates' reaction. These shocks
motivate additional gradualism as well as communication policies that reveal the Fed's belief, not
to persuade the market (which is opinionated) but to prevent a misinterpretation of the Fed's
belief. Finally, we also find that disagreements affect inflation and create a policy trade-o¤
between stabilizing output and inflation.


Ricardo J. Caballero
Department of Economics, E52-528
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
caball@mit.edu

Alp Simsek
Department of Economics, E52-552
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
asimsek@mit.edu
 1.     Introduction
Figure 1 plots the evolution of the Fed funds rate over time (thin black line), along with predicted
paths. The dotted lines plot the Fed'
                                    s predictions-- either the FOMC members'median dot fore-
cast (the right panel) or the Fed sta¤'
                                      s assumption for the Greenbook (the left panel). The solid
lines plot the forward interest rates that reect the ...nancial market's predictions. Each color-
matched pair of lines plots data from the same FOMC meeting. The ...gure shows large disagree-
ments between the Fed'
                     s predictions and the forward rates, especially around policy-inection
episodes. Ubide (2015) observes similar disagreements in other countries where central banks
publish their expected interest rate paths (e.g., Sweden, Norway, and New Zealand).1 These
disagreements about interest rates are di¢ cult to explain with conventional macroeconomic
models. The literature typically focuses on the Fed's superior information about its policy rule
or economic activity (and its willingness to signal this information). However, the right panel of
Figure 1 shows that ...nancial markets expect a di¤erent interest rate than the Fed even after the
FOMC members announce the interest rates they plan to set. In fact, market participants often
have their own opinions and do not necessarily consider the Fed to have superior information
about the state of the economy.2
    These disagreements are a source of concern for the Fed, as they suggest that the market
might perceive the Fed's actions as "mistakes." How do interest rate announcements perceived
as "mistakes"a¤ect the term structure of interest rates and economic activity? How should the
Fed manage monetary policy in this environment? To address these, and related issues, we build
a model in which the market and the Fed have disagreements about future aggregate demand.
Our model delivers several positive and normative results: First, we explain the di¤erences
in interest rate predictions between the Fed and ...nancial markets. Second, we ...nd that the
Fed'
   s optimal interest rate target partially reects the market'
                                                             s view. Third, we provide a
microfoundation for monetary policy shocks driven by the Fed'
                                                            s announcements, and analyze the
role of communication policy in attenuating these shocks. Finally, we show that disagreements
   1
     There are many adjustments one could make to Figure 1, while preserving its main qualitative features. The
most signi...cant one is to remove the embedded risk premium from the forward curve. We chose not to do so
because there is a wide range of estimates for this premium. The most recent estimates by the Fed researchers
suggest that this adjustment is of the order of one basis point per month (positive in the pre GFC period and
negative after that), which is not nearly enough to eliminate the disagreements (see, e.g., Diercks et al. (2019)).
Moreover, we also found large disagreements between the Fed'          s predictions and the professional forecaster' s
consensus (in both the Blue Chip Financial Forecasts and the Survey of Professional Forecasters).
   2
     To illustrate how opinionated the market can be, consider the FOMC meeting in December 2007-- the run-up
to the ...nancial crisis-- in which the Fed cut interest rates by 25 basis points. The market was expecting a larger
interest rate cut, so this was a "hawkish"policy surprise that led to a decline in stock prices. According to journal
coverage, some market participants were quite pessimistic that deteriorating ...nancial conditions would adversely
a¤ect the economy, and they thought the Fed did not realize the scope of the problem. For example, the day after
the FOMC meeting the Wall Street Journal wrote: "Some on Wall Street yesterday criticized the Fed'        s actions so
far as inadequate. `  From talking to clients and traders, there is in their view no question the Fed has fallen way
behind the curve,'said David Greenlaw, economist at Morgan Stanley. `        There' s a growing sense the Fed doesn' t
get it.' Markets believe a weakening economy will force the Fed to cut rates even more than they expected before
yesterday, Mr. Greenlaw said."



                                                          2
Figure 1: Dotted lines: the Fed prediction for Fed funds rates for select FOMC meetings-- from
either the Greenbook assumptions (the left panel) or the FOMC dots (the right panel). Solid
lines: the forward Fed funds rates for the same meetings. Thin black line: the Fed funds rate.


a¤ect ination and create a policy trade-o¤ between stabilizing output and ination.
   Our model is a variant of the canonical New Keynesian model (e.g., Clarida et al. (1999);
Galí (2015)). Nominal prices are fully sticky in our baseline setup (and partially sticky in an
extension). There is a representative household (the market) that makes consumption-saving
and labor supply decisions. In each period, the economy is subject to a shock that a¤ects
current spending without changing current potential output-- we refer to this as an aggregate
demand shock. The Fed sets the risk-free interest rate in an attempt to insulate output from
aggregate demand shocks. However, the Fed sets the interest rate under uncertainty about
aggregate demand for the current period. This assumption implies that the Fed cannot fully
stabilize the output gap (output relative to potential). Instead, the Fed ensures the output gap
is zero "on average" according to the Fed's belief.
   Our main assumption is that the market and the Fed can have opinionated belief disagree-
ments about the evolution of aggregate demand. In our baseline setup, agents know each others'
beliefs and agree to disagree. Agents also learn over time : they update their beliefs as they ob-
serve realizations of aggregate demand. These assumptions provide the central insight of our
paper: the market considers the Fed'
                                   s interest rate decisions that do not match the market's
belief to be "mistakes" (we occasionally use quotes to remind the reader that these are mistakes
under the market's belief, not under the Fed'
                                            s belief or the objective belief). The anticipation
of these "mistakes"a¤ects economic activity and drives the Fed'
                                                              s optimal interest rate decision.
   For example, suppose the Fed becomes more optimistic than the market about a persistent
component of aggregate demand. Since the Fed is optimistic about aggregate demand, it raises
the interest rate to stabilize the output gap. However, since the market doesn't share the Fed'
                                                                                              s

                                                3
optimism, it considers the interest rate hike to be a "mistake"and expects the output gap to be
negative. Moreover, since disagreements are expected to disappear only gradually as agents learn
over time, the market expects "mistakenly high" interest rates in future periods as well. The
forward interest rates immediately increase and put downward pressure on current economic
activity. Therefore, even though the Fed is optimistic about aggregate demand, it does not
need to raise the current interest rate by much to stabilize the output gap under its belief.
In equilibrium, the Fed raises the interest rate by a relatively small amount, which-- together
with the increase in the forward rates-- reduces aggregate demand just enough to counteract
the increase in the Fed'
                       s optimism. The Fed also expects to continue raising rates over time,
as it expects the data to support its view and persuade the market to move closer to its view.
That is, when combined with learning, disagreements naturally imply (expected) gradualism in
monetary policy implementation.
   Our ...rst result formalizes this logic and shows that the Fed'
                                                                 s optimal interest rate reects
a weighted average of the Fed's belief and the market's belief. Moreover, the relative weight on
the market's belief is greater when agents are more con...dent in their initial beliefs, since con...-
dence translates into more persistent disagreements. The observation that the interest rate is a
weighted average of agents'beliefs, together with learning, also explains the observed di¤erences
between the market'
                  s and the Fed's expectation for future interest rates-- "the forward curve"
and "the dot curve" (see Figure 1). Speci...cally, for su¢ ciently distant horizons, the forward
curve reects the market'
                       s current belief whereas the dot curve reects the Fed's current belief.
Intuitively, the market thinks the Fed will learn from data and come to the market's belief.
Hence, the market thinks the Fed will set future interest rates that are more closely aligned with
the market'
          s current belief. Conversely, the Fed thinks the market will learn from data and it
will set future interest rates reecting its current belief.
   We then provide a microfoundation for textbook monetary policy shocks. These shocks are
typically modeled as exogenous, random uctuations around an interest rate rule. In contrast,
we envision monetary policy shocks as times when the market updates its belief about the
Fed'
   s belief about aggregate demand. To capture these shocks, we extend the model to make
the market initially uncertain about the Fed'
                                            s belief. In this setup, a surprise interest rate
announcement informs the market about the Fed's belief. Since the market is opinionated,
the announcement does not change the market'
                                           s belief about aggregate demand. Instead, the
announcement a¤ects the market'
                              s expectation of "mistaken"interest rate changes. The induced
market response a¤ects economic activity in the same manner as textbook shocks-- but with
important di¤erences and policy implications. We categorize our microfounded monetary policy
shocks into three groups: Fed belief shocks, market reaction shocks, and tantrum shocks.
   A Fed belief shock corresponds to a situation in which the Fed'
                                                                 s interest rate decision fully
reveals the Fed'
               s belief to the market. In particular, a surprise interest rate hike implies the Fed
has become more optimistic. Since beliefs adjust only gradually, the market anticipates further
("mistaken") interest rate hikes. Therefore, the shock lifts the forward curve and reduces the


                                                  4
market's expected output gap (and asset prices)-- like textbook shocks. However, the shock'
                                                                                          s
subsequent impact on the output gap is more subtle and depends on whether the Fed'
                                                                                 s or the
market's belief is closer to the data generating process. In fact, if the Fed has the objective
belief and sets the interest rate optimally-- accommodating the disagreement as in our baseline
model-- then the shock has no impact on the output gap on average.
   A market reaction shock arises when the Fed's belief has multiple dimensions and is not fully
revealed by the interest rate. We focus on scenarios in which a surprise rate hike can result from
either short or long-term optimism. This type of shock a¤ects the equilibrium according to the
market's reaction-- whether the market interprets the signal as short or long-term optimism-- as
opposed to the Fed's actual belief about its optimism's horizon. For instance, a reactive market
attributes the signal to long-term optimism and responds by raising the forward rates. Facing
such a market, the Fed needs to act as if it has long-term optimism-- raising the interest rate
by a small amount as in our baseline setup-- even when it only has short-term optimism.
   A tantrum shock is similar to the market reaction shock with the di¤erence that the Fed fails
to forecast correctly how the market will react to its interest rate decision. This is a costlier
shock because the interest rate set by the Fed is suboptimal given the market's reaction. For
concreteness, suppose the Fed has become more optimistic about the short term and thinks the
(unreactive) market will attribute an interest rate hike to short-term optimism. However, the
market is actually reactive. In this setup, anticipating no change in the forward rates, the Fed
raises the current interest rate substantially to address its short-term optimism. The market
interprets this aggressive hike as a large increase in long-term optimism and the forward rates
increase substantially. This unanticipated market reaction depresses current aggregate demand
and makes the Fed miss its output target-- even under its own belief.
   Tantrum shocks have two other important implications. First, when the Fed anticipates
these shocks, it acts even more gradually than in our baseline setting (where the Fed knows
how the market will react to its policy). Intuitively, an optimistic Fed does not hike the interest
rate as much as in the baseline, to mitigate the tantrum shock that would arise if the market
were revealed to be reactive. Second, despite the Fed's more conservative policy stance, these
shocks induce the Fed to miss its output gap target more often than in the baseline setting. This
motivates Fed communication policies designed to mitigate tantrum shocks. With these shocks,
Fed communication can be a highly e¤ective policy tool, not for its persuasion power (since
the market is opinionated), but because it reveals the Fed'
                                                          s actual belief to the market. For
example, by announcing the future interest rates it expects to set ("the dot curve") in addition
to the current rate, the Fed can reveal whether it has long or short-term optimism and reduce
the chance of tantrum shocks in which the market misinterprets the Fed's belief.
   In the ...nal part of the paper we extend the model to allow for partial price exibility,
which gives rise to a standard New Keynesian Phillips curve. This extension strengthens our
mechanism, in the sense that the Fed accommodates the market'
                                                            s belief even more than with fully
sticky prices. The reason is that, for optimal policy purposes, disagreements closely resemble

                                                5
the cost-push shocks in the textbook New-Keynesian model. Consider the earlier example with
an optimistic Fed in which the market expects the Fed to set high interest rates and induce
negative output gaps. With partially exible prices, the market also expects disination which,
via the Phillips curve, reduces current ination. The Fed is then forced to set an even lower
interest rate than before-- closer to the market'
                                                s pessimistic belief-- to create a positive output
gap and ...ght the disinationary pressure. In fact, the "divine coincidence" breaks down and
the Fed faces a trade-o¤ between stabilizing current ination and the current output gap.
   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. After discussing the related literature, we start
in Section 2 by documenting facts about interest rate disagreements among forecasters that
motivate our modeling ingredients. Section 3 introduces our general environment, describes
the belief structure we focus on, and derives the equilibrium conditions. Section 4 shows how
disagreements a¤ect optimal interest rate policy and (together with learning) explain the gap
between the forward curve and the dot curve. Section 5 introduces the market's uncertainty
about the Fed'
             s belief and derives our results about monetary policy shocks. Section 6 analyzes
the extension with partial price exibility. Section 7 provides ...nal remarks, and is followed by
several appendices.

Related literature. Our paper has normative and positive parts, both of which relate to
multiple literatures about monetary policy. The distinctive feature of our model is belief dis-
agreements between the Fed and the market. In particular, the market has its own belief and
does not consider the Fed to have superior information about economic activity.
   Our policy analysis contributes to a large literature that investigates gradualism in monetary
policy: the idea that the Fed tends to adjust the interest rates in small steps in the same direction
(see, e.g., Woodford (2003); Bernanke (2004); Stein and Sunderam (2018)). Our model features
a novel form of expected gradualism. When the Fed becomes more optimistic than the market,
it hikes the interest rate by a small amount-- partially accommodating the market'
                                                                                 s view-- but
it also expects to continue to hike rates. Importantly, the market does not expect the rate hikes
to continue, which might help explain why gradualism has been di¢ cult to detect from the term
structure of interest rates (e.g., Rudebusch (2002)). With tantrum shocks, our model features a
second, more standard rationale for gradualism (similar to Brainard (1967); Sack (1998)): The
Fed adjusts the policy rate conservatively in fear of a large market reaction. However, our model
can also generate rapid policy responses with respect to other types of shocks, e.g., an increase
in the market'
             s optimism not matched by the Fed's optimism (see Remark 1 in Section 4).
   Our policy analysis is also related to the growing literature on central bank communication
(see Blinder et al. (2008) for a review). The literature documents that central bank transparency
has increased in recent years, and that the common forms of communication has made monetary
policy shocks more predictable. Our model is consistent with these ...ndings and provides a
theoretical rationale for Fed communication. As anticipated by Blinder (1998), the Fed in our
setup communicates to let the market know its own belief. This improves the Fed'
                                                                               s ability to

                                                 6
predict how the market will react to its actions and to devise appropriate policies. In particular,
                                                                              s belief.3
the Fed can avoid the tantrum shocks in which the market misinterprets the Fed'
       More broadly, our normative analysis is part of a large literature that investigates optimal
macroeconomic policy without rational expectations (see Woodford (2013) for a review). This
literature typically assumes the planner is rational, but agents are boundedly rational due to
frictions such as learning (e.g., Evans and Honkapohja (2001); Eusepi and Preston (2011)), level-
k thinking (e.g., García-Schmidt and Woodford (2019); Farhi and Werning (2019); Angeletos
and Sastry (2018)), or cognitive discounting (Gabaix (forthcoming)).4 The focus is on designing
policies that address or are robust to agents' bounded rationality. Our approach has two key
di¤erences. First, we do not take a stand on who has rational beliefs: in fact, the market thinks
it has correct beliefs and the Fed has incorrect beliefs-- the opposite of the typical assumption.
Second, our agents are not boundedly rational in the usual sense: both the market and the
Fed have dogmatic beliefs about exogenous states and understand how those states map into
endogenous outcomes. These assumptions lead to a di¤erent policy analysis and results. In our
setting, the Fed'
                s main non-standard concern is to mitigate the macroeconomic impact of the
monetary policy "mistakes" perceived by the market.
       Our positive analysis contributes to the large literature that empirically investigates the
e¤ects of monetary policy shocks on economic activity (see Ramey (2016) for a recent review).
We introduce Fed belief shocks (and variants) as microfounded monetary policy shocks. Our
shocks are related to the Fed information e¤ ect emphasized in the recent literature (see, e.g.,
Campbell et al. (2012); Nakamura and Steinsson (2018); Andrade et al. (2019))-- the idea that
the Fed'
       s policy announcements might contain information about fundamentals. In our model,
the market does not think policy announcements have information about fundamentals. Instead,
the market updates its belief about the Fed'
                                           s belief. Our monetary policy shocks generate
contingent predictions for the impact of monetary policy shocks on subsequent economic activity
that depend on the accuracy of the Fed'
                                      s belief (or the market's understanding of it). As we
discuss in the concluding section, these predictions can help shed light on the recent empirical
...ndings that monetary policy shocks seem to have a smaller e¤ect on activity in recent years.
       Our analysis generates some of the asset price responses to monetary policy shocks identi-
...ed by the empirical literature that uses high-frequency event study methods (e.g., Bernanke
   3
     See Woodford (2005) for other arguments for Fed communication and Amato et al. (2002) for a model in
which the Fed communication might be excessive. A parallel debate concerns the best practices for central bank
communication; for instance, whether the central bank should speak with a single voice or with many voices--
re ecting the di¤erences of opinion among policymakers (see, e.g., Ehrmann and Fratzscher (2007)). In recent
work, Vissing-Jorgensen (2019) analyzes "the quiet cacophony of voices"       : informal communication by multiple
FOMC members. She argues that the market beliefs do in            uence actual monetary policy decisions (as in our
model), and the FOMC members know this and selectively reveal information to in         uence the market's belief. In
her model, informal communication resembles a Prisoner'      s dilemma and is welfare reducing.
   4
     A closely related literature assumes agents are also rational but lack common knowledge of each other' s beliefs,
and illustrates how the resulting coordination problems can lead to aggregate behavior that resembles some forms
of bounded rationality (e.g., Woodford (2001); Angeletos and La'       O (2010); Morris and Shin (2014); Angeletos
and Lian (2018); Angeletos and Huo (2018)).



                                                          7
and Kuttner (2005); Gürkaynak et al. (2005a,b); Hanson and Stein (2015); Goodhead and Kolb
(2018)). For instance, Gürkaynak et al. (2005b) ...nd the forward curve reaction can be summa-
rized by two factors: a policy target factor and a path factor. Our monetary policy shocks can
accommodate both factors with appropriate beliefs (see Remark 2 in Section 5).
   A strand of the literature documents that the high-frequency "policy surprises" are pre-
dictable from information publicly available before the announcement (see, e.g., Miranda-
Agrippino (2016); Miranda-Agrippino and Ricco (2018); Cieslak et al. (2018)). In recent work,
Sastry (2019); Bauer and Swanson (2020) investigate this puzzle and ...nd that the Fed has re-
acted to public data about the state of the economy more than the market had anticipated.
The evidence further suggests that, at the time of the announcement, the market learns the
Fed'
   s belief (or reaction) and disagrees with it. Instead of adopting the Fed'
                                                                            s belief, the market
independently updates its own belief from the same public data-- possibly at a di¤erent time.
These ...ndings are consistent with our key ingredients, disagreements and learning from data.
   Our analysis with partial price exibility is related to the New Keynesian literature on the
limits of ination stabilization policy. In the textbook model, stabilizing ination also replicates
the exible-price outcomes. This divine coincidence applies for supply shocks as well as demand
shocks and implies that the central bank does not face a policy trade-o¤ (e.g., Goodfriend and
King (1997); Blanchard and Galí (2007); Galí (2015)). This feature seems counterfactual, which
has lead the literature to introduce "cost-push"shocks-- often motivated by markup uctuations
or wage rigidities-- that a¤ect ...rms'price setting (the Phillips curve) and create a policy trade-
o¤. We show that disagreements between the Fed and the market (the price setters) create
a policy trade-o¤ even without cost-push shocks. Intuitively, perceived policy "mistakes" shift
agents'ination expectations and a¤ect their price setting as-if there is a cost-push shock.
   Our analysis of the Blue Chip data is related to a literature that uses survey data to document
belief distortions about macroeconomic outcomes. Much of the recent literature focuses on
whether agents over-or-underreact to data (e.g., Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2015); Bordalo
et al. (2018); Broer and Kohlhas (2018); Angeletos et al. (2020); Ma et al. (2020)). In contrast,
we focus on agents' disagreements (see also Andrade et al. (2016)) and their reaction to each
other'
     s beliefs. We provide evidence for con...dent disagreement: forecasters'beliefs are persistent
and largely insensitive to the consensus belief. We also show that, as in our model, beliefs about
the interest rate correlate with beliefs about aggregate demand-- proxied by ination (see also
Giacoletti et al. (forthcoming)).
   Finally, this paper is related to a large literature that studies the macroeconomic implications
of belief disagreements and speculation (see Simsek (2020) for a recent survey). We analyze
the disagreements between the Fed and investors, whereas the literature mostly focuses on the
disagreements among investors (see, e.g., our previous work, Caballero and Simsek (2020, 2019)).




                                                 8
                          Fed f unds rate three quarters ahead (av erage, percent)




           6
           4
           2
           0




           2001m1   2003m1   2005m1   2007m1   2009m1   2011m1   2013m1   2015m1   2017m1   2019m1


                    GDP price index growth three quarters ahead (annualized, percent)
           3
           2
           1
           0




           2001m1   2003m1   2005m1   2007m1   2009m1   2011m1   2013m1   2015m1   2017m1   2019m1


                         Consensus                 Goldman Sachs                    Bear Stearns


Figure 2: Select Blue Chip predictions for the Fed funds rate (top panel) and the GDP price
index (bottom panel).


 2.    Interest rate disagreements: Some facts from forecasters
Our model is built on the observation that disagreements on expected interest rates are driven by
disagreements about expected aggregate demand. Moreover, we assume con...dent disagreement:
that is, agents have dogmatic beliefs and do not consider the other agent to have superior infor-
mation. In this section, we present evidence for these modeling ingredients from disagreements
among professional forecasters. We focus on disagreements among forecasters to exploit the high
quality and forecaster-level data on beliefs, which we do not have for the Fed. Our presumption
is that the beliefs' traits observed across forecasters (major ...nancial institutions) should also
carry over to the Fed.
   Speci...cally, we measure beliefs from Blue Chip Financial Forecasts (Blue Chip). Blue Chip
is a monthly survey of several major ...nancial institutions. Forecasters report predictions about
interest rates and other outcomes for up to six quarters. We focus on the Fed funds rate (reported
as the quarterly average)-- which captures beliefs about the policy interest rate, and the GDP
price index as well as the real GDP (reported as the annualized quarterly growth rate)-- which
proxy for beliefs about aggregate demand. We analyze predictions for the third quarter (beyond
the current quarter) but the results are similar for other horizons. Our sample runs from January
2001 until February 2020.
   Figure 2 illustrates the consensus (average) prediction together with the predictions from



                                                        9
two major institutions: Goldman Sachs and Bear Stearns (until its failure in 2008). The panels
show that higher interest rate predictions are typically associated with higher aggregate demand
predictions (proxied by the GDP price index). In the early 2000s, Goldman Sachs and Bear
Stearns were both more pessimistic about aggregate demand and predicted lower interest rates
than the consensus. In the mid 2000s, both institutions turned more optimistic about demand
and predicted higher interest rates. In the run-up to the ...nancial crisis of 2008, Goldman Sachs
became more pessimistic about demand and predicted lower interest rates; whereas Bear Stearns
remained optimistic and predicted higher interest rates (until it eventually failed in early 2008).
After the crisis, Goldman Sachs remained pessimistic and predicted low interest rates during
the zero lower bound and the lift-o¤ episodes (until recent years).
       Importantly, Figure 2 also highlights that relative predictions are quite persistent. This per-
sistence is di¢ cult to reconcile with dispersed information: forecasters see each other'
                                                                                        s prediction
as well as the consensus prediction (with a delay of one month) and yet they largely stay with
their own prediction. Rather, the persistence of predictions suggests con...dent disagreement : as
in our model, forecasters seem to have dogmatic beliefs that they change only gradually.
       We use regression analysis to show these observations more systematically. We ...rst establish
that higher interest rate predictions are associated with higher aggregate demand predictions.
Speci...cally, we regress the Fed funds rate prediction on the GDP price index or the real GDP
prediction, controlling for month and forecaster ...xed e¤ects. The ...rst three columns of Table 1
illustrate that the coe¢ cients are positive and signi...cant. The coe¢ cient for the GDP price index
is larger and more signi...cant-- this is expected since nominal prices provide a more accurate
proxy for aggregate demand than real output (which might also be driven by aggregate supply).
       We next establish that interest rate predictions are persistent in a way that suggests con-
...dent disagreement rather than dispersed private information. With con...dent disagreement,
predictions are correlated with their own past values. With dispersed private information, pre-
dictions instead are correlated with the consensus prediction'
                                                             s past values-- assuming the con-
sensus aggregates the dispersed information. We therefore run a "horse race" where we regress
the Fed funds rate prediction on its one-month lag and the consensus prediction'
                                                                               s one-month
lag, controlling for forecaster ...xed e¤ects.5 The fourth column of Table 1 shows that con...dent
disagreement wins this horse race: the lagged own prediction has a much larger impact than the
lagged consensus prediction (and adding more lags does not change this result).
       In the horse-race regression, the lagged consensus also has a signi...cant e¤ect. While this
might be driven by dispersed private information, it might also reect other public signals that
correlate with the consensus. To investigate, we control for the one-month lag of the Fed funds
futures rate for three quarters ahead (the same quarter as the predictions).6 The ...fth column
shows the lagged futures rate has a larger e¤ect than the lagged consensus. Moreover, once
   5
     We exclude month ...xed e¤ects from this regression, since including them would absorb the e¤ect of the
consensus prediction.
   6
     We obtain the futures rate for the quarter by averaging the implied futures rates for the months in the quarter.



                                                         10
                        Table 1: Correlates of interest rate predictions
                                              Fed funds rate (FFR) prediction
                                  (1)     (2)        (3)      (4)       (5)   (6)                             (7)
  GDP price index prediction 0.11**                0.11**                                                   0.04**
                                (0.02)             (0.02)                                                   (0.01)
  Real GDP prediction                    0.03* 0.03+                                                        0.01+
                                         (0.02) (0.02)                                                      (0.01)
  FFR prediction last month                                 0.69** 0.69** 0.69**                            0.68**
                                                            (0.03) (0.03) (0.02)                            (0.02)
  FFR consensus last month                                  0.29** -0.17**
                                                            (0.03) (0.06)
  FFR futures last month                                              0.47**
                                                                      (0.06)
  Time FE                        Yes      Yes       Yes       No        No    Yes                            Yes
  Forecaster FE                  Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes      Yes    Yes                            Yes
  R2 (adjusted, within)          0.03     0.00      0.03     0.96      0.97  0.48                            0.49
  Forecasters                    110      111       110       108      108    108                            107
  Months                         230      230        230      229       226   229                            229
  Observations                  10,365 10,645 10,363 10,370 10,244 10,370                                   10,052
 Note: The sample is an unbalanced panel of monthly Blue Chip forecasts between 2001-2020. Predictions and
futures are for 3 quarters ahead. FFR is the quarterly average (percent) and the GDP price index and the real
GDP are annualized quarterly growth rates (percent). Estimation is via OLS. Standard errors are in parentheses
and clustered by forecaster and month. +, *, and ** indicate signi...cance at 0.1, 0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively.


we control for the futures, the coe¢ cient on the consensus changes signs (most likely due to
collinearity). In contrast, the coe¢ cient on the lagged own prediction is robust to including
lagged futures (...fth column), month ...xed e¤ects-- that capture forecasters' common reaction
to all signals (sixth column), and the current own prediction for the GDP price index and the
real GDP (the last column).
    In sum, Table 1 shows that the results illustrated in Figure 2 hold more systematically.
Interest rate forecasts correlate with aggregate demand forecasts. Forecasts also feature con...dent
disagreement: forecasters seem to have dogmatic beliefs that they change only gradually. We
next turn to our theoretical analysis, where we equip the Fed and the market with beliefs that
satisfy these features and investigate the implications for monetary policy and asset prices.


 3.     Environment, equilibrium, and beliefs
In this section we introduce the model, characterize the equilibrium conditions for our baseline
setting, and describe the evolution of beliefs. We also solve for the equilibrium in a benchmark
case with common beliefs.




                                                          11
               Figure 3: The timeline of events and the summary of the model.


3.1.    The model
The model is similar to a textbook New Keynesian model with two distinct features. First,
the economy is subject to aggregate demand shocks that move expenditure without changing
potential output. Second, and more importantly, the Fed sets the interest rate before observing
the aggregate demand shock for the current period. This assumption captures realistic lags in
monetary policy transmission. It also makes the Fed's belief about demand shocks relevant for
optimal monetary policy and allow us to study disagreements between the Fed and ...nancial
markets.
   Figure 3 illustrates the timeline of events within a period. Each period has three phases. In
the ...rst phase, the Fed sets the risk-free interest rate. Then, a shock that determines aggregate
demand within the period is realized. Finally, in the last phase, the market chooses optimal
allocations, markets clear, and the equilibrium level of output is determined. Throughout, we
                                                                        i [ ] to denote agent
denote the Fed and the market with the superscript i 2 fF; M g. We use Et
                                                                                                 i
 s expectation in period t before the realization of shocks (in the ...rst phase), and we use E t [ ]
i'
to denote the corresponding updated beliefs after the realization of shocks (in the last phase).

Preferences and technology. The economy is set in discrete time t 2 f0; 1; ::g. The demand
side features a representative household (the market ) that maximizes utility in the last phase of
each period,                         2
                                       1                                  1+'
                                                                                !3
                                   M X                   ~               Nt
                                                                          ~
                                  Et 4   e               t
                                                              log Ct
                                                                   ~             5.
                                                                         1+'
                                           ~=t
                                           t

The market observes the current aggregate demand shock (that we describe subsequently) and
solves a standard problem that we relegate to the appendix.
   The supply side features a competitive ...nal goods sector and monopolistically competitive
intermediate good ...rms that produce according to,
                            Z     1
                                                              "
                                                             " 1
                                               " 1
                     Yt =             Yt ( )    "    d             and Yt ( ) = At Nt ( )1   .
                              0




                                                               12
If nominal prices were fully exible, the equilibrium labor and output would be equal to their
potential levels denoted by, N and Yt = At (N )1                  (see Eq. (A:12) in the appendix).

Nominal rigidities. We assume a fraction of the intermediate good ...rms have sticky nomi-
nal prices. We focus on the standard Calvo setup in which in each period a randomly selected
fraction of ...rms reset their nominal prices, whereas the remaining fraction leaves their prices un-
changed. For small aggregate demand shocks, this setup implies aggregate output is determined
by aggregate demand, Yt = Ct .
   In the appendix, we log-linearize the equilibrium around allocations that feature potential
(exible-price) real outcomes and zero nominal ination. We show that our price setting as-
sumption implies the New-Keynesian Phillips Curve (NKPC),

                                                             M
                                             t   = y
                                                   ~t + E t [     t+1 ] ,                                       (1)

where y
      ~t = log (Yt =Yt ) denotes the output gap relative to potential and                   t   = log (Pt =Pt       1)
denotes ination. The coe¢ cient,             , is a price exibility parameter (see Eq. (A:21) in the
appendix).

Aggregate demand shocks. We capture aggregate demand shocks via news about potential
growth. Formally, log productivity, at = log At , follows the process,

                                                  at+1 = at + gt ,

where gt denotes the growth rate of productivity between periods t and t + 1, which is realized
in period t. In particular, by the time the economy reaches period t, there is no uncertainty
about the potential output of the economy in the current period: at = at                1   + gt   1   and gt   1   is
already determined. However, there is uncertainty about potential growth between this and the
next period, gt .
   In the appendix, we log-linearize the Euler equation for the market to obtain the IS equation,

                                                 M                          M
                               y
                               ~t =     it   Et [    t+1 ]       + gt + E t [~
                                                                             yt+1 ] ,                           (2)

             M
where it   Et [     t+1 ]   corresponds to the (market-expected) real interest rate. Eq. (2) illustrates
that for a given real interest rate, the equilibrium output gap increases one-to-one with the
potential growth rate, gt , as well as with the expected future output gap. This is why we refer
to gt as the aggregate demand shock in period t.

Monetary policy. The interest rate is set by the monetary authority (the Fed). Our key
friction is that the Fed sets the interest rate at the beginning of the period, before observing the
aggregate demand shock for the period. Otherwise, the Fed solves a standard gap-minimization


                                                        13
problem. We assume the Fed sets policy without commitment. In each period and state, it takes
the future allocations as given and implements the allocation that solves,

                                                             1 F        2     2
                                              min             E       y
                                                                      ~t  +       ,                                  (3)
                                            i t ;y
                                                 ~t ;   t    2 t              t


subject to (1) and (2).

 3.2.     Baseline equilibrium conditions
Except for Section 6, we focus on the special case with fully sticky prices,                        = 0. In this case,
ination is zero,     t   = 0, and the Fed focuses on stabilizing output. In particular, combining
problem (3) with Eq. (2), the Fed's optimality condition implies,

                                                                                    M [~
                                                                                  dEt
                            F    dy
                                  ~t              dy
                                                   ~t                                 +1 yt+1 ]
                           Et        y
                                     ~t = 0 where     =                     1+                  .                    (4)
                                 dit              dit                                  dit

Note that in this expression we substituted the market's end-of-period expectations in period
                                                                          M [~        M
t with its beginning-of-period expectations in period t + 1, E t [~
                                                                  yt ] = Et +1 yt+1 ] (since no new
information arrives between the last phase of period t and the ...rst phase of period t + 1-- see
Figure 3). For most of our analysis, we work with belief speci...cations under which the policy
                                                                                                              M [~
                                                                                                            dEt +1 yt+1 ]
rate has a deterministic impact on the market's expected future output gap: that is,                             dit
                                          M [~
is deterministic. This is either because Et +1 yt+1 ] does not depend on the current interest rate
(Section 4); or because it has a (conditionally) constant slope with respect to the current interest
rate (Section 5 except for Section 5.4). In these cases, the Fed'
                                                                s optimality condition simpli...es
to,
                                                             F
                                                            Et [~
                                                                yt ] = 0.                                            (5)

The Fed closes output gaps in expectation and according to its own belief.
      We can then combine Eqs. (2) and (5) to solve for the equilibrium interest rate as

                                                 F          F  M
                                     it =     + Et [gt ] + Et Et +1 [~
                                                                     yt+1 ] .                                        (6)

                                                                               F [g ]. More
The Fed sets a higher interest rate when it expects greater aggregate demand, Et   t
subtly, the Fed also sets a higher interest rate if it expects the market to be more optimistic about
                                   F E M [~
the subsequent output gap (higher Et  t+1 yt+1 ] ). As illustrated by Eq. (2), the market'
                                                                                         s
optimism about future output increases current output, and the Fed increases the interest rate
to o¤set this e¤ect. This mechanism plays an important role for our results.
      Substituting Eq. (6) into Eq. (2), we solve for the equilibrium output gap as,

                                        F          M                         F  M
                           ~t = gt
                           y           Et [gt ] + Et     yt+1 ]
                                                     +1 [~                  Et Et +1 [~
                                                                                      yt+1 ] .                       (7)

In equilibrium, the output gap depends on surprises relative to the Fed's expectations. The


                                                                 14
...rst two terms concern surprises to the aggregate demand shock, gt . When aggregate demand
is higher than the Fed expected when it set the interest rate, the output gap is higher. The last
two terms concern the Fed'
                         s surprise about the market'
                                                    s expectation about the output gap in
the next period. This second surprise will play no role until Section 5.3 (on tantrum shocks).
    Finally, we also characterize risky asset prices along the equilibrium path. We focus on "the
market portfolio"which we de...ne as a ...nancial asset (in zero net supply) whose payo¤ is equal
                                     1
to output in subsequent periods, fYt ~ t+1 . In the appendix, we show that the log price of this
                                   ~gt
asset satis...es,
                                                   qt = q + at + y
                                                                 ~t ,                                   (8)

where q is a constant. Under log-utility, the price of the market portfolio is proportional to
output (see Eq. (A:23)). Therefore, the price moves either when productivity changes or when
the output gap changes. In subsequent analysis, we focus on characterizing the output gap, y
                                                                                           ~t ,
and refer to Eq. (8) to describe the impact on asset prices.
    Eqs. (6     8) provide a generally applicable characterization of equilibrium (when prices are
                      M [~
                    dEt +1 yt+1 ]
fully sticky and         dit        is deterministic). We next specify the agents'beliefs under which we
apply these equations.

 3.3.    Uncertainty and beliefs
Motivated by our empirical analysis in Section 2, we equip agents with persistent belief disagree-
ments. For simplicity, we start with a case in which agents disagree about a fully persistent
component of aggregate demand. In Section 5, we analyze the case in which agents can (also)
disagree about a transitory component.
    Formally, we assume aggregate demand follows

                               gt = g + vt for each t,                                                  (9)
                      where vt           N (0; ) for each t and independent across t.

The random variable vt captures transitory shocks to aggregate demand. These shocks are i.i.d.
across periods with a Normal distribution. The term g is an unknown parameter that captures
the persistent component of aggregate demand. It is realized at the beginning of the model but
it is not observed by the agents.
    Agents have heterogeneous prior beliefs about g. Speci...cally, at the beginning of period 0,
each agent j 2 fF; M g believes the persistent component is drawn from a Normal distribution,

                                                         j
                                               g      N g0 ; C0 1       ,                              (10)

       j
where g0 denotes the perceived prior mean and C0 1                  denotes the perceived variance. The key
assumption is that the beliefs           F
                                        g0   and    M
                                                   g0   may di¤er. Throughout, agents have dogmatic dis-



                                                          15
agreements in the sense that they do not think the other agent has any information they haven't
already incorporated. Except for Section 5, we assume agents know each other'
                                                                            s beliefs: "they
agree to disagree." The parameter C0 is a measure of the agent'
                                                              s con...dence in its initial belief.
In the main text, we focus on the case in which agents have common con...dence. Con...dence
captures (inversely) how fast agents update their beliefs as they observe new data.
   We are agnostic about the source of agents'dogmatic belief disagreements-- our results do
not require a speci...c interpretation. One possibility is that agents received news of an unusual
event (e.g., a ...nancial crisis) that will induce a persistent shock to aggregate demand. Since these
events are rare, history does not provide su¢ cient guidance about how they a¤ect the economy,
so it is natural for agents to start with heterogeneous prior beliefs. An alternative possibility is
that agents have heterogeneous and possibly misspeci...ed learning models. For instance, suppose
agents receive public signals that are informative about aggregate demand (e.g., macroeconomic
data releases), but they interpret these signals di¤erently, e.g., the Fed puts more weight on one
signal whereas the market puts more weight on another signal. Our results would qualitatively
apply under this alternative (behavioral) interpretation. For concreteness, however, we assume
agents are "rational" given their heterogeneous initial beliefs.

Bayesian updating of beliefs. Speci...cally, the realization of aggregate demand in each
period provides the agents with a noisy signal about the persistent component, gt = g + vt .
Agents combine this data with their prior beliefs in (10) to form their posterior beliefs according
to Bayes'rule. In Appendix B.1, we show that agent j '
                                                     s conditional belief about the persistent
            j       j
component, gt      Et [g], evolves according to,

                                                                                              t 1
                                                                                              X
                            j              j                                                      g~t
                           gt    =   c0;t g0   + (1    c0;t ) g t   1   where g t     1   =             ,   (11)
                                                                                                    t
                                                                                              ~=0
                                                                                              t
                                              j
                                 = ct    1;t gt 1   + (1     ct     1;t ) gt 1   for each t         1,

where cs;t denotes the relative con...dence in period s compared to a later period t,

                                                      C0 + s
                                           cs;t                     for s        t.                         (12)
                                                      C0 + t
                                                                                        j
Eq. (11) says that the conditional belief is a weighted average of the initial belief, g0 , and the
average realization, g t    1.   The weights are determined by the relative con...dence between periods
0 and t. The second line writes the belief as a weighted average of the most recent belief and
the most recent realization.
   Recall that the equilibrium depends on the agents'conditional belief of aggregate demand.
                                                                                j          j
This belief is the same as the conditional belief of the persistent component, Et [gt ] = gt , since
the transitory component has mean zero [cf. (9)]. We establish two additional properties of
the conditional beliefs that facilitate the subsequent analysis. The ...rst result describes the


                                                           16
evolution of disagreements. The second result describes the higher order beliefs that matter for
the equilibrium: in particular, the agents'expectations at time t about the conditional beliefs
they will have at time t + 1 [cf. Section 3.2].

Lemma 1. Disagreements evolve according to,

                        M        F              M         F           M           F
                       gt +1    gt +1 = ct;t+1 gt        gt = c0;t+1 g0          g0 .                  (13)

In particular, disagreements are deterministic and they decline over time.

      Disagreements decline over time since agents update from the same data [cf. (11)]. Moreover,
they decline deterministically because we have assumed agents have common con...dence and
therefore put the same weight on data (i.e., new realizations of gt generate identical belief
updates for both agents).

Lemma 2. Consider the mean belief at the beginning of period s about the conditional mean
belief (about aggregate demand) in a subsequent period t              s. For each agent j 2 fF; M g and
j0   6= j , we have:
                                      h i
                                   j     j    j
                                 Es    gt  = gs ,                                                      (14)
                                     h 0i
                                  j     j          j0                      j
                                 Es   gt   = cs;t gs  + (1         cs;t ) gs .                         (15)

      Each agent expects its own conditional belief about aggregate demand in a future period to
be the same as its current belief. In contrast, each agent expects the other agent's conditional
belief in a future period to be a weighted average of the other agent's current belief and its
own current belief. The weights depend on the relative con...dence, cs;t . Intuitively, each agent
expects the other agent to learn from the data and to come toward its own view. The expected
speed of learning is decreasing in (the other agent's) con...dence. This implication of learning
will be important for our results.

 3.4.      Benchmark with common beliefs
We end this section by solving for the equilibrium in a benchmark scenario with no disagreement
                                                        F = gM
between the Fed and the market. Speci...cally, suppose g0                        g0 so that agents have the
                                                             0
same conditional belief, gt , in all periods.
      Since agents share the same belief and the Fed sets output gaps to zero in expectation [cf.
(5)], Eqs. (6) and (7) imply,

                                     it =       + gt ;                                                 (16)
                                     y
                                     ~t = gt       Et [gt ] = gt     gt .                              (17)

With common beliefs, the market knows the Fed will, on average, stabilize future output gaps,

                                                    17
Et+1 [~
      yt+1 ] = 0. Therefore, there are no perceived "mistakes" and the Fed sets an interest rate
that reects its expected aggregate demand. Naturally, surprises relative to the Fed's belief shift
the output gap.
   Next suppose the economy is at the initial period 0, and consider the expected future in-
terest rates according to the market'
                                    s and the Fed'
                                                 s belief, respectively. With a slight abuse of
terminology, we refer to the former as "the forward curve"and the latter as "the dot curve"(see
Figure 1). Using Eq. (16) and Lemma 2, we obtain,

                               M          F
                              E0 [it ] = E0 [it ] =     + g0 for each t.                        (18)

With common beliefs, the forward and dot curves are the same and they reect agents' current
belief about aggregate demand.


 4.    Disagreements and interest rate policy
We next turn to disagreements. Our ...rst result describes how disagreements a¤ect the optimal
interest rate as well as the expected interest rates.
                                                                   M ; gF .
Proposition 1. Consider our setup with arbitrary initial beliefs, g0    0
   (i) The equilibrium interest rate and output gap are given by

                                                            F           M
                              it =      + (1      ct;t+1 ) gt + ct;t+1 gt ,                     (19)
                                            F
                              y
                              ~t = gt      gt .                                                 (20)

The optimal interest rate set by the Fed reects in part the market's belief, with a weight that
depends on relative con...dence, ct;t+1 . In the limit of very high initial con...dence, the interest
rate reects only the market's belief, lim it =              M:
                                                         + gt
                                          C0 !1
   (ii) The forward and dot curves in period 0 are given by

                        M                 M                           F        M
                       E0 [it ] =      + g0 + c0;t (1       ct;t+1 ) g0       g0 ,              (21)
                         F                F           M           F
                        E0 [it ] =     + g0 + c0;t+1 g0          g0 .                           (22)

Each curve reects the corresponding agent's current belief for aggregate demand, with
an adjustment toward the other agent's belief that declines with horizon. For su¢ ciently long
                                                                        j            j
horizons, each curve reects only the corresponding agent's belief, lim E0 [it ] = + g0 , and the
                                                                              t!1
                                                          M [i ]
di¤ erence reects the level of current disagreement, lim E0                 F [i ] = gM
                                                                           E0              F.
                                                                                          g0
                                                              t                 t     0
                                                          t!1

   The ...rst part characterizes the equilibrium outcomes. The output is the same as in the
benchmark with common beliefs [cf. (17)]. The interest rate is di¤erent and depends on a
weighted average of the Fed's and the market's beliefs about aggregate demand. The Fed cannot
set interest rates by focusing only on its own view of aggregate demand-- it also needs to take

                                                   18
into account the market'
                       s view and the extent of disagreement. Moreover, the more entrenched
the disagreements, the more the Fed ignores its own view.
    The second part shows that, unlike the benchmark case, the forward and dot curves trace out
di¤ erent expected interest rate paths [cf. (18)]. The forward curve reects the market'
                                                                                      s belief for
aggregate demand with an adjustment toward the Fed'
                                                  s belief-- and vice versa for the dot curve.
Therefore, belief disagreements about aggregate demand translate into di¤erences between the
forward and dot curves.

Sketch of proof. We sketch the proof of the proposition, which is useful to develop intuition.
Recall from Lemma 1 that belief disagreements evolve deterministically. Therefore, we conjecture
(and verify) an equilibrium in which the market'
                                               s conditional belief about the subsequent output
                                                                                         M [~
                                                                                       dEt
      M [~                                                                                 +1 yt+1 ]
gap, Et +1 yt+1 ], is also deterministic and independent of the current policy rate,        dit        = 0.
In particular, the baseline characterization in Section 3.2 applies. Eq. (7) then immediately
implies (20). Since disagreements evolve deterministically, the Fed can still adjust the interest
rate appropriately to hit its output target on average, according to its own belief. Disagreements
manifest themselves in the interest rate that the Fed must set to achieve this outcome.
    Next consider the IS curve (2) for the case without ination,

                                                             M
                                     y
                                     ~t =   (it    ) + gt + Et +1 [~
                                                                   yt+1 ] .

All terms except for gt are deterministic. Taking the expectations according to each agent and
       F [~
using Et  yt ] = 0, we obtain,

                                  M          F          M          M       F
                                 Et [~
                                     yt ]   Et  yt ] = Et
                                               [~         [~
                                                           yt ] = gt      gt .                         (23)

In general, the market does not expect the output gap to be zero since it thinks the Fed will make
                                                                                   F > gM ,
"mistakes." The extent of "mistakes" depends on disagreements. For instance, when gt    t
the market thinks the Fed is too optimistic about demand and therefore sets an interest rate
                                                               M [~
too high, which will on average induce a negative output gap, Et  yt ] < 0.
    Eq.                                                M [~
            (23) together with Lemma 1 veri...es that Et +1 yt+1 ] is deterministic and satis...es
  M [~
dEt +1 yt+1 ]
    dit         = 0. Using (6), we also solve for the the equilibrium interest rate,

                                                F    M
                                    it =     + gt + Et +1 [~
                                                           yt+1 ]                                      (24)
                                                F    M          F
                                        =    + gt + gt +1      gt +1
                                                F           M           F
                                        =    + gt + ct;t+1 gt          gt .

This proves Eq. (19). The anticipation of future "mistakes"a¤ects current activity and induces
the Fed to adjust the interest rate in the direction of the market'
                                                                  s belief. For instance, when
 F > gM , the market thinks the Fed will remain optimistic also in the next period, gF > gM ,
gt    t                                                                              t+1  t+1
                                     M [~
and will set a negative output gap, Et +1 yt+1 ] < 0. This exerts downward pressure on the


                                                     19
current output gap. Consequently, the Fed sets a lower interest rate than implied by its own
(more optimistic) belief. The extent to which the Fed moves toward the market depends on
the relative con...dence, ct;t+1 , because this determines the extent to which the market expects
current disagreements to persist into the future.
   Finally, we establish the second part of the proposition. Consider the forward curve. Taking
the expectation of Eq. (19) according to the market'
                                                   s belief, we obtain

                       M                            M  F           M  M
                      E0 [it ] =   + (1   ct;t+1 ) E0 gt + ct;t+1 E0 gt .                       (25)

Substituting the higher order belief from Lemma 2 proves Eq. (21). For intuition, recall that
                          M gF , monotonically converges to gM as the horizon t increases. The
the higher order belief, E0  t                               0
market expects the Fed to learn over time and to converge to the market'
                                                                       s belief. Therefore, the
                                                                              M . A symmetric
market expects future interest rates to be determined by its current belief, g0
argument proves Eq. (22).

Illustration. Figure 4 illustrates the result and provides further intuition. In each panel, the
thin dashed line corresponds to the (overlapping) expected interest rates with a common baseline
belief. The thin solid line shows the expected rates when the common belief becomes more
optimistic. The thicker purple and blue lines show the dot and the forward curves, respectively,
when one agent becomes more optimistic and the other agent remains with the more pessimistic
baseline belief.
   First consider the case in which the Fed becomes more optimistic. The top panels of Figure
4 illustrate that this shifts both dot and forward curves upward, but with greater e¤ects on the
dot curve [cf. (22   21)]. This gap arises because the Fed expects the market to learn. Hence,
over longer horizons, the Fed expects to set interest rates that reect its optimism (whereas the
market expects the Fed will learn instead).
   These panels also illustrate that the Fed raises the interest rate less than the increase in its
optimism [cf. (19)]. For a complementary intuition, note that the market's expected interest
rates beyond the initial period also increase-- illustrated by the shaded area in the ...gure. More-
over, the market considers these increases a "mistake."These "mistakenly high"future interest
rates exert downward pressure on current output. Hence, even though the Fed becomes more
optimistic, it only needs to increase the current interest rate slightly to achieve its target output
gap. In fact, the Fed can be thought of as targeting an overall increase in the forward curve--
the current rate hike plus the shaded area-- that is just enough to counteract the increase in
its optimism. Consistent with this intuition, the Fed increases the interest rate by more when
agents are less con...dent in their initial beliefs. In that case, disagreements are less persistent
and the market expects the interest rate hike to decline more quickly (see the top right panel of
Figure 4).
   Next consider the case in which the market is more optimistic. The bottom panels of Figure


                                                 20
   0.07                                                 0.07


  0.069                                                0.069


  0.068                                                0.068


  0.067                                                0.067


  0.066                                                0.066


  0.065                                                0.065


  0.064                                                0.064


  0.063                                                0.063


  0.062                                                0.062


  0.061                                                0.061


   0.06                                                 0.06

          0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9                0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9




   0.07                                                 0.07


  0.069                                                0.069


  0.068                                                0.068


  0.067                                                0.067


  0.066                                                0.066


  0.065                                                0.065


  0.064                                                0.064


  0.063                                                0.063


  0.062                                                0.062


  0.061                                                0.061


   0.06                                                 0.06

          0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9                0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9




Figure 4: Top (resp. bottom) panels illustrate expected interest rates when the Fed (resp. the
market) becomes more optimistic while the other agent remains with the baseline belief. Left
(resp. right) panels correspond to higher (resp. lower) levels of initial con...dence, C0 .




                                                  21
4 show that this also shifts both forward and dot curves upward, but with greater e¤ects on
the forward curve. As before, this gap arises because agents expect each other to learn. Note
also that the Fed raises the initial interest rate even though its own belief did not change. In
this case, the market expects the Fed to be too pessimistic and to set interest rates too low
in future periods-- illustrated by the shaded area in the ...gure. These "mistakenly low" future
interest rates (together with the market's optimism) exert upward pressure on current output.
Therefore, the Fed is forced to increase the interest rate to achieve its target output gap. In fact,
the Fed can be thought of as hiking the current rate just enough to counteract the expected
"shortfall" in future interest rates-- the shaded area. Consistent with this intuition, the Fed
increases the interest rate by less when agents are less con...dent in their initial beliefs. In that
case, disagreements are less persistent and the market expects the interest rate to catch up with
its optimism more quickly (see the bottom right panel of Figure 4).

Remark 1 (Expected Gradualism). In our baseline model, the optimal interest rate policy has
a novel form of gradualism in the implementation of the Fed's view. When the Fed is more
optimistic than the market, it chooses not to increase the policy rate by the full amount of its
optimism (it partially accommodates the market's view), but it also expects to continue raising
rates as it expects the data to sway the market toward the Fed's view over time (as reected in
the dot curve). Conversely, the Fed is very reactive to the market's optimism, as it raises rates
immediately with the expectation to undo those changes over time as the market learns from
data.


 5.     Disagreements and monetary policy shocks
So far, we have assumed the Fed and the market know each others'belief. While the Fed might
observe changes in the market'
                             s belief through asset prices (albeit with noise), it is harder for
the market to observe changes in the Fed's belief. In fact, much of the Fed'
                                                                           s communication
policy can be viewed as an attempt to convey the Fed'
                                                    s belief to the public. In this section, we
analyze the role of the Fed'
                           s announcements in revealing the Fed's belief to the market.
   We derive microfounded monetary policy shocks and categorize them into three groups. "Fed
belief shocks"occur when the Fed'
                                s interest rate decision optimally and fully reveals a change in
its belief to the public. "Market reaction shocks"occur when the Fed's belief is multidimensional.
In this case, the interest rate decision signals the Fed's belief only partially and its impact on the
economy depends on the market'
                             s reaction to the signal, rather than on the Fed's actual belief.
Finally, "tantrum shocks" occur when "market reaction shocks" are possible and the Fed does
not fully know how the market will react to its interest rate decision. We also show that the
fear of tantrum shocks induces the Fed to act even more gradually than in our baseline setting.
Despite the Fed'
               s more conservative policy stance, these (tantrum) shocks are welfare reducing
and can be mitigated by appropriate Fed communication policies.


                                                 22
 5.1.      Fed belief shocks
Consider the baseline setup with the di¤erence that the market does not know the Fed'
                                                                                    s initial
         F . Speci...cally, the market believes the Fed'
belief, g0                                             s belief is drawn from a distribution with
mean, gF
       0
                    M gF . The Fed still knows the market'
                   E0  0
                                                                    M . The rest of the model is
                                                         s belief, g0
unchanged.
   We conjecture an equilibrium that is exactly the same as in Section 4. That is, the Fed sets
the interest rate
                                                                   F         M
                                          i0 =    + (1     c0;1 ) g0 + c0;1 g0 .

Note that this rate is a one-to-one function of the Fed'           F . Therefore, after observing the
                                                        s belief, g0
                                                                              i0            M
                                                                                      c0;1 g0
                                        s belief as, GF
interest rate, the market infers the Fed'             0 (i0 )                       1 c0;1    .   Along the equilibrium
path, the market'
                s inference is correct,            GF
                                                    0    (i) =    F.
                                                                 g0                            F , the analysis is
                                                                       Once the market learns g0
the same as in Section 4.
   We also need to check that the Fed does not have an incentive to deviate from the equilibrium
interest rate policy. In the appendix, we show that the policy has a constant impact on the
market's expected output gap,

                                        M [~
                                      dE1   y1 ji0 ]        dGF
                                                              0 (i0 )         c0;1
                                                     = c0;1           =             :                              (26)
                                          di0                 di0            1 c0;1

A greater interest rate makes the market infer greater Fed optimism and expect a smaller output
gap. Consequently, the interest rate has a larger impact on current output than in the previous
           dy
            ~0                c0;1
section,   di0   =      1+   1 c0;1    . However, the additional impact is constant across states and does
not distort the Fed's optimal interest rate decision [cf. Eq. (4)]. In particular, the baseline
characterization in Section 3.2 still applies and the optimal interest rate is the same as before,
verifying the equilibrium.
   In this equilibrium, the Fed belief shock -- the revelation of the Fed'
                                                                         s belief via the interest
rate-- a¤ects the market's expected equilibrium outcomes. To characterize the impact, ...rst con-
sider the expected outcomes after the interest rate decision. Proposition 1 implies the market'
                                                                                              s
expected interest rates are,

                  M                  F                        M
                 E0 [it ji0 ] =   + g0 c0;t (1    ct;t+1 ) + g0 (1        c0;t (1    ct;t+1 ))     for t   1.      (27)

Likewise, Eq. (23) and Lemma 1 imply the market'
                                               s expected output gaps are,

                                       M                   M        F
                                      E0 [~
                                          yt ji0 ] = c0;t g0       g0       for t     1.                           (28)

   Next note that the market'
                            s expected outcomes before the interest rate decision corresponds
                              F replaced by gF . This leads to the following result.
to the same expressions with g0              0

Proposition 2. Suppose the market initially does not know the Fed's belief. Let                            x denote the


                                                            23
equilibrium change of a variable in period 0 relative to its ex-ante expectation by the market.
(For instance,       F = gF      gF                                                                 M [i ]
                    g0    0       0 denotes the surprise change in the Fed's belief and            E0   t
 M [i ji ]
E0              M [i ] denotes the change in the market'
               E0                                       s expected interest rates.) The equilibrium
     t 0            t
is the same as in Proposition 1. The Fed's interest rate announcement in period 0 fully reveals
its belief. A Fed optimism shock increases the current as well as the forward interest rates,

                        i0                       M [i ]
                                                E0   t
                         F
                           =1      c0;1 and        F
                                                        = c0;t (1     ct;t+1 ) for t   1.                 (29)
                        g0                       g0

The shock reduces the market's expectation for the output gap and the price of the market port-
folio,
                                        M [~
                                       E0   yt ]       M [q ]
                                                      E0   t
                                          F
                                                 =       F
                                                              =      c0;t .                               (30)
                                         g0             g0
       Eq. (29) says that a Fed optimism shock a¤ects the expected rates as we described previously
[cf. Figure 4]. Eq. (30) shows that the shock reduces the market'
                                                                s expected output gap. After
an interest hike, the market perceives greater monetary policy "mistakes" in the direction of
high interest rates. This also reduces the expected price of the market portfolio, which is a
one-to-one function of the output gap [see (8)].
       These results highlight that Fed belief shocks a¤ect interest rates and (the market's) expected
economic activity like the textbook monetary policy shocks-- typically modeled as random uc-
tuations around an interest rate rule (see, e.g., Galí (2015)). Finding an empirical counterpart
to these shocks is challenging and requires a structural interpretation.7 Proposition 2 describes
a microfounded monetary policy shock, and clari...es the conditions under which it induces the
classical e¤ects of monetary policy. A Fed belief shock unambiguously generates conventional
e¤ects on ...nancial market outcomes (e.g., forward interest rates and asset prices) that depend
on the market's expectation.8 However, the predictions for subsequent real outcomes are more
subtle and depend on whether the market'
                                       s or the Fed'
                                                   s belief is closer to the data generating
process. The following result formalizes this point.

Corollary 1. Consider the setup in Proposition 2. Suppose that at the beginning of date 0 the
market'                            M ; whereas the Fed'
       s belief is ...xed at some g0                              F , and the actual persistent com-
                                                       s belief, g0
ponent of demand, g, are jointly drawn from a distribution with some mean g; gF
                                                                              0 . The market
knows the Fed's belief is drawn from a distribution with mean gF
                                                               0 but thinks it is uncorrelated
   7
     For instance, Ramey (2016) notes: "Because monetary policy is typically guided by a rule, most movements
in monetary policy instruments are due to the systematic component of monetary policy rather than to deviations
from that rule. We do not have many good economic theories for what a structural monetary policy shock should
be."
   8
     The ...nancial market reaction also helps to di¤erentiate our Fed belief shocks from the Fed information
shocks emphasized in the recent literature. Unlike a Fed belief shock, an interest rate hike driven by a Fed
information shock would typically increase stock prices-- as it would make the market more optimistic about
subsequent economic activity. In fact, Cieslak and Schrimpf (2019); Jarocinski and Karadi (2020) use the stock
price response at the time of the policy announcement to disentangle conventional monetary policy shocks and
Fed information shocks.



                                                      24
 0.04


 0.03


 0.02


 0.01


     0
         0         1          2             3             4         5            6            7          8         9



     0


 -0.02


 -0.04


 -0.06


 -0.08
         0         1          2             3             4         5            6            7          8         9




Figure 5: Impulse responses to a Fed optimism shock, g0       F > 0, that raises the interest rate

by 1%. Blue lines (resp. purple lines) correspond to the case in which the actual persistent
component demand is equal to the market'     s initial belief (resp. the Fed's initial belief). All
transitory demand shocks are set to zero [cf. (9) ].

                  DGP              cov DGP (y;x)
with g. Let             (y; x) =    varDGP (x)
                                                   denote the beta coe¢ cient between two variables under the
data generating process. Then, we have,

                                   DGP                   c0;t      DGP       F
                                         (~
                                          yt ; i0 ) =                    g; g0        1 .
                                                        1 c0;1

     The result envisions a scenario in which a Fed belief shock-- not matched by a market be-
lief change-- might be correlated with an actual (persistent) demand shock. In this scenario,
regressing the output gap y
                          ~t on the interest rate i0 will produce the conventional (negative)
                  DGP
coe¢ cient,             (~
                         yt ; i0 ) < 0, if and only if the data on average changes less than one-to-one
                             DGP           F < 1. Intuitively, while the market thinks the Fed'
with the Fed'
            s belief,                 g ; g0                                                  s interest
rate change is a mistake, the Fed thinks it is appropriate and stabilizes the output gap ac-
                        F [~                                                           DGP         F
cording to its belief, E0  yt ] = 0. If the Fed is right on average,                           g; g0   = 1, then the
                                                                                     DGP        F
regression coe¢ cient is zero. If the market is right on average,                           g; g0   = 0, then the re-
gression coe¢ cient is strictly negative [cf. Proposition 2]. If the truth is somewhere in between,
 DGP              F 2 (0; 1)-- arguably a reasonable assumption in a disagreement context-- then the
             g ; g0
regression coe¢ cient is still negative but smaller in magnitude.
     Figure 5 illustrates the result by plotting the impulse responses to a Fed optimism shock
under di¤erent realizations of the persistent component of demand, g. We construct the impulse
responses by setting all transitory demand shocks to zero: the realized aggregate demand is equal
                                                                                      M = g, the
to the persistent component, gt = g [cf. (9)]. If the market has the correct belief, g0


                                                              25
responses resemble a classical monetary policy shock: the interest rate increases and gradually
declines, and the output gap declines and gradually recovers. If instead the Fed has the correct
         F = g, the output gap remains at zero. Moreover, the interest rate keeps increasing-- as
belief, g0
the market learns from data and converges toward the Fed's more optimistic belief.

5.2.      Market reaction shocks
In the previous subsection, the Fed's interest rate decision fully reveals its belief. In practice,
beliefs are more complex and the interest rate might reveal the Fed'
                                                                   s belief only partially. This
leads to a second type of monetary policy shock that we refer to as "market reaction shocks."
      To capture these shocks, we extend the setup to allow for short-term as well as long-term
disagreement. In particular, suppose in (only) period 0 the Fed and the market can also disagree
about the transitory component of demand, v0 . Speci...cally, the Fed believes v0                      F;
                                                                                                    N v0       ,
whereas the market believes v0           N (0; ) as before. Suppose also that the market is uncertain
about both dimensions of the Fed'                            F
                                s belief: the market thinks g0                        N gF      2        F
                                                                                         0;     g   and v0
N vF
   0;
           2
           v    , which are independent of each other. The parameters,           2;
                                                                                 g
                                                                                      2,
                                                                                      v    denote the market's
uncertainty about the Fed'
                         s long-term and short-term belief, respectively. As before, we use the
notation        x to denote the change of a variable in period 0 relative to its ex-ante expectation.
In particular,        F     F   gF            F     F     vF
                     g0    g0    0 and       v0    v0      0 denote the change in the Fed's long-term
and short-term optimism, respectively.
      As a benchmark, consider what happens when either                g   = 0 (and gF    F
                                                                                     0 = g0 ) or        v   = 0
(vF
  0   =    F)
          v0    so that the market knows one dimension of the Fed'
                                                                 s belief but is uncertain about
the other dimension. In this case, adapting our analysis from the previous sections implies the
equilibrium interest rate is given by,

                                              F    F         M          F
                                  i0 =     + g0 + v0 + c0;1 g0         g0 .                                 (31)

In these corner cases, the equilibrium rate fully reveals the remaining dimension of the Fed's
                                           F it can back out vF from the interest rate (and vice
belief. For instance, if the market knows g0                  0
versa). Therefore, the equilibrium is as if there is no belief uncertainty. The Fed accommodates
for its long-term disagreement with the market but not for short-term disagreement-- since this
type of disagreement does not persist. Therefore, a short-term Fed optimism shock has a sizeable
impact on the current rate, but no impact on the forward curve,

                                   i0                M [i ]
                                                    E0   t
                                    F
                                      = 1 and          F
                                                            = 0 for t       1.                              (32)
                                   v0                v0

In contrast, a long-term Fed optimism shock has an impact on both the current rate and the
forward curve as before [cf. (29)].
      Set against these benchmarks, consider arbitrary       2;   2.   Since the market is uncertain about
                                                             g    v
both dimensions of the Fed'
                          s belief, the interest rate cannot fully reveal the Fed'
                                                                                 s belief. In this


                                                     26
case, the equilibrium consists of two functions that depend on each other: one describes the
Fed'
   s optimal interest rate policy, i0 , and the other describes the market's Bayesian posterior
         M gF ji . Our next result characterizes these functions as follows,
belief, E0  0 0

                                           F    F         M                 M  F
                            i0 =        + g0 + v0 + c0;1 g0                E0 g0 ji0                              (33)
                                    M                                    F         F
                                 = E0 [i0 ] + (1          c0;1 )        g0 +      v0 ;
                                                 i0 E0M [i ]
                   M  F                                   0
                  E0 g0 ji0      = gF
                                    0 +                                                                           (34)
                                                   1 c0;1
                                                                                           2
                                                                                           g
                                 = gF
                                    0 +
                                                    F
                                                   g0 +           F
                                                                 v0    where      =    2       2
                                                                                                   .
                                                                                       v   +   g


   The ...rst row in Eq. (33) describes the Fed's optimal interest rate policy. The Fed still
accommodates the long-term disagreement with the market. However, the extent of accommo-
dation depends on the market's posterior belief for the Fed'                     M gF ji , rather
                                                            s long-term belief, E0  0 0
than on the Fed'                           F [cf. (31)]. The next row describes the equilibrium
               s actual long-term belief, g0
interest rate-- obtained by substituting the market'
                                                   s posterior belief along the equilibrium path.
   The ...rst row in Eq. (34) describes the market's Bayesian posterior belief given the interest
rate it observes. The next row describes the Bayesian posterior along the equilibrium path,
obtained by substituting the equilibrium interest rate. In equilibrium, the posterior is centered
around the market's prior with an adjustment toward the change in total Fed optimism,                             F +
                                                                                                                 g0
  F , regardless of where that optimism comes from. Higher-than-expected interest rates reveal
 v0
a bundled signal of Fed optimism, but not whether the optimism is short term or long term.
The market interprets the signal according to its relative uncertainty about the long-term belief,
        2
        g
  =   2+ 2    . When     is high, the market is more uncertain about the long-term belief and
      v   g
attributes high interest rates to long-term optimism. Going forward, we refer to                       as the market's
reaction type.
   The following result veri...es the equilibrium and describes how a change in Fed optimism
a¤ects the forward rates as well as the current interest rate in equilibrium.

Proposition 3. Consider the setup with both long-term and short-term disagreement. Suppose
                     F
the market believes g0     N gF     2        F     N vF          2
                              0;    g     ; v0        0;         v    , independent of each other. In equilib-
rium, the interest rate and the market's posterior belief are given by Eqs. (33) and (34). An
increase in Fed optimism-- regardless of whether it is long-term or short-term-- increases the
                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                 g
current interest rate and the forward rates according to the market's reaction type                        =   2+ 2    :
                                                                                                               v   g


                                  i0
                             F       F
                                            = 1           c0;1                                                    (35)
                            v0   + g0
                             E0M [i ]
                                   t
                             F + gF
                                            =      c0;t (1       ct;t+1 ) for t       1.                          (36)
                            v0        0

   This results says that both the current and the forward interest rates are determined by the

                                                     27
market's reaction type-- rather than by the Fed's actual belief type. Figure 6 illustrates the result
for the case in which the market's reaction type is relatively high. The solid lines plot the
current and forward rates'response to a change in (long-term or short-term) Fed optimism. For
comparison, the dotted and the dashed lines plot the forward rates'response to an equivalent
change in long-term and short-term Fed optimism, respectively, when the market knows the
Fed'
   s belief. With a reactive market, the equilibrium is similar to the case with long-term Fed
optimism, regardless of the Fed's actual belief type. In particular, even when the Fed has short-
term optimism, it hikes the current interest rate by a small amount (smaller than the increase
in its optimism).9
    Why does the market'
                       s reaction drive the equilibrium? Forward rates are naturally deter-
mined by the market'
                   s reaction, as these rates reect the market's belief. The current rate is
also determined by the market'
                             s reaction, because the Fed optimally responds to the market'
                                                                                         s
reaction. As before, the Fed targets an overall increase in the forward curve-- the current rate
plus the shaded area in the ...gure-- that counteracts its initial optimism. Since the forward rates
increase substantially, a Fed with short-term optimism raises the current interest rate by a small
amount-- closer to the baseline case in which it has long-term optimism [cf. Figure 4].
    Finally, note that the analogues of Eq. (30) and Corollary 1 also apply in this setting. Market
reaction shocks (driven by either long-term or short-term Fed beliefs) generate the conventional
e¤ects of monetary policy shocks on ...nancial market outcomes but not necessarily on subsequent
real outcomes.

Remark 2 (Interpreting the evidence on monetary policy shocks and forward rates). Empirical
studies with high-frequency identi...cation typically ...nd that the forward interest rates'reaction to
monetary policy shocks can be captured with a small number of factors. For instance, Gürkaynak
et al. (2005b) emphasize a (Fed funds rate) target factor that captures the surprise changes to
near-term interest rates, and an orthogonalized path factor that captures surprises to longer-
term interest rates (see also Hamilton (2008); Barakchian and Crowe (2013)). These factors
can be mapped into our analysis. A target factor can be thought of as a market reaction shock
with an average -- that is, the market attributes the Fed's belief change to an average horizon.
In contrast, a path factor can be thought of as the market reaction relative to the average,                     --
the market attributes the belief change to a longer or shorter horizon than                usual.10   In line with
    9
      In a memorable 2005 lecture, then BOE'   s Governor Mervyn King, wrote: "Maradona ran 60 yards from inside
his own half beating ...ve players before placing the ball in the English goal. The truly remarkable thing, however,
is that, Maradona ran virtually in a straight line. How can you beat ...ve players by running in a straight line?
The answer is that the English defenders reacted to what they expected Maradona to do. Because they expected
Maradona to move either left or right, he was able to go straight on.
   Monetary policy works in a similar way. Market interest rates react to what the central bank is expected to do.
In recent years the Bank of England and other central banks have experienced periods in which they have been
able to in  uence the path of the economy without making large moves in o¢ cial interest rates. They headed in
a straight line for their goals. How was that possible? Because ...nancial markets did not expect interest rates to
remain constant. They expected that rates would move either up or down. Those expectations were su¢ cient-- at
times-- to stabilise private spending while o¢ cial interest rates in fact moved very little" (King (2005)).
   10
      Equivalently, assuming the market knows the Fed'     s belief, we could modify the model slightly to interpret


                                                        28
        0.003



        0.003



        0.002



        0.002



        0.001



        0.001



        0.000




                0     1         2          3          4         5          6          7         8          9




Figure 6: Market reaction shock from an increase in (long-term or short-term) Fed optimism
when the market is relatively reactive (high ). The solid line plots the current and the forward
rates' response. The dotted (resp. the dashed) line plots the forward rates' response to an
equivalent long-term (resp. short-term) optimism shock that the market knows.


this interpretation, empirical studies ...nd that the path factor that drives the long-term interest
rates is mainly driven by the content of Fed statements (see, e.g., Lucca and Trebbi (2011)).

 5.3.      Tantrum shocks
In the previous subsection, the Fed knows the market'
                                                    s reaction type                  and understands how the
forward rates will change in response to its interest rate decisions. In practice, the Fed might
be confused or uncertain about the market'
                                         s reaction. This leads to a third type of monetary
policy shock that we refer to as "tantrum shocks." These shocks are costlier (under the Fed's
belief) than the previous shocks. Their anticipation induces the Fed to move more gradually
and creates a role for Fed communication.11
these factors as appropriate Fed belief shocks-- rather than market reaction shocks. Suppose the two dimensions
                                            F
of the Fed'  s belief change according to, g0 = gF0 +     bF and v0  F
                                                                       = vF
                                                                          0 + (1    ) bF , where bF captures the
change in Fed optimism and 2 (0; 1) captures the extent to which optimism concerns the long term rather than
the short term. Suppose bF and are independent random variables (realized at the beginning of the period and
observed by the market) with mean 0 and , respectively. Then, the target factor would re        ect the forward-rate
impact of bF given , and the path factor would re       ect the impact of (      ) given bF .
    11
       On May 23, 2013, the day after Fed's Chairman Bernanke'   s testimony to Congress that touched o¤ the "Taper
Tantrum" episode, the WSJ wrote: "...The next step by the Fed could be especially tricky. One worry at the
central bank is that a single small step to shrink the size of the program could be interpreted by investors as the
...rst in a larger move to end it altogether. Mr. Bernanke sought to dispel that view, part of a broader e¤ort
by Fed o¢ cials to manage market expectations. If the Fed takes one step to reduce the bond buying, it won'        t
mean the Fed is `   automatically aiming towards a complete wind-down,'Mr. Bernanke said. `     Rather we would be



                                                          29
    We start with an extreme case in which the Fed does not anticipate tantrum shocks, which is
useful to illustrate how the shocks a¤ect the equilibrium. Formally, suppose the market is either
very unreactive or very reactive,            2 f0; 1g. The Fed thinks the market is unreactive ( = 0),
whereas the market is actually reactive ( = 1). We also assume that both the unreactive and
the reactive types think the Fed knows their type. The rest of the model is unchanged.
    In this case, the Fed sets the interest rate according to (33) with                 = 0, which implies,

                                                 M             F         F
                                           i0 = E0 [i0 ] +    g0 +      v0                                    (37)

An optimistic Fed hikes the interest rate by the full amount of its optimism. Since the Fed thinks
the market is unreactive, it expects the market to receive the optimism signal,                  F + vF , and
                                                                                                g0    0
to attribute it to short-term optimism [cf. Eq. (34) with                = 0].
    However, the market reacts to the Fed's interest rate decision very di¤erently than what the
Fed anticipates. Since the market is reactive (and thinks the Fed knows this), it expects the Fed
to set the interest rate according to (33) with            = 1, which implies,

                                            M                           F         F
                             i0 j   =1   = E0 [i0 ] + (1     c0;1 )    g0 +      v0 .

In particular, the market expects an optimistic Fed to change the interest rate by a small amount.
Therefore, after the market observes the interest rate in (37), it extracts a larger optimism signal,
   F +
( g0        F )=(1
           v0         c0;1 ). Moreover, the market attributes this signal to long-term optimism, so
its posterior belief is given by [cf. (34)],

                                                                   F + vF
                                                                  g0
                                      M  F
                                     E0 g0 ji0 = gF
                                                  0 +
                                                                         0
                                                                           .                                  (38)
                                                                  1 c0;1

The forward curve and the market's expected output gap in equilibrium are then given by Eqs.
                                  F with the posterior belief, E M gF ji .
(27) and (28) after substituting g0                             0   0 0
    In particular, Eqs. (27) and (38) imply,

                                               F + vF
                                              g0
                             M                       0
                            E0 [it ] =                 c0;t (1        ct;t+1 ) for t    1,                    (39)
                                              1 c0;1

where     M [i ]
         E0           M [i ji ]
                     E0                   M [i ], as before. In equilibrium, an increase in Fed optimism
                                         E0
              t           t 0                 t
raises the forward curve substantially-- more than the case in which the market knows the Fed'
                                                                                             s
belief [cf. (29)]. The top panel of Figure 7 illustrates this result. The solid line shows the actual
change in the forward curve in period 0, whereas the dashed line is the change the Fed had
anticipated when it announced the interest rate policy in period 0.
    Likewise, Eqs. (28) and (38) imply that an increase in Fed optimism reduces the market'
                                                                                          s
looking beyond that to seeing how the economy evolves and we could either raise or lower our pace of purchases
going forward. Again that is dependent on the data,'he said."




                                                        30
   0.01

  0.009

  0.008

  0.007

  0.006

  0.005

  0.004

  0.003

  0.002

  0.001

      0
          0     1         2             3          4           5            6         7         8    9




      0


  -0.01


  -0.02


  -0.03


  -0.04


  -0.05


  -0.06


  -0.07
          0     1         2             3          4           5            6         7         8    9




Figure 7: Tantrum shock from a 1% increase in (short-term or long-term) Fed optimism. The
Fed thinks the market is not reactive, = 0, when the market is actually reactive, = 1. The
solid (resp. the dashed) blue lines plot the actual realization (resp. the Fed's assumption) for
the change in the market' s expectations in period 0. The purple line in the bottom panel plots
the Fed' s expected output gap in period 0 conditional on the market'  s actual reaction type.


expected output gap substantially,

                                                               F + vF
                                                              g0
                                         M                           0
                                        E0 [~
                                            yt ] =     c0;t            .                            (40)
                                                              1 c0;1

This decline is greater than the perceived decline that would arise if the market knew the
Fed'
   s belief,     M [~
                E0  yt ] =    c0;t       F +
                                        g0         F . In fact, since the Fed sets i under the wrong
                                                  v0                                0
assumption about the market'
                           s reaction type, , it misses its expected output gap in period 0
even under its own belief,

                                                                     c0;1         F + vF
                                                                                 g0
                F                     M             F          F                       0
               E0 [~
                   y0 j = 1] =       E0 [~
                                         y0 ] +    g0 +       v0 =                       < 0.       (41)
                                                                                1 c0;1

       F [~
Here, E0  y0 j = 1] denotes the Fed'
                                   s expected output gap given the market'
                                                                         s actual reaction
type. For subsequent periods t                                                F [~
                                       1, the Fed expects to hit its target, E0  yt j = 1] = 0, because
it has learned that the market is reactive and will adjust its future policy appropriately. The
bottom panel of Figure 7 illustrates these results.
    In this extreme case, the Fed operates under the assumption that the market is unreactive
and will interpret its interest rate change as temporary. Thus, the Fed is surprised when the

                                                       31
market is revealed to be reactive. This large reaction increases the forward curve substantially
more than what the Fed anticipated when it set the policy rate. This makes the Fed miss
its expected output gap target-- even according to its own belief [cf. Figure 7]. Note also
that the market's reaction is stronger-- and the output gap is more negative-- when the relative
con...dence, c0;1 , is higher [cf. (38   41)]. In this case, the optimal policy with respect to a
reactive market requires only a small adjustment of the interest rate. Therefore, adjusting the
interest rate as-if the market is unreactive can be very costly.

 5.4.   Gradualism
In the previous subsection, we assumed the Fed sets the interest rate under incorrect beliefs about
the market'
          s reaction type, . We also assumed the market (incorrectly) assumes the Fed knows
its . These assumptions simpli...ed the analysis and are arguably relevant for episodes of extreme
market reaction (such as the 2013 "Taper Tantrum" episode). However, tantrum shocks are
costly even without these extreme assumptions. We next consider the case in which the Fed sets
the interest rate policy under uncertainty about the market'
                                                           s type, and the market knows that
the Fed is uncertain (so neither agent has incorrect views). In this case, the equilibrium features
milder tantrum shocks that still reduce the Fed'
                                               s welfare (under its own belief). Moreover, the
fear of these shocks induces the Fed to act more gradually than in our baseline setting (see
Remark 1). As emphasized by Brainard (1967), the Fed faces uncertainty about how a change
in the policy rate will a¤ect the economy, which induces it to act more conservatively.
   Formally, suppose the Fed believes the market has the reactive type,             = 1, with probability
  2 (0; 1), and the unreactive type,     = 0, with probability 1            . The market knows . The
rest of the model is unchanged.
   In this case, our next result shows the optimal interest rate and the market's posterior belief
are given by the following analogues of Eqs. (33          34),
                                                           (                                      )!
                                                                    ~E M gF ji0 ; = 1
                               F    F                M                0   0
                   i0 =     + g0 + v0 + c0;1        g0                ~   M      F ji ; = 0
                                                                                                            (42)
                                                                 + 1     E0 g0       0

                         M
                      = E0 [i0 ] + 1       c0;1 ~         F
                                                         g0 +       F
                                                                   v0   where ~ >   solves (B:5) ;
                                       M [i ]                                                     2
      M  F                        i0 E0     0                                                     g
     E0 g0 ji0 ;      = gF
                         0 +                  = gF
                                                 0 +
                                                                    F
                                                                   g0 +    F
                                                                          v0   where    =                  . (43)
                                    1 c0;1 ~                                                  2
                                                                                              v   +    2
                                                                                                       g


Here, the parameter, ~, is the solution to a quadratic equation that we relegate to the appendix.
   Eq. (43) is the same as in the setup in which the Fed knows the market'
                                                                         s reaction type. Along
the equilibrium path, the market extracts a bundled optimism signal and forms a posterior belief
that depends on its reaction type. Eq. (42) is di¤erent and says that the Fed accommodates
the long-term disagreement with the market according to a weighted-average of the market'
                                                                                        s
posterior beliefs over the cases in which the market is reactive and unreactive. Importantly, the


                                                    32
Fed overweights the case in which the market is reactive relative to its perceived prior probability
of this case, ~ > . Consequently, we also have 1 c0;1 ~ < 1 c0;1 (recall that = E F [ ]).                    0
That is, the Fed acts more gradually than in a "certainty-equivalent" benchmark in which the
market's reaction type is certain and equal to the Fed's ex-ante mean for the type [cf. (33)].
    Relatedly, and unlike any of the cases we have analyzed so far, Eq. (7) does not apply: the
Fed does not hit its output target on average. Instead, we show in the appendix that the Fed's
ex-ante expected output gap satis...es,

                                    F
                                   E0  y0 ] = ~
                                      [~                   c0;1      F
                                                                    g0 +       F
                                                                              v0 .                               (44)

Since ~ > , this expression implies that the Fed does not fully stabilize the expected output gap
changes that result from its belief changes. For instance, when the Fed becomes more optimistic,
   F +
  g0        F > 0, the Fed hikes the interest rate less than in the previous sections and allows
           v0
for a positive output gap on average. We also characterize the Fed'
                                                                  s output gap conditional on
the market's type as,

   F
  E0  y0 j = 1] =
     [~                   1     ~ c0;1    F
                                         g0 +       F
                                                   v0            F
                                                            and E0  y0 j = 0] = ~c0;1
                                                                   [~                             F
                                                                                                 g0 +    F
                                                                                                        v0 . (45)

An optimistic Fed expects a negative output gap when the market is revealed to be reactive-- a
milder version of the tantrum shocks from the previous section-- and a positive output gap when
the market is unreactive. The following result veri...es the equilibrium.

Proposition 4. Consider the setup in Proposition 3 with the di¤ erences that the market has
one of two types,       2 (0; 1); the Fed believes          = 1 with probability           2 (0; 1); and the market
knows . In equilibrium, the interest rate and the market's posterior belief are given by Eqs.
               ~
(42 43), where 2 ( ; 1) is the solution to Eq. (B:5) in the appendix. The Fed acts as if the
market is more reactive than implied by its ex-ante mean, ~ >                          F [ ]. The Fed'
                                                                                    = E0              s ex-ante
expected output gap is (typically) non-zero and given by (44). The Fed's output gap conditional
on the market's type is also (typically) non-zero and given by, (45).

    Why does the Fed act more gradually than before and miss its expected output gap on
average? Unlike in the previous sections, the Fed is uncertain about how a change in its pol-
icy interest rate i0 will a¤ect the output gap. As illustrated by Eq. (43), if the market is
reactive, an interest rate hike increases the market's perception for the Fed'
                                                                             s long-term opti-
mism. Consequently, the interest rate hike also reduces the market'
                                                                  s expected future output
       M [~
     dE1  y1 ji0 ; =1]
gap,       di0          < 0.   In view of the IS curve (2), this creates a large impact on the current
               dy ~0 [ =1]
output gap, di0 <              1. In contrast, if the market is unreactive, an interest rate hike does
                                                                        M [~
                                                                      dE1  y1 ji0 ; =0]
not change the market'
                     s expected future output gap,                          di0           = 0, and it has a smaller
                                           dy
                                            ~0 [ =0]
impact on the current output gap,             di0      =        1. Since the economy is more sensitive to its
interest rate decision when the market is reactive, the Fed overweights that case in its decision,
~ > [cf. Eq. (4)]. Therefore, the Fed acts as if the market is more reactive than implied by its


                                                           33
prior mean, and adjusts the interest rate by a small amount. By acting conservatively, the Fed
misses its output gap on average but it mitigates the tantrum shock that exacerbates its miss
when the market is revealed to be reactive [cf. Eqs. (44    45)].
   Note also that, despite acting conservatively, the Fed misses its output gap conditional on the
market's type. Therefore, the possibility of tantrum shocks lowers the Fed'
                                                                          s ex-ante objective
in (3). When the market is uncertain about the Fed'
                                                  s belief, its reaction type      becomes a key
parameter for policy. If the Fed is confused about , there can be extreme tantrum shocks as in
the previous subsection. If the Fed is uncertain about , there are still (milder) tantrum shocks
that make the Fed miss its output target more often than without these shocks.

5.5.     Fed communication
The welfare losses induced by tantrum shocks create a natural role for communication between
the Fed and the market. First, the Fed can try to ...gure out the market'
                                                                        s reaction type .
Second, and perhaps more simply, the Fed can try to reveal its own belief to the market--
mitigating the market reaction shocks and therefore also the tantrum shocks. In an early and
insightful analysis, Blinder (1998) emphasized this mechanism as the key bene...t of central bank
communication:

          Greater openness might actually improve the e¢ ciency of monetary policy... [be-
       cause] expectations about future central bank behavior provide the essential link
       between short rates and long rates. A more open central bank... naturally condi-
       tions expectations by providing the markets with more information about its own
       view of the fundamental factors guiding monetary policy..., thereby creating a virtu-
       ous circle. By making itself more predictable to the markets, the central bank makes
       market reactions to monetary policy more predictable to itself. And that makes it
       possible to do a better job of managing the economy.

Our next result formalizes Blinder's insight. In our model with two belief types, the Fed can
reveal its belief by announcing the average interest rate it plans to set in the next period in
addition to the current rate.

Proposition 5. Consider the setup in Propositions 3 and 4, with both long-term and short-term
disagreement and the market uncertainty about the Fed's beliefs. Suppose in period 0 the Fed
                       F [i ]. In equilibrium, the Fed'
announces both i0 and E0                               s interest announcements are given by
                           1

                                            F    F         M          F
                                i0 =     + g0 + v0 + c0;1 g0         g0 ,
                            F               F         M        F
                           E0 [i1 ] =    + g0 + c0;2 g0       g0 .

These announcements fully reveal both dimensions of the Fed'           F ; gF . Therefore, the
                                                            s belief, v0    0
Fed belief shocks a¤ ect the equilibrium according to the Fed'
                                                             s actual belief [cf. (29    30) and

                                                34
                                                                   2
                                                                   g
(32)]-- rather than the market's reaction type              =    2+ 2    . The Fed hits the output gap on average
                                                                 v   g
(according to its belief ) regardless of its belief and the market'         F [~
                                                                   s type, E0          F [~
                                                                               y0 ] = E0  y0 j ] = 0.

       This result provides a rationale for the enhanced Fed communication that we have seen in
recent years (e.g., the dot curves). In our model, the role of these policies is not to persuade the
market-- the market is opinionated. Rather, communication is useful because it helps to reveal
the Fed'
       s belief to the market, reducing the chance of tantrum shocks in which the market
misinterprets the Fed'
                     s belief.


 6.       Disagreements and ination
So far, we have assumed nominal prices are fully sticky,                           = 0. In this section, we consider
the case with partial price exibility. We show that disagreements create a policy trade-o¤
between stabilizing output and ination that reinforces our earlier ...ndings. In particular, the
Fed accommodates the market's belief more than in the earlier sections with fully sticky prices.
We further show that, for optimal policy purposes, disagreements closely resemble the cost push
shocks in a textbook New Keynesian model. For simplicity, we focus on the baseline setup in
which agents know each other's beliefs and "agree-to-disagree."12

       As in Section 4, we conjecture an equilibrium in which each agent'
                                                                        s expected output gap
              j            j
and ination, Et [~
                 yt ] and Et [ t ], evolve deterministically. The di¤erence is that ination is not
necessarily zero and is determined by the NKPC [cf. (1)],

                                                         M
                                             t   = y
                                                   ~t + Et +1 [          t+1 ] .


Considering the equation (for period t + 1) under each agent's belief and taking the di¤erence,
we obtain the key equation of this section,

                       M                   F                       M                   F
                      Et +1 [   t+1 ]   = Et +1 [   t+1 ]   +     Et +1 [~
                                                                         yt+1 ]       Et +1 [~
                                                                                             yt+1 ]
                                           F                       M           F
                                        = Et +1 [   t+1 ]   +     gt +1       gt +1 .                           (46)

Here, the second line uses Eq. (23) which applies also in this context. Eq. (46) shows that the
market can expect ination or disin        M [
                                  ation, Et +1                   t+1 ]   6= 0, even if the Fed were to set expected
ination to zero according to its own belief. Intuitively, with disagreements, the market thinks
the Fed will make "mistakes" and won'
                                    t be able to stabilize ination. Since price setters are
forward looking, expected ination creates inationary pressure in the current period as well.
  12
     There is an important caveat for this section. Up to now we have referred to the private sector as the market,
because we think in practice ...nancial market participants'expectations, rather than the households'or the ...rms'
expectations, determine the interest rates and asset prices (and households' consumption decisions are a¤ected
indirectly through asset prices). Instead, the new results in this section depend on the expectations of the price
setters, which in practice would correspond to a di¤erent set of agents, e.g., ...rms, workers, or labor unions. We
will ignore this distinction and leave this dimension of heterogeneity for future work.



                                                            35
Consequently, the divine coincidence breaks down: the Fed cannot simultaneously set average
ination and output to zero.
   Next consider how the Fed trades o¤ ination and output. Problem (3) and the NKPC
(1) imply the Fed chooses a particular split between expected output and in        F [~
                                                                           ation, Et  yt ] =
    F [ ]. Combining this with the NKPC (under the Fed'
   Et                                                  s belief), we obtain,
        t

                               F                              M
                              Et [ t] =                      Et +1 [    t+1 ]                                              (47)
                               F                         1              M
                              Et [~
                                  yt ] =                               Et +1 [   t+1 ]   where   =       2
                                                                                                             .             (48)
                                                                                                     +

Here,     M [
         Et +1       t+1 ]   captures the current inationary pressure that results from the market's
expected ination. The composite parameter,                                       2 [0; 1], captures the extent to which the Fed
responds to the pressure by stabilizing output relative to ination. As expected, the Fed focuses
on output relatively more when it puts more weight on the output gap (greater ) and when
the nominal prices are more sticky (smaller ).
   Eqs. (46) and (47) characterizes ination expectations as the solution to a recursive equation.
Our main result in this section describes how the solution depends on disagreements between
the Fed and the market.

Proposition 6. Suppose prices are partially exible,                                       > 0. In equilibrium, the market's ex-
pected ination is deterministic and given by,

                                         M                    M   F       M
                                        Et [ t] =            gt  gt +    Et +1 [ t+1 ]
                                                           1
                                                           X
                                                         =    ( )n gtM
                                                                      +n  gtF
                                                                             +n ,                                          (49)
                                                               n=0


where        =                 M
                          and gt                F = c
                                               gt          M              F . The Fed's expected ination and output gap
                 +   2                                0;t g0             g0
                                                                      M > gF , the market
are given by Eqs. (47) and (48). When the market is more optimistic, g0    0
                  M [
expects ination, Et +1                 t+1 ]   > 0, and the Fed induces (on average) ination and negative output
gaps,    F
        Et   [ t] >       F
                      0; Et       [~                                                           M < gF , the
                                   yt ] < 0. Conversely, when the market is more pessimistic, g0    0
                            M [
market expects disination, Et +1                     t+1 ] < 0, and              the Fed induces (on average) disination and
positive output gaps,              F
                                  Et   [ t] <        F
                                                 0; Et [~
                                                        yt ] > 0.

   When the market is more optimistic than the Fed, it expects positive output gaps ("too
low interest rates") as in our earlier analysis. Expectations of positive output gaps translate
into expected ination. In turn, expected ination exerts upward pressure on current ination.
When the market is more pessimistic than the Fed, the situation is the opposite.
   We next characterize the equilibrium interest rate and generalize our main result from Section
4 [cf. Proposition 1]. Using Eqs. (2) and (48), we obtain,

                                     M                             F    M                    1        M
                     rt      it     Et +1 [      t+1 ]   =      + gt + Et +1 [~
                                                                              yt+1 ] +               Et +1 [     t+1 ] .



                                                                           36
Here, rt denotes the real interest rate the Fed sets to target its desired output gap. The ...rst
three terms on the right side are similar to their counterparts with fully sticky prices [cf. (24)].
The last term is new and captures the Fed'
                                         s concern with stabilizing ination. As before, output
gap expectations satisfy Eq. (23). These observations imply the following.

Corollary 2. The real interest rate corresponding to the equilibrium in Proposition 6 is,

                                    sticky        1               M                    M
                              rt = rt      +                     Et +1 [   t+1 ]      Et +2 [   t+2 ]   ,

       sticky                                F + c        M
where rt      =        + (1        ct;t+1 ) gt     t;t+1 gt is the interest rate with fully sticky prices [cf.
Proposition 1]. The interest rate reects the market's belief relatively more than the case with
fully sticky prices,                     (
                                                   sticky                M > gF
                                             rt > rt               when g0    0
                                                       sticky            M < gF
                                                                                           .
                                             rt <     rt           when g0    0

   For intuition, consider the case in which the market is more optimistic than the Fed. In
this case, Proposition 1 says the market expects positive in        M [
                                                            ation, Et +1                                     t+1 ]   > 0 (and more
so in earlier periods,     M [
                          Et                       M [
                             +1 t+1 ]         >   Et +2 t+2 ]).          Since the Fed is concerned with stabilizing
ination, it sets a higher rate than before. E¤ectively, this brings the interest rate closer to the
level implied by the market'
                           s optimistic belief. Conversely, when the market is pessimistic and
expects disination, the Fed sets a lower interest rate that reects relatively more the market'
                                                                                             s
pessimistic belief.
   This result reinforces our earlier analysis and provides a complementary reason for why the
Fed accommodates the market's belief. With fully sticky prices, the market'
                                                                          s perceived monetary
policy "mistakes"translate into future output gaps. This exerts pressure on the current output
gap (via the IS curve) and forces the Fed's hand. With partially exible prices, perceived
"mistakes" translate into future ination. This exerts pressure on the current ination (via the
NKPC) and forces the Fed'
                        s hand through a second channel.

Relationship to cost-push shocks. In the textbook New Keynesian model, the NKPC is
usually augmented with cost-push shocks: a catchall for factors other than output gaps and
ination expectations that might a¤ect ...rms'price setting. In our model, disagreements closely
resemble cost-push shocks from the Fed's perspective. Therefore, our model inherits the optimal
policy implications of cost-push shocks.
   To illustrate this connection, we rewrite the NKPC (1) and substitute Eq. (46) to obtain,

                                                   F
                               t     =       y
                                             ~t + Et +1 [        t+1 ]   + ut+1
                                               M                    F                            M           F
                where ut+1                    Et +1 [    t+1 ]     Et +1 [    t+1 ]    =        gt +1       gt +1 .


Therefore, the NKPC under the Fed's belief features an "as-if" cost-push shock-- even though
the actual NKPC (under the market'
                                 s belief) features no such shock. Moreover, the as-if cost-

                                                                 37
push shock is positive, ut+1 > 0 (resp. negative ut+1 < 0) when the market is more optimistic,
 M > gF (resp. more pessimistic, gM < gF ). This provides a complementary intuition for
g0    0                           0    0
Proposition 6.
     For the limit with high con...dence, C0 ! 1, disagreements remain constant over time,
 M
gt       F = gM
        gt            F . In this case, there is a tighter relationship between our model and
                     g0
              0
the textbook model. In particular, the equilibrium is identical to a corresponding equilibrium
analyzed by Clarida et al. (1999) with an appropriate as-if cost-push shock.

Corollary 3. Consider the equilibrium characterized in Proposition 6. When con...dence is high,
C0 ! 1, the Fed's expected output gap and ination are constant over time and given by,

                       F
                      Et [~
                          yt ] =        2
                                                           u.
                                            + (1       )
                      F                                               M    F
                     Et [ t] =      2
                                                       u where u =   g0   g0
                                        + (1       )

These expressions are the same as Eqs. (3.4) and (3.5) in Clarida et al. (1999) for the case
with a fully persistent exogenous cost-push shock (after appropriately adjusting the notation).

     This result implies the optimal policy in our model shares some of the properties in Clarida
et al. (1999). In particular, the Fed can bene...t from committing to put a higher relative weight
on ination than implied by its own preferences in (3). Intuitively, since ination is forward
looking, committing to stabilize future ination aggressively also helps to stabilize current ina-
tion. We leave a more complete analysis of the bene...ts of commitment in our setting for future
work.


 7.     Final remarks
After illustrating the occasional large di¤erences between FOMC interest rate predictions and
the forward curve, we proposed a macroeconomic model where these di¤erences emerge from
disagreements about expected aggregate demand. We then studied the implications of these
disagreements for monetary policy, the term structure of interest rates, and economic activity.
The key feature of the environment is that the market constantly expects the Fed to make
"mistakes" (under the market'
                            s belief). The anticipation of future "mistakes" a¤ects current
output and forces the Fed to partially accommodate the market'
                                                             s belief to stabilize the output
gap. In particular, "rstar" (the natural interest rate) reects the extent of disagreement as
well as how entrenched each agent'
                                 s beliefs are. The more entrenched the beliefs, the more
the Fed needs to weight the market's belief. Partial price exibility strengthens this result
since perceived "mistakes" create inationary or disinationary pressures that induce the Fed
to accommodate the market'
                         s belief even more. The Fed plans to implement its own belief
gradually, as it expects the market to learn over time and move closer to the Fed'
                                                                                 s belief. The


                                                   38
Fed and the market disagree about future interest rates, as in the data, because agents expect
the other agent to come to their own belief.
    The model generates microfounded monetary policy shocks because the market learns the
Fed'
   s belief-- and therefore the extent of future "mistaken"interest rate changes-- from surprise
policy announcements. These shocks come in di¤erent avors that depend on the nature of
the market's uncertainty about the Fed's belief. Fed belief shocks and market reaction shocks
are benign (under the Fed'
                         s belief) as long as the Fed anticipates the market's reaction and
embeds it into its interest rate policy. Tantrum shocks are more damaging, as they arise when
the Fed fails to forecast the market'
                                    s reaction. These shocks motivate additional gradualism as
well as communication policies that reveal the Fed'
                                                  s belief. The reason for communication in
our environment is not to persuade the market about the state of the economy-- the market
is opinionated. Rather, communication is useful because it helps to reveal the Fed'
                                                                                  s belief to
the market, reducing the chance of tantrum shocks in which the market misinterprets the Fed's
belief.
    Our monetary policy shocks generate contingent e¤ects on subsequent economic activity
depending on whether the Fed'
                            s or the market'
                                           s belief is closer to the objective belief. Fed belief
shocks generate the textbook impulse responses for the output gap and ination according to the
market's belief, but not according to the Fed'
                                             s belief. Tantrum shocks can generate the textbook
impulse responses under both beliefs. While we do not test these empirical predictions, our
results are in line with the empirical ...ndings that monetary policy shocks seem to have a smaller
e¤ect on economic activity-- and sometimes with ipped signs-- after mid-1980s compared to
earlier years (see, e.g., Boivin and Giannoni (2006); Barakchian and Crowe (2013); Ramey
(2016)). One interpretation is that greater central bank transparency in recent years has made
tantrum shocks rarer. It is also possible that the Fed's belief has become more accurate over
time.
    For simplicity, we assumed that both the Fed and the market were equally con...dent in their
beliefs. In Appendix B.1, we analyze the case when they are not. Heterogeneous con...dence
leads to heterogeneous updating of beliefs as new macroeconomic shocks arrive. This implies
that every demand shock now comes bundled with a market anticipation of a Fed belief shock.
This bundling changes the impact of demand shocks on economic activity. Speci...cally, if the
Fed is more data sensitive (less con...dent) than the market, then a positive demand shock
has a dampened e¤ect on output and asset prices-- as the market anticipates interest rates to
overreact due to the embedded Fed belief shock. Conversely, if the Fed is less data sensitive
(more con...dent), then the market expects the interest rates to underreact, and the demand
shock has an ampli...ed e¤ect on output and asset prices. We leave a fuller analysis of bundled
shocks for future research.
    Finally, it is important to clarify that the optimal policy we have characterized does not
mean that the Fed should "surrender" to the market and avoid surprises at all costs. Instead,
the optimal policy says that disagreements and surprises are normal, as long as the policy


                                                39
itself considers the e¤ect of disagreement and surprises on output and ination stabilization.
Concretely, suppose that the Fed (but not the market) receives divine information that the long
run "rstar" has risen by 100 basis points. If the market had received the same information or
fully trusted the in...nite wisdom (or divine connections) of the Fed, the optimal policy would
be to hike the target rate immediately by 100bps. Instead, in our environment the market is
opinionated, so the Fed knows that if it raises the rate by 100bps in one shot, it will trigger a
much larger contraction in aggregate demand than it seeks. Thus, the Fed optimally raises the
target rate by only 25bps today and it anticipates that it will continue raising rates by 25bps for
three more meetings. This expected gradualism arises because the Fed expects the future data
to con...rm its belief. The Fed thinks that, by the next meeting, the market will update toward
the Fed'
       s belief and will expect smaller "mistakes"than it did after the previous hike, which will
create more room for the Fed to raise rates in subsequent meetings. Rather than "surrendering"
to the market, the Fed plans to implement its own belief more gradually.




                                                40
References
Amato, J. D., Morris, S., Shin, H. S., 2002. Communication and monetary policy. Oxford Review
 of Economic Policy 18 (4), 495­   503.

Andrade, P., Crump, R. K., Eusepi, S., Moench, E., 2016. Fundamental disagreement. Journal
 of Monetary Economics 83, 106­ 128.

Andrade, P., Gaballo, G., Mengus, E., Mojon, B., 2019. Forward guidance and heterogeneous
 beliefs. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 11 (3), 1­ 29.

Angeletos, G.-M., Huo, Z., 2018. Myopia and anchoring. NBER working paper No. 24545.

Angeletos, G.-M., Huo, Z., Sastry, K., 2020. Imperfect expectations: Theory and evidence. In:
 NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2020, volume 35. University of Chicago Press.

Angeletos, G.-M., La'O, J., 2010. Noisy business cycles. NBER Macroeconomics Annual 24 (1),
 319­ 378.

Angeletos, G.-M., Lian, C., 2018. Forward guidance without common knowledge. American
 Economic Review 108 (9), 2477­  2512.

Angeletos, G.-M., Sastry, K. A., 2018. Managing expectations without rational expectations.
 NBER working paper No. 25404.

Barakchian, S. M., Crowe, C., 2013. Monetary policy matters: Evidence from new shocks data.
  Journal of Monetary Economics 60 (8), 950­ 966.

Bauer, M. D., Swanson, E. T., 2020. The fed's response to economic news explains the 'fed
  information e¤ect'
                   . NBER working paper No. 27013.

Bernanke, B., 2004. Gradualism. Remarks at an economics luncheon co-sponsored by the Federal
  Reserve Bank of San Francisco (Seattle Branch) and the University of Washington, Seattle,
  Washington, May 20, 2004.

Bernanke, B. S., Kuttner, K. N., 2005. What explains the stock market's reaction to federal
  reserve policy? The Journal of ...nance 60 (3), 1221­1257.

Blanchard, O., Galí, J., 2007. Real wage rigidities and the new keynesian model. Journal of
  money, credit and banking 39, 35­ 65.

Blinder, A. S., 1998. Central banking in theory and practice. Mit press.

Blinder, A. S., Ehrmann, M., Fratzscher, M., De Haan, J., Jansen, D.-J., 2008. Central bank
  communication and monetary policy: A survey of theory and evidence. Journal of Economic
  Literature 46 (4), 910­45.

Boivin, J., Giannoni, M. P., 2006. Has monetary policy become more e¤ective? The Review of
  Economics and Statistics 88 (3), 445­462.

Bordalo, P., Gennaioli, N., Ma, Y., Shleifer, A., 2018. Over-reaction in macroeconomic expecta-
  tions. NBER working paper No. 24932.



                                              41
Brainard, W. C., 1967. Uncertainty and the e¤ectiveness of policy. The American Economic
  Review 57 (2), 411­425.

Broer, T., Kohlhas, A., 2018. Forecaster (mis-) behavior. CEPR Discussion Paper No. DP12898.

Caballero, R. J., Simsek, A., 2019. Prudential monetary policy. NBER working paper no. 25977.

Caballero, R. J., Simsek, A., 2020. A risk-centric model of demand recessions and speculation.
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics 135 (3), 1493­   1566.

Campbell, J. R., Evans, C. L., Fisher, J. D., Justiniano, A., Calomiris, C. W., Woodford,
  M., 2012. Macroeconomic e¤ects of federal reserve forward guidance [with comments and
  discussion]. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1­80.

Cieslak, A., Morse, A., Vissing-Jorgensen, A., 2018. Stock returns over the fomc cycle. The
  Journal of Finance.

Cieslak, A., Schrimpf, A., 2019. Non-monetary news in central bank communication. Journal of
  International Economics 118, 293­  315.

Clarida, R., Gali, J., Gertler, M., 1999. The science of monetary policy: a new keynesian
  perspective. Journal of economic literature 37 (4), 1661­1707.

Coibion, O., Gorodnichenko, Y., 2015. Information rigidity and the expectations formation
  process: A simple framework and new facts. American Economic Review 105 (8), 2644­78.

Diercks, A. M., Carl, U., et al., 2019. A simple macro-...nance measure of risk premia in fed
  funds futures. FEDS Notes No. 2019-01-08.

Ehrmann, M., Fratzscher, M., 2007. Communication by central bank committee members: dif-
  ferent strategies, same e¤ectiveness? Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 39 (2-3), 509­541.

Eusepi, S., Preston, B., 2011. Expectations, learning, and business cycle uctuations. American
  Economic Review 101 (6), 2844­   72.

Evans, G. W., Honkapohja, S., 2001. Learning and expectations in macroeconomics.

Farhi, E., Werning, I., 2019. Monetary policy, bounded rationality, and incomplete markets.
  American Economic Review 109 (11), 3887­   3928.

Gabaix, X., forthcoming. A behavioral new keynesian model. American Economic Review.

Galí, J., 2015. Monetary policy, ination, and the business cycle: an introduction to the new
 Keynesian framework and its applications. Princeton University Press.

García-Schmidt, M., Woodford, M., 2019. Are low interest rates de   ationary? a paradox of
 perfect-foresight analysis. American Economic Review 109 (1), 86­120.

Giacoletti, M., Laursen, K., Singleton, K. J., forthcoming. Learning from disagreement in the
  U.S. treasury bond market. The Journal of Finance.

Goodfriend, M., King, R. G., 1997. The new neoclassical synthesis and the role of monetary
 policy. NBER macroeconomics annual 12, 231­ 283.


                                              42
Goodhead, R., Kolb, B., 2018. Monetary policy communication shocks and the macroeconomy.

Gürkaynak, R. S., Sack, B., Swanson, E., 2005a. The sensitivity of long-term interest rates to
 economic news: Evidence and implications for macroeconomic models. American economic
 review 95 (1), 425­436.

Gürkaynak, R. S., Sack, B., Swanson, E. T., 2005b. Do actions speak louder than words? the
 response of asset prices to monetary policy actions and statements. International Journal of
 Central Banking.

Hamilton, J. D., 2008. Daily monetary policy shocks and new home sales. Journal of Monetary
  Economics 55 (7), 1171­ 1190.

Hanson, S. G., Stein, J. C., 2015. Monetary policy and long-term real rates. Journal of Financial
  Economics 115 (3), 429­   448.

Jarocinski, M., Karadi, P., 2020. Deconstructing monetary policy surprises: the role of informa-
  tion shocks. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 12 (2), 1âA    ¼ T43.
                                                                          µ

King, M., 2005. Monetary policy: Practice ahead of theory. Mais Lecture, Cass Business School,
  London, May 17, 2005.

Lucca, D. O., Trebbi, F., 2011. Measuring central bank communication: an automated approach
  with application to fomc statements. NBER working paper No. 15367.

Ma, Y., Ropele, T., Sraer, D., Thesmar, D., 2020. A quantitative analysis of distortions in
 managerial forecasts. NBER Working Paper No. 26830.

Miranda-Agrippino, S., 2016. Unsurprising shocks: information, premia, and the monetary trans-
 mission.

Miranda-Agrippino, S., Ricco, G., 2018. The transmission of monetary policy shocks.

Morris, S., Shin, H. S., 2014. Risk-taking channel of monetary policy: A global game approach.
 Unpublished working paper, Princeton University.

Nakamura, E., Steinsson, J., 2018. High-frequency identi...cation of monetary non-neutrality:
  the information e¤ect. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 133 (3), 1283­ 1330.

Ramey, V. A., 2016. Macroeconomic shocks and their propagation. In: Handbook of macroeco-
  nomics. Vol. 2. Elsevier, pp. 71­162.

Rudebusch, G. D., 2002. Term structure evidence on interest rate smoothing and monetary
 policy inertia. Journal of monetary economics 49 (6), 1161­1187.

Sack, B., 1998. Uncertainty, learning, and gradual monetary policy. FEDS Working Paper Series
  No. 98-34.

Sastry, K., 2019. Public sentiment and monetary surprises. Available at SSRN 3421723.

Simsek, A., 2020. The macroeconomics of ...nancial speculation. working paper.

Stein, J. C., Sunderam, A., 2018. The fed, the bond market, and gradualism in monetary policy.
  The Journal of Finance 73 (3), 1015­  1060.

                                               43
Ubide, A., 2015. How the fed and markets are not in sync on interest rates. Peterson Institute
 for International Economics, www.piie.com/realtime.

Vissing-Jorgensen, A., 2019. Central banking with many voices: The communications arms race.

Woodford, M., 2001. Imperfect common knowledge and the e¤ects of monetary policy. NBER
 working paper No. 8673.

Woodford, M., 2003. Optimal interest-rate smoothing. The Review of Economic Studies 70 (4),
 861­886.

Woodford, M., 2005. Central bank communication and policy e¤ectiveness. NBER working paper
 No. 11898.

Woodford, M., 2013. Macroeconomic analysis without the rational expectations hypothesis.
 Annu. Rev. Econ. 5 (1), 303­346.




                                             44
 A.      Appendix: Model and the log-linearized equilibrium
In this appendix, we describe the details of the model and derive the log-linearized equilibrium conditions
that we use in our analysis. The model and the analysis closely follows the textbook treatment in Galí
(2015). The main di¤erence is that the central bank sets the interest rate before observing the aggregate
demand shock within the period.



Representative household (the market). The economy is set in discrete time with periods t 2
f0; 1; :::g. In each period, a representative household that we refer to as "the market"makes consumption-
savings and labor supply decisions. Formally, the market solves,
                                               2                             !3
                                                 1                     1+'
                                             M X       ~             N ~
                                 max1       Et 4   e   t
                                                          log Ct~
                                                                       t       5                     (A.1)
                              fCt   ~gt
                                 ~;Nt ~=t                            1 +   '
                                                ~
                                                t=t
                                                                       Z 1
                                             Bt~
                              s.t. Pt C
                                     ~ t~ +  f
                                                  = Bt~ 1 + W  t N
                                                               ~ t ~ +        ~( ) d .
                                                                              t
                                            Rt
                                             ~ 1                         0


Here, Ct denotes consumption, Nt denotes the labor supply, and ' is the inverse labor supply elasticity.
The market has log utility-- we describe the role of this assumption subsequently. The expectations
           M
operator Et   [ ] corresponds to the market' s belief after the realization of uncertainty in period t (see
Figure 3).
                                f
    In the budget constraint, Rt  denotes the gross risk-free nominal interest rate between periods t and
t + 1. The term Bt denotes the one-period risk-free bond holdings. In equilibrium, the risk-free asset is
in zero net supply, Bt = 0. The term t ( ) denotes the pro...ts from intermediate good ...rms (that we
describe subsequently). For simplicity, we do not allow households to trade the ...rms (in equilibrium,
there would be no trade since this is a representative household).
    The optimality conditions for problem (A:1) are standard and given by,

                                    Wt            Nt'
                                             =                                                       (A.2)
                                    Pt            Ct 1
                                        1              f        M    Pt
                                   Ct        = e      Rt Et             C 1 .                        (A.3)
                                                                    Pt+1 t+1

Final good ...rms. There is a competitive ...nal good sector that combines intermediate inputs from
a continuum of monopolistically competitive ...rms indexed by 2 [0; 1]. The ...nal good sector produces
according to the technology,
                                           Z 1                "
                                                             " 1
                                                      " 1
                                    Yt =        Yt ( ) " d       :                                (A.4)
                                                  0

This ...rm's optimality conditions imply a demand function for the intermediate good ...rms,
                                                                    "
                                                      Pt ( )
                                   Yt ( )     =                  Yt                                  (A.5)
                                                        Pt
                                                      Z 1                1=(1 ")
                                                                1 "
                                where Pt      =           Pt ( )    d              .                 (A.6)
                                                       0

Here, Pt denotes the ideal price index.


                                                           45
Intermediate good ...rms. Each intermediate good ...rm produces according to the technology,
                                                                           1
                                            Yt ( ) = At Nt ( )                     .                      (A.7)

Firms take the demand for their goods as given and set price to Pt ( ) to maximize the current market
value of their pro...ts, as we describe subsequently.

Market clearing conditions. The aggregate goods and labor market clearing conditions are given
by,

                                            Yt    = Ct                                                    (A.8)
                                                    Z 1
                                            Nt    =     Nt ( ) d .                                        (A.9)
                                                             0


Potential (exible-price) outcomes. We start by characterizing a potential (exible-price)
benchmark around which we log-linearize the equilibrium conditions. In this benchmark, ...rms are
symmetric and set the same price that we denote with Pt . The optimal price solves [cf. (A:5) and
(A:7)]:

                                                      max            Pt Yt         Wt Nt                 (A.10)
                                                  Pt ;Yt ;Nt
                                                                                            "
                                                                 1                 Pt
                                  s.t. Yt   = At (Nt )                  =                       Yt .
                                                                                   Pt

Here, Yt denotes the aggregate output that ...rms take as given. The solution is given by,

                                                  "                   Wt
                                       Pt =                                             .                (A.11)
                                              "       1 (1           ) At (Nt )

Hence, ...rms operate with a constant markup over their marginal cost. By symmetry, aggregate output
                               1
is given by Yt = Yt = At (Nt )     . Combining these observations with Eqs. (A:2) and (A:8), we solve
for the potential labor supply
                                                          1=(1+')
                                            " 1
                                     N =         (1     )         .                           (A.12)
                                             "
Likewise, potential output is given by
                                                                       1
                                              Yt = At (N )                     .                         (A.13)

Note that potential output is determined by current productivity and is independent of expectations
about the future.

Nominal rigidities. We next describe the nominal rigidities. In each period, a randomly selected
fraction, 1   , of ...rms reset their nominal prices. The ...rms that do not adjust their price in period t; set
their labor input to meet the demand for their goods (since ...rms operate with a markup and we focus
on small shocks). Consider the ...rms that adjust their price in period t. These ...rms'optimal price, Ptadj ,




                                                             46
solves
                                           1
                                           X            M
                                                             n                                                          o
                               max                 k
                                                       Et     Mt;t+k Yt+kjt Ptadj                          Wt Nt+kjt              (A.14)
                                  Pt
                                           k=0
                                                                                                       !     "
                                                                                           Ptadj
                               where Yt+kjt =                 At+k Nt1
                                                                     +kjt           =                            Yt+k
                                                                                           Pt+k

                                                                   k 1=Ct+k         Ptadj
                               and Mt;t+k = e                                             .
                                                                      1=Ct          Pt+k

The terms, Nt+kjt ; Yt+kjt , denote the input and the output of the ...rm (that resets its price in period t)
in a future period t + k . The term, Mt;t+k , is the stochastic discount factor between periods t and t + k
(determined by the ...rm owners'preferences). Note that ...rms share the same belief as the representative
household. The optimality condition gives,

                         1
                                           (                                                                            !)
                         X         M                                            "                     Wt+k
                              k
                                  Et        Mt;t+k            Ptadj                                                          =0   (A.15)
                                                                            "       1 (1              ) At+k Ntjt+k
                        k=0
                                                                   !1   "
                                                                                                  1
                                                           Ptadj                Yt+k          1
                        where Ntjt+k =                                                                 .
                                                           Pt+k                 At+k

The New-Keynesian Phillips curve. We next combine Eq. (A:15) with the remaining equilib-
rium conditions to derive the New-Keynesian Phillips curve. Speci...cally, we log-linearize the equilibrium
around the allocation that features real potential outcomes and zero in     ation, that is, Nt = N ; Yt = Yt
and Pt = P for each t. Throughout, we use the notation x     ~t = log (Xt =Xt ) to denote the log-linearized
                                                                 Wt
version of the corresponding variable Xt . We also let Zt = A     t Pt
                                                                       denote the normalized (productivity-
adjusted) real wage.
    We ...rst log-linearize Eq. (A:2) (and use Yt = Ct ) to obtain,

                                                               z
                                                               ~t = 'n
                                                                     ~t + y
                                                                          ~t .                                                    (A.16)

Log-linearizing Eqs. (A:4     A:7) and (A:9), we also obtain

                                                              y
                                                              ~t = (1               )n
                                                                                     ~t.                                          (A.17)

Finally, we log-linearize Eq. (A:15) to obtain,
                              1
                              X                        M
                                                            n                                                       o
                                               k
                                       (    ) Et             p~adj
                                                               t            ~t+k + n
                                                                            z      ~ t+kjt + p
                                                                                             ~t+k                       =0        (A.18)
                              k=0

                                                                  ~adj
                                                                " pt                p
                                                                                    ~t+k
                              where n
                                    ~ tjt+k =                                                 +n
                                                                                               ~ t+k .
                                                                        1

Here, the second line uses y
                           ~t = (1              )n
                                                 ~t.
   We next combine Eqs. (A:16                  A:18) and rearrange terms to obtain a closed-form solution for the




                                                                        47
price set by adjusting ...rms,
                                                                         1
                                                                         X              k       M
                                   ~adj
                                   pt           =           (1       )         (        ) Et [ y
                                                                                               ~t+k + p
                                                                                                      ~t+k ]
                                                                         k=0
                                                              1+'
                              where             =
                                                            1   + "

Since the expression is recursive, we can also write it as a di¤erence equation

                                                                                                      M
                                                                                                           h      i
                                   ~adj
                                   p t  = (1                      )( y
                                                                     ~t + p
                                                                          ~t ) +                 Et         p~adj
                                                                                                              t+1 .                 (A.19)

                                                                                    M                 M
                                                                                                           h     M
                                                                                                                        i
Here, we have used the law of iterated expectations, E t [ ] = E t                                             E t+1 [ ] .
   Next, we consider the aggregate price index (A:6),

                                                                     1 "
                                                                                Z                                       1=(1 ")
                                                                                                           1 "
                        Pt    =            (1       )       Ptadj          +            (Pt      1   ( ))         d
                                                                                   St
                                                                     1 "                         1=(1 ")
                              =            (1       ) Ptadj                + Pt1         1
                                                                                          "



Here, we have used the observation that a fraction of prices are the same as in the last period. The
term, St , denotes the set of sticky ...rms in period t, and the second line follows from the assumption that
adjusting terms are randomly selected. Log-linearizing the equation, we further obtain p    ~t = (1    ~adj
                                                                                                      )pt +
 p
 ~t 1 . After substituting in  ation, t = p  ~t p ~t 1 , this implies,

                                                        t   = (1           ~adj
                                                                         ) pt               ~t
                                                                                            p     1    .                            (A.20)

Hence, in ation is proportional to the price change by adjusting ...rms.
   Finally, note that Eq. (A:19) can be written in terms of the price change of adjusting ...rms as

                                                                                                            M
                                                                                                                 h             i
                       ~adj
                       p t        p
                                  ~t   1
                                           = (1                  ) y    ~t
                                                                   ~t + p           ~t
                                                                                    p       1   +         Et         ~adj
                                                                                                                     pt+1    ~t .
                                                                                                                             p

Substituting t = p ~t p~t 1 and combining with Eq. (A:20), we obtain the New-Keynesian Phillips curve
(1) that we use in the main text,

                                                                                    M
                                                    t        =       y~t + E t [ t+1 ]
                                                                    1                  1+'
                                       where                 =            (1     )           .                                      (A.21)
                                                                                   1     + "

Aggregate demand shocks. We focus on aggregate demand shocks, which we capture by assuming
log productivity, at+1 , follows the process

                                                                  at+1 = at + gt .                                                  (A.22)

Here, gt denotes the growth rate of productivity between periods t and t + 1, which is realized in period
t.




                                                                           48
The IS curve. Finally, we log-linearize the Euler equation (A:3) to obtain Eq. (2) in the main text,
                                                       M                                             M
                             y
                             ~t =            it    Et [        t+1 ]                + gt + E t [~
                                                                                                yt+1 ] .

                f
Here, it = log Rt denotes the nominal risk-free interest rate. We have used the market clearing condition,
                                                                                1
Yt = Ct [cf. Eq. (A:8)], the de...nition of the potential output, Yt = At (N )       [cf. (A:13)], and the
evolution of productivity, At+1 = At egt [cf. (A:22)]. The equation illustrates gt has a one-to-one e¤ect
on aggregate spending and output in period t. Hence, we refer to gt as the aggregate demand shock in
period t.

Monetary policy and equilibrium. Recall that we assume the Fed sets the interest rate to solve
problem (3),
                                             1 F             2          2
                                min           E            y
                                                           ~t  +             s.t. (A:21) and (2) .
                              it ;y
                                  ~t ;   t   2 t                        t


Here,   denotes the relative weight on the output gap. This completes the equilibrium conditions.

Price of the market portfolio. For future reference, we also derive the equilibrium price of "the
market portfolio." Speci...cally, in every period t, agents can also invest in a security in zero net supply
                                                                      1
whose payo¤ is proportional to output in subsequent periods, fYt    ~gt
                                                                      ~ t+1 . We let ! t
                                                                                       ~ denote the market's
holding of this security and modify the budget constraint as follows,
                                                                                                             Z    1
                          Bt
                           ~+1
                  Pt
                   ~Ct
                     ~+     f        ~! t
                                        ~ = Bt
                                  + Qt       ~ + !t
                                                  ~                 1 (Yt
                                                                        ~ + Qt       ~+
                                                                                   ~Nt
                                                                             ~) + Wt                                  ~(
                                                                                                                      t    )d .
                           Rt
                            ~                                                                                 0


Here, Qt~ denotes the ex-dividend price of this security (excluding the current dividends). Using the
optimality condition for ! t , we obtain,
                                                       "                                              #
                                                                      1
                                                   M               Ct+1
                                         Qt =     Et       e            1    (Qt+1 + Yt+1 ) .
                                                                   Ct

Solving the equation forward, and using the transversality condition, we further obtain

                                                       X                                 1
                                                                    k (Ct+k )
                                             Qt =              e                     1       Yt+k .
                                                       k 1
                                                                            (Ct )

After substituting Yt = Ct and simplifying, we ...nd

                                                                        e
                                                       Qt =                         Yt .                                          (A.23)
                                                                   1        e

Hence, in view of log utility, the equilibrium price of the market portfolio is proportional to output.
                                                1
Substituting Yt = exp (~
                       yt ) Yt and Yt = At (N )     and taking logs, we obtain Eq. (8) in the main text,

                                                                                             e            1
                          qt = q + at + y
                                        ~t where q = log                                              (N )            .
                                                                                      1          e
In equilibrium, asset prices are proportional to output. Therefore, asset prices change either when
productivity (at ) changes or when the output gap (y
                                                   ~t ) changes.



                                                                    49
 B.      Appendix: Omitted derivations
This appendix presents the derivations omitted from the main text.


 B.1.     Omitted derivations in Section 3.3
Bayesian updating. The realization of aggregate demand provides each agent with an independent
and noisy signal about the persistent component, gt = g + vt N (0; ). Agents combine this data with
                             j
their prior beliefs, g N g0    ; C0 1  [cf. (10)], to form their posterior beliefs. Applying the Bayes'rule,
at the beginning of each period t, agent j believes the persistent shock is Normally distributed with mean
and variance given by,

                                                         1 j
                                                              Pt 1                 1               j   Pt 1
                         j         j             C0       g0 + t
                                                               ~                       gt
                                                                                        ~     C 0 g0 + t ~=0 gt
                                                                                                              ~
                        gt    =   Et   [g]   =                Pt =0
                                                                  1                         =
                                                      C0   1 + t
                                                               ~=0
                                                                                   1                C0 + t
                                                 0                                 1   1
                                                                     t 1
                                                                     X                                            1
                       and       j
                              vart     (g)   = @C0           1
                                                                 +              1A
                                                                                            = (C0 + t)                .
                                                                     ~=0
                                                                     t


Here, C0 1 denotes the precision of the initial belief and          1
                                                                      denotes the precision of each signal. The
posterior belief is a precision-weighted average of the prior belief and the signals. The posterior precision
(the inverse of the variance) is the sum of the precision of the initial belief and the precision of the signals.
The posterior precision increases (or the posterior variance declines) over time.
    Using the de...nition of relative con...dence, c0;t = CC 0
                                                           0 +t
                                                                [cf. (12)], we write the posterior mean as

                                                                                                    t 1
                                                                                                    X
                                   j         j                                                          g~t
                                  gt = c0;t g0 + (1          c0;t ) g t    1   and g t      1   =             .
                                                                                                          t
                                                                                                    ~=0
                                                                                                    t


The term, g t 1 , denotes the average realization of aggregate demand up to (and including) the realization
in period t 1. The agent'   s posterior (conditional) mean belief is a weighted average of her initial mean
belief and the realized data. This proves the ...rst line in (11).
    To prove the second line in (11), note that
                                                  Pt     2
               j         C0         t                  ~=0 gt
                                                            ~ 1      + gt      1
              gt   =          gj +                     t
                        C0 + t 0 C0 + t                          t
                                  8                                         0          19
                        C +t 1<                                                         =
                                                                              t 2
                          0           C           0          j       t 1 @X gt     ~ 1
                                                                                       A + 1 gt
                   =                                        g0   +                                                        1
                          C0 + t         : C0 + t       1          C0 + t 1       t 1 ; C0 + t
                                                                                            ~=0
                                                                                            t
                                   j
                   = ct       1;t gt 1   + (1    ct   1;t ) gt 1 .

                                                     j
Here, the last line substitutes the de...nitions of gt               1   and ct    1;t .


    Proof of Lemma 1. Follows from Eq. (11).

    Proof of Lemma 2. We next characterize the higher order beliefs. Note that the identities trivially
hold when t = s. Suppose t > s. Consider j; j 0 2 fF; M g where we allow j 0 to be the same as j . Consider
the second line of Eq. (11) for agent j 0 . By repeatedly applying the equation and using Eq. (12), we



                                                                     50
obtain:
                                            0                  0
                                        j         j
                                       gt = cs;t gs + (1                   cs;t ) g s;t   1,
                Pt   s 1
where g s;t 1 = n=0 gs+n = (t s) denotes the average realization between periods s and t                                 1. Con-
sidering agent j '
                 s expectation of this expression in period s, we obtain:


                                   h 0i
                                 j   j          j0                                   j
                                Es  gt  = cs;t gs  + (1                      cs;t ) Es g s;t    1
                                                           j0                        j
                                                =    cs;t gs        + (1     cs;t ) gs .                                   (B.1)

                                                           0
                                                 j
Here, the ...rst line uses the observation that gs is known in period s. The second line observes that for
                          j           j                                        j
each n    0, we have Es [gs+n ] = gs by de...nition of the conditional belief gs . Applying Eq. (B:1) for
 0                                          0
j = j implies Eq. (14). Applying it for j 6= j implies Eq. (15) and completes the proof.


 B.2.     Omitted derivations in Section 4
Recall that the relative con...dence is given by cs;t = C 0 +s
                                                         C0 +t [cf. (12)], Relative con...dence satis...es the
following identity, which we use in subsequent analysis,

                                          cs;t ct;t0 = cs;t0 for s              t     t0 .                                 (B.2)


Proof of Proposition 1, part (i). Provided in the main text.

Proof of Proposition 1, part (ii). The derivation of the forward curve is presented in the main text.
Here, we derive the dot curve, and we establish the limit results as t ! 1. Taking the expectation of
Eq. (19) according to the Fed's belief, we obtain,

                      F                                   F  F           F  M
                     E0 [it ]   =    + (1       ct;t+1 ) E0 gt + ct;t+1 E0 gt
                                                          F                M                                F
                                =    + (1       ct;t+1 ) g0 + ct;t+1 c0;t g0 + (1                   c0;t ) g0
                                        F           M                       F
                                =    + g0 + c1;t+1 g0                      g0 :

Here, the second line uses Lemma 2 and the third line uses Eq. (B:2). This proves Eq. (22).
                                                       C0
    To derive the limit results, note that c0;t+1 = C0 + t+1 . Thus, c0;t+1 is decreasing in horizon t with
                                        F           F
limt!1 c0;t+1 = 0. This implies lim E0 [it ] = + g0 . Likewise, (1 ct;t+1 ) c0;t is decreasing in horizon
                                    t!1
                                                          M                                  M
t with limt!1 (1     ct;t+1 ) c0;t = 0. This implies lim E0 [it ] =                       + g0 , completing the proof.
                                                                   t!1


 B.3.     Omitted derivations in Section 5
Proof of Proposition 2. Most of the proof is provided in the main text. We verify that the conjectured
actions correspond to an equilibrium. Speci...cally, we check that the Fed does not have an incentive to
deviate from the equilibrium interest rate in (19),

                                                                           F         M
                                      i0 =          + (1           c0;1 ) g0 + c0;1 g0 .




                                                                    51
Recall that, after seeing this interest rate, the market thinks the Fed'
                                                                       s belief is given by,
                                                                          M
                                                         i0         c0;1 g0
                                             GF
                                              0 (i0 )                       :
                                                              1    c0;1

Along the equilibrium path, the market'    s belief is correct, GF           F
                                                                 0 (i0 ) = g0 .
     Consider the allocations in periods t 1. The market thinks the equilibrium will be the same as in
Section 4 given the Fed' s initial belief GF
                                           0 (i0 ). Therefore, the market'  s expected output gap in period 1
is given Eq.(23),

                                                                                                                          M
             M              M      F         M                                                            i0        c0;1 g0
            E1  y1 ji0 ] = g1
               [~                 g1 = c0;1 g0          GF              F
                                                         0 (i0 ) where G0 (i0 ) =                                           .   (B.3)
                                                                                                               1   c0;1

    Next consider the equilibrium in period 0. Note that Eq. (B:3) implies Eq. (26) in the main
         M
      dE1   y1 ji0 ]
           [~             c0;1
text,     di0        =          . Substituting this into the Fed'    s optimality condition (4), we obtain
    h                  i 1 c0;1
  F          c ;1                    c ;1                                                 F
Et    1+ 1 0  c0;1 y ~0 = 0. Since 1 0 c0;1 is constant, this implies Eq. (5) as before, E0 [~
                                                                                             y0 ] = 0. Thus,
the Fed's optimal interest rate is still given by Eq. (6),

                                                    F          F  M
                                     i0    =     + E0 [g0 ] + E0 E1 [~
                                                                     y1 ji0 ]
                                                    F         M
                                           =     + g0 + c0;1 g0              GF
                                                                              0 (i0 ) .

                              M                                         F          F
The second line substitutes E1   [~
                                  y1 ji0 ] as well as the Fed'
                                                             s belief, E0 [g0 ] = g0 . Substituting the equilib-
                  F         F
rium condition, G0 (i0 ) = g0 , we verify Eq. (19).

Proof of Corollary 1. First consider the output gap in period t. Eq. (20) implies,

                                                         F
                                            y
                                            ~t = gt     gt =g          gF
                                                                        t + vt ,


where we substituted gt = g + vt . Next recall that the Fed's conditional belief is given by [cf. (11)],

                                                                       t 1
                                                                       X
                                 F                F                        g~  t
                                gt        = c0;t g0 + (1      c0;t )
                                                                              t
                                                                       ~=0
                                                                       t
                                                                       0                     1
                                                                                  t 1
                                                                                  X   v~
                                                  F
                                          = c0;t g0 + (1      c0;t ) @g+                    tA
                                                                                        t
                                                                                  ~=0
                                                                                  t
                                                                                            t 1
                                                                                            X
                                                      F                                         v~t
                                          = g + c0;t g0         g + (1             c0;t )
                                                                                                  t
                                                                                            ~=0
                                                                                            t


Substituting this into the expression for the output gap, we obtain
                                                         8                                   9
                                                         <                            t 1
                                                                                      X   v~ =t
                                y
                                ~t = c0;t g      gF
                                                  0     + vt      (1         c0;t )                   .
                                                         :                                    t;
                                                                                      ~=0
                                                                                      t


The terms in set-parentheses are zero-mean random variables (transitory shocks) independent from both
       F
g and g0 .




                                                           52
    Next consider the interest rate in period 0. Eq. (19) implies

                                                                     F         M
                                          i0 =     + (1      c0;1 ) g0 + c0;1 g0 .

                                       F
All of the terms except for (1 c0;1 ) g0 are deterministic.
    Finally, we combine the expressions for the output gap and the interest rate to obtain the desired
result,

                           DGP                     cov DGP c0;t g g0
                                                                   F              F
                                                                     ; (1 c0;1 ) g0
                                 (~
                                  yt ; i0 )   =                             F
                                                          varDGP (1 c0;1 ) g0
                                                   c0;t (1c0;1 ) cov DGP g g0  F    F
                                                                                 ; g0
                                              =              2                 F
                                                    (1 c0;1 )        varDGP g0
                                                                             !
                                                                      F
                                                     c0;t    cov g; g0
                                              =                      F
                                                                           1
                                                   1 c0;1     var g0
                                                     c0;t          F
                                              =                g; g0    1 ,
                                                   1 c0;1

                                                                   F
where the last line substitutes the de...nition of             g; g0 .

Proof of Proposition 3. We conjecture an equilibrium that satis...es Eqs. (33                      34),

                                                     F    F         M            M  F
                                  i0    =         + g0 + v0 + c0;1 g0           E0 g0 ji0
                                           M                                F
                                        = E0 [i0 ] + (1             c0;1 ) g0    gF    F
                                                                                  0 + v0      vF
                                                                                               0
                                                   M
                        M  F                  i0 E0   [i0 ]
                       E0 g0 ji0        =
                                                1 c0;1
                                        = gF
                                           0 +
                                                           F
                                                          g0     gF    F
                                                                  0 + v0        vF
                                                                                 0 .

                                                                                                     M      F
The ...rst row describes the optimal interest rate policy, i0 , given the market'
                                                                                s posterior belief, E0    g0  ji0 .
                                                                          M   F
The third row describes the market'      s Bayesian posterior belief, E0 g0 ji0 , given the interest rate it
                                                                                                 M     F
observes, i0 . The second and the last rows describe the equilibrium levels of i0 and E0             g0  ji0 , re-
                                                                                                        M
spectively, obtained by substituting the equilibrium level of the other variable. The term, E0 [i0 ] =
  + gF       F
       0 + v0 + c0;1 g0
                        M
                              gF0 , describes the market' s ex-ante expected interest rate.
    To verify the conjecture, ...rst consider the equilibrium starting period 1 onward given the market'          s
                     M    F
posterior belief, E0    g0  ji0 . The analysis is the same as in Section 5.1. Since there is no short-run
disagreement (by assumption), the Fed'      s interest rate decision in period 1 fully reveals its conditional
         F          F
belief g1 . Given g1 , the equilibrium is the same as before. In particular, after the interest rate decision,
the market'  s expected output gap is given by the following analogue of Eq.(28),

                                    M              M            F         M        F
                                   E1 [~
                                       y1 ji1 ] = g1           g1 = c0;1 g0       g0 .

Before the interest rate decision in period 1, we instead have,
                                                                                                M
                  M                   M        M  F                        M  F            i0 E0   [i0 ]
                 E1 [~
                     y1 ji0 ] = c0;1 g0       E0 g0 ji0             where E0 g0 ji0 =                    .   (B.4)
                                                                                             1 c0;1

The market expects an average mistake that reects its posterior belief (in period 0) about the Fed'
                                                                                                  s


                                                               53
long-term belief.
    Next consider the Fed'        s optimal interest rate policy in period 0. Note that Eq. (B:4) im-
        M
      dE1   y1 ji0 ]
           [~                c0;1
plies     di0         =            . Substituting this into the Fed'  s optimality condition (4), we obtain
    h                     i1 c0;1
  F           c0;1                          c0;1                                                 F
E0    1 + 1 c0;1 y      ~0 = 0. Since 1 c0;1 is constant, this implies Eq. (5) as before, E0       [~
                                                                                                    y0 ] = 0.
Thus, the Fed'     s optimal interest rate is still given by Eq. (6),

                                                   F          F  M
                                 i0    =        + E0 [g0 ] + E0 E1 [~
                                                                    y1 ji0 ]
                                                   F    F         M                          M  F
                                       =        + g0 + v0 + c0;1 g0                         E0 g0 ji0          ,

                                   M                                          F           F    F
where the second line substitutes E1  [~
                                       y1 ji0 ] as well as the Fed's belief, E0  [g0 ] = g0 + v0 . This proves
Eq. (33).
    Next consider the market' s Bayesian posterior belief in period 0. In equilibrium, the interest rate in
(33) provides the market with an imperfect signal of the Fed'     s long-term belief (relative to its ex-ante
mean),
                          i0 E M [i0 ]
                    xF0                 = g0  F
                                                   gF
                                                    0 + v0
                                                           F
                                                               vF
                                                                0    N g0  F
                                                                                gF     2
                                                                                  0; v .
                            1 c0;1
                                                       F
The market combines the signal with its prior belief, g0                          gF
                                                                                   0        N 0;      2
                                                                                                      g   , to form the Bayesian posterior,

                                                               1                                                       2
                                                               2
                     M      F                                                                                          g
                    E0     g0      gF   F
                                    0 jx0       =   xF
                                                     0 1
                                                               v
                                                                   1
                                                                           F
                                                                        = g0           gF    F
                                                                                        0 + v0            vF
                                                                                                           0       2       2
                                                                                                                               .
                                                          2   +    2                                               g   +   v
                                                          g        v



This proves Eq. (34).
     Finally, consider the comparative statics of the equilibrium described in the proposition. Eq. (35)
follows directly from Eq. (33). Consider Eq. (36) that describes the change in the forward interest rates
for t    1. Recall that starting period 1 onward, the Fed'  s belief is revealed and the equilibrium is the
                                             F
same as before. Therefore, conditional on g0 , the forward rates are still given by Eq. (27),

                         M      F              F                               M
                        E0 it jg0 =         + g0 c0;t (1           ct;t+1 ) + g0 (1              c0;t (1       ct;t+1 )) .

Taking the expectation, we obtain,

      M                      M  F                                         M
     E0 [it ji0 ]   =     + E0 g0 ji0 c0;t (1                 ct;t+1 ) + g0 (1              c0;t (1       ct;t+1 ))
                    =     +   gF
                               0   +        F
                                           g0       gF
                                                     0   +     F
                                                              v0        vF
                                                                         0        c0;t (1                 M
                                                                                              ct;t+1 ) + g0 (1             c0;t (1   ct;t+1 ))
                         M                                          F
                    =   E0    [it ] + c0;t (1       ct;t+1 )       g0        gF
                                                                              0   +     F
                                                                                       v0     vF
                                                                                               0      .

Here, the second line substitutes Eq. (34) and the last line substitutes the market's ex-ante expectation.
                                            M             M            M
Eq. (36) then follows after substituting E0 [it ji0 ] = E0 [it ji0 ] E0 [it ].

Proof of Proposition 4. We ...rst describe the endogenous weight the Fed assigns to the case in which
the market is reactive, ~. Consider the quadratic,

                                   P (x)        x2 c0;1        x (1 + 2 c0;1 ) + (c0;1 + 1) .

Note that P ( ) = (1      ) c0;1 > 0 and P (1) = (1    ) (c0;1 1) < 0. Since P ( ) is an upward sloping
parabola, these conditions imply that P (:) has exactly one zero that falls in the interval ( ; 1). Let ~


                                                                       54
denote this zero: that is, ~ is the unique solution to,

                                                 P ~ = 0 over ~ 2 ( ; 1) :                                                         (B.5)

     Given ~, we conjecture an equilibrium that satis...es Eqs. (42) and (43), that is,
                                                                              (                                               )!
                                                                                       ~E M gF ji0 ; = 1
                                           F    F                    M                   0   0
                             i0    =    + g0 + v0 + c0;1            g0
                                                                                    + 1 ~ E0 M
                                                                                                 g0 F
                                                                                                      ji0 ; = 0
                                      M
                                   = E0 [i0 ] + 1          c0;1 ~           F
                                                                           g0 +        F
                                                                                      v0 ;
                                                     M
              M  F                              i0 E0   [i0 ]
             E0 g0 ji0 ;           = gF
                                      0 +
                                                  1 c0;1 ~
                                                                                             2
                                                                                             g
                                   = gF
                                      0 +
                                                    F
                                                   g0 +        F
                                                              v0        where        =   2       2
                                                                                                     .
                                                                                         v   +   g


We also conjecture that the forward curve change in period 0 is given by the same expression as in
Proposition 3, conditional on the market'    s type [cf. (36)]. Therefore, after observing the forward curve
reaction to its interest rate decision in period 0, the Fed learns the market'  s reaction type .
    To verify the conjecture, ...rst consider the equilibrium in period 1 given the market'  s posterior belief,
  M    F
E0   g0  ji0 ; . Since the Fed has learned the market'    s type , the analysis is the same as in Section 5.1.
Following the steps in the proof of Proposition 3, we obtain the following analogue of (B:4):

                                                                                                                      M
           M                     M            M  F                     M  F                                      i0 E0   [i0 ]
          E1 [~
              y1 ji0 ; ] = c0;1 g0           E0 g0 ji0 ;        where E0 g0 ji0 = gF
                                                                                   0 +                                         .   (B.6)
                                                                                                                   1 c0;1 ~

     Next consider the Fed'
                          s optimal interest rate policy in period 0. In this case, Eq. (B:6) implies
  M
dE1  y1 ji0 ; ]
    [~             c0;1
    di0     = 1 c ~ . Substituting this into the Fed' s optimality condition (4), we obtain,
                       0;1

                                                                                                         !
                                    F   dy
                                         ~0              dy
                                                          ~0                             c0;1
                                   E0       y
                                            ~0 = 0 where     =                      1+                       .                     (B.7)
                                        di0              di0                           1 c0;1 ~

The marginal policy impact, d   y
                                ~0
                               di0 , depends on the market'  s reaction type, . Since the Fed is uncertain
about the market' s type, this term does not drop out of the expectation. Therefore, unlike the equilibria
                                                      F
we analyzed so far, the Fed' s expected output gap, E0  [~
                                                         y0 ], is not necessarily zero.
   To characterize the optimal policy, we rewrite Eq. (B:7) in terms of conditional expectations,
                                                                    !
                        F         dy
                                   ~0               c0;1                 F                                  F
                  0=   E0             y
                                      ~0 =      1+                      E0 [~
                                                                            y0 j = 1] + (1               ) E0 [~
                                                                                                               y0 j = 0] .
                                  di0              1 c0;1 ~

Note that the quadratic in Eq. (B:5) implies,

                                                                          c0;1
                                                               1+        1 c0;1 ~
                                                ~=                                       .
                                                                 c0;1
                                                        1+      1 c0;1 ~
                                                                              +1




                                                                    55
Therefore, the Fed's optimality condition can be equivalently written as,

                                 0 = ~E0
                                       F
                                         [~
                                          y0 j = 1] + 1                 ~ E F [~
                                                                           0 y0 j = 0] .                        (B.8)

Hence, the Fed targets a weighted average of the output gap over the cases in which the market is reactive
and unreactive. The weight for the reactive case is given by the endogenous parameter, ~, which exceeds
the prior probability of this case, ~ > .
    We next solve the policy interest rate. Substituting the IS curve (2) into (B:8), we obtain,

                i0    =     + E0F
                                  [g0 ] + ~E1
                                            M
                                               y1 ji0 ; = 1] + 1 ~ E1
                                              [~                       M
                                                                           [~
                                                                            y1 ji0 ; = 0]                       (B.9)
                                                        (                                 )!
                                                               ~E M gF ji0 ; = 1
                               F       F           M             0   0
                      =     + g0 + v0 + c0;1 g0                                              .
                                                           + 1 ~ E0  M
                                                                         g0 F
                                                                              ji0 ; = 0

                             M                                                       F          F     F
The second line substitutes E1  [~
                                 y1 ji0 ; ] from (B:6) as well as the Fed's belief, E0 [g0 ] = g0 + v0  . This
proves Eq. (42).
    Next consider the market' s Bayesian posterior belief in period 0. In equilibrium, the interest rate in
(42) provides the market with an imperfect signal of the Fed'     s long-term belief (relative to its ex-ante
         F     i0 E M [i0 ]   F          F
mean), x0 = 1 c ~ = g0 + v0 . Following the same steps as in the proof of Proposition 3, we
                    0;1
prove Eq. (43) and verify the conjectured equilibrium.
    We next establish Eqs. (44 45). To this end, we substitute the interest rate from (B:9) into the IS
curve (2) to obtain
                                                        n                                                 o
          y
          ~0 = g0      F
                      E0          M
                         [g0 ] + E1  y1 ji0 ; ]
                                    [~                   ~E M [~                      ~ E M [~
                                                           1 y1 ji0 ; = 1] + 1           1   y  j
                                                                                               1 0i ; = 0]  .

Taking the Fed'
              s expectation conditional on                = 1, we obtain

                F
               E0  y0 j = 1]
                  [~             =       1       ~     M
                                                      E1  y1 ji0 ; = 1]
                                                         [~                   M
                                                                             E1 [~
                                                                                 y1 ji0 ; = 0]

                                 =           1       ~ c0;1 E M gF ji0 ; = 1         M
                                                                                    E0  F
                                                                                       g0 ji0 ; = 0
                                                             0   0

                                 =           1       ~ c0;1     F
                                                               g0 +        F
                                                                          v0 .

The second and the third lines use Eqs. (B:6) and (43), respectively. Likewise, taking the Fed'
                                                                                              s expec-
tation conditional on = 0, we obtain

                      F
                     E0  y0 j = 0]
                        [~           = ~ E1M
                                              [~              M
                                               y1 ji0 ; = 0] E1 [~
                                                                 y1 ji0 ; = 1]
                                     =   ~c0;1 E M gF ji0 ; = 0    E0 M    F
                                                                          g0 ji0 ; = 1
                                                  0     0
                                       ~
                                     = c0;1      F
                                                g + v .   F
                                                          0         0


This proves Eq. (45). Finally, note that the unconditional expectation is given by

                           F                  F                       F
                          E0 [~
                              y0 ]   =       E0 [~
                                                 y0 j = 1] + (1    ) E0 [~
                                                                         y0 j = 0]
                                     =           1 ~ + (1       ) ~ c0;1      F
                                                                             g0    F
                                                                                + v0

                                     =       ~          c0;1    F
                                                               g0 +        F
                                                                          v0 .




                                                               56
This establishes Eq. (44) and completes the proof of the proposition.

Proof of Proposition 5. We verify that the conjectured allocation is an equilibrium. The Fed'                       s
                                                F
expected interest rate for the next period, E0    [i1 ], is a one-to-one function of the Fed'     s long-term belief,
  F                                                                      F              F
g0  . Therefore, the announcement of the expected rate reveals g0          . Given g0     , the current interest rate
                                                                F
is a one-to-one function of the Fed'  s short-term belief, v0 . Thus, the announcement of the current rate
          F
reveals v0  . Note also that the Fed does not bene...t from deviating from the interest rate policy, since
                                                           F
the policy enables it to hit its target (on average), E0     [~
                                                              y0 ] = 0. This veri...es the equilibrium. The rest of
the result follows from the analysis preceding the proposition.


 B.4.     Omitted derivations in Section 6
Proof of Proposition 6. Most of the proof is provided in the main text. Here, we complete the
remaining steps. Eq. (49) follows from solving the di¤erence equation forward and assuming that
            M
limt!1 Et     [ t ] remains bounded. Then, Eqs. (47 49) provide a closed form and deterministic solution
     M          F            F                                               M           F          M  F
for Et [ t ] ; Et   [ t ] ; Et [~
                                yt ]. Note also that the IS curve implies Et   [~
                                                                                yt ] = E t [~
                                                                                            yt ] + gt gt [cf. (23)].
                                                        j       j
This veri...es the conjecture that for each j , Et [ t ] ; Et [~  yt ] evolve deterministically and completes the
proof.

Proof of Corollary 2. The analysis that precedes the corollary implies

                                 F    M             F      F                    1         M
                       rt =   + gt + gt+1          gt           yt+1 ] +
                                                     +1 + Et+1 [~                        Et +1 [       t+1 ] .


                    M       F                M     F                                      F
Lemma 1 implies gt   +1   gt +1 = ct;t+1 gt       gt  , and Proposition 6 implies Et      +1 [~
                                                                                              yt+1 ] =
  1   M
     Et+2 [ t+2 ]. Combining these observations, we obtain the expression for the interest rate,

                                    sticky     1              M                  M
                              rt = rt      +                 Et+1 [    t+1 ]    Et+2 [   t+2 ]     .

    To prove the inequalities in the second part of the result, let                 xt = xt      xt+1 denote the ...rst forward
di¤erence of a variable xt . Note that Eq. (49) implies,

                                   M                    M      F                 M
                                  Et [ t] =            gt     gt +              Et+1 [   t+1 ] ,                        (B.10)

Note also that Lemma 1 implies,

                                   M      F           M            F             M         F
                                  gt     gt        = gt           gt     ct;t+1 gt        gt
                                                                         M           F
                                                   =    (1     ct;t+1 ) gt          gt
                                                                              M           F
                                                   = c0;t (1        ct;t+1 ) g0          g0 .

Combining this with (B:10), we obtain a closed-form solution for the forward di¤erence of ination,
                                                              1
                                                              X
                               M                M       F
                              Et [ t] =        g0      g0           c0;t+n (1       ct+n;t+n+1 ) .
                                                              n=0

               M               M    F                      sticky     M    F
Note that Et     [ t ] > 0 i¤ g0 > g0 . This implies rt > rt      i¤ g0 > g0 and completes the proof of
the corollary.

                                                             57
                                    M                    F    M          F
Proof of Corollary 3. Substituting gt                   gt = g0         g0 , Eq. (49) implies

                                                           M        F
                                    M                    g0        g0                 u
                                   Et [ t] =                             =                          .
                                                         1                       (1             )

Then, Eq. (48) implies
                                 F                 1
                                Et [~
                                    yt ] =                         u=        2
                                                                                                            u.
                                                  (1           )                 + (1                   )

Here, the second substitutes      =   +   2   . Likewise, Eq. (47) implies

                                    F
                                   Et [ t] =                   u=       2
                                                                                                u.
                                                    1                       + (1            )

These equations are the same as Eqs. (3.4) and (3.5) in Clarida et al. (1999); Galí (2015) for the special
case with a persistent cost-push shock ( = 1) after appropriately adjusting the notation (speci...cally, by
         F               F
setting Et [~
            yt ] = xt ; Et [ t ] = t ; = and = ).


 B.      Appendix: Omitted extensions
This appendix presents the extensions of the baseline model, omitted from the main text.


 B.1.     Heterogeneous data sensitivity and bundled Fed belief shocks
In the main text, we focus on the case in which the Fed and the market have the same level of con...dence in
                  j
initial beliefs, C0 = C0 . In this appendix, we consider the general case in which agents have heterogeneous
                       F        M                                              F      M
con...dence levels, C0   and C0   , as well as heterogeneous initial beliefs, g0 and g0 . We establish the results
that we describe in the concluding section. For simplicity, we focus on the baseline setup in which agents
know each other'    s initial beliefs and "agree-to-disagree."
     In this case, the Fed and the market have heterogeneous data sensitivity. Speci...cally, Bayesian
updating implies the following analogue of Eq. (11),

                                           j
                                          gt    = cj
                                                   t
                                                                j
                                                           1;t gt 1     + 1       cj
                                                                                   t      1;t       gt       1   (B.1)
                                                         j
                                                        C0 +s
                               where cj
                                      s;t       =         j
                                                                        for s     t.
                                                         C0 +t
                     0                    0
             j      j
Note that C0   > C0   implies cj      j
                               s;t > cs;t for each t > s: higher initial con...dence implies a higher relative
con...dence at all times. Therefore, agents put heterogeneous weights on new realizations of aggregate
demand. In particular, the agent with smaller con...dence puts greater weight on new data. This feature
changes how output and asset prices react to demand shocks. The demand shocks are bundled with
endogenous Fed belief shocks similar to the ones analyzed in Section 5.1. We start by presenting our
main result that characterizes the equilibrium. We then illustrate the comparative statics of demand
shocks and contrast the e¤ects with the case with common data sensitivity.
                                        F    M    F    M
Proposition 7. Consider arbitrary C0      ; C0 ; g0 ; g0 so that the Fed and the market can have heteroge-
neous data sensitivity as well as heterogeneous initial beliefs about aggregate demand.




                                                               58
    The equilibrium output gap and risky asset price are given by

                                                                         F
                                             y
                                             ~t    = Dt gt              gt                                                  (B.2)
                                                                                      F
                                             qt    = q + at + Dt gt                  gt                                     (B.3)

Here, fDt gt is a deterministic sequence that captures the output impact of demand shocks. It is the
unique solution to the di¤ erence equation:

                             Dt = 1 + cF
                                       t;t+1               cM
                                                            t;t+1 Dt+1 with lim Dt = 1.                                     (B.4)
                                                                                     t!1

The solution satis...es Dt > 0: above-average shocks have a positive impact. If the Fed is more data
                              F      M                                               F    M
sensitive than the market, C0   < C0     (resp. less data sensitive than the market C0 > C0 ), then the
impact is dampened Dt < 1 (resp. ampli...ed Dt > 1) relative to the case with common data sensitivity.
    The equilibrium interest rate is given by

                                                     F
                                         it =     + gt + Dt+1 cM      M
                                                               t;t+1 gt
                                                                                          F
                                                                                         gt .                               (B.5)

The forward and dot curves in a period s (for interest rates in a subsequent period t                            s) are given by

                           M                         M
                          Es [it ]       =        + gs + cF
                                                          s;t 1              Dt+1 cM
                                                                                   t;t+1
                                                                                                F
                                                                                               gs    M
                                                                                                    gs                      (B.6)
                           F                           F
                          Es     [it ]   =        +   gs   +   Dt+1 cM
                                                                     s;t+1
                                                                                 M
                                                                                gs        F
                                                                                         gs    .                            (B.7)

    This result generalizes our main result, Proposition 1, to the case with heterogeneous data sensitivity.
Common data sensitivity corresponds to the special case with Dt = 1. Eqs. (B:2) and (B:3) show that
heterogeneous data sensitivity changes the impact of demand shocks on output and asset prices. If the Fed
is more (less) data sensitive than the market, then demand shocks have a dampened (ampli...ed) impact
compared to the case with common sensitivity. Figure 8 illustrates the equilibrium sequence, fDt g, for
a particular parameterization and heterogeneous data sensitivity.
    Eqs. (B:6 B:7) characterize the equilibrium interest rate as well as the forward and the dot curves.
These expressions are similar to their counterparts with common data sensitivity [cf. Proposition 1]. We
describe the forward and the dot curves for each period s (as opposed to only the initial period 0). This
enables us to analyze how a demand shock in the initial period 0, g0 , a¤ects the forward and the dot
curves. The initial demand shock a¤ects the expected interest rates in period 1 (but not in period 0).

Sketch of proof of Proposition 1. We next provide a sketch of the proof for the result, which
is useful to understand the intuition. We complete the proof at the end of the section. The limit
condition holds, limt!1 Dt = 1, because in the long run disagreements disappear (due to learning) and
the equilibrium approximates the benchmark case with common beliefs. We conjecture that the output
gap satis...es Eq. (B:2) for period t + 1. We then establish the same condition for period t (along with
the other equilibrium conditions) proving the result by backward induction.
    The key observation is that Eq. (B:2) and Eq. (B:1) together imply:

                  M                        M                    F
                 Et +1 [~
                        yt+1 ]     = Dt+1 gt +1                gt +1
                                                                                     "                     # !
                                                                                              1 cM
                                                                                                 t;t+1
                                   = Dt+1          cM      M
                                                    t;t+1 gt           cF      F
                                                                        t;t+1 gt +                         gt    .          (B.8)
                                                                                               1 cFt;t+1



                                                                  59
                1 .1 5




                 1 .1




                1 .0 5




                    1




                0 .9 5




                 0 .9




                0 .8 5
                         1         2          3            4              5         6          7           8




Figure 8: The equilibrium path for the output impact of demand shocks, fDt g, with heteroge-
neous data sensitivity.


Unlike the case with common data sensitivity, disagreement is stochastic and depends on the most recent
                                                                                         M
realization of aggregate demand, gt . Therefore, the market'  s expected output gap, Et   +1 [~
                                                                                              yt+1 ], is no
longer deterministic. For instance, when the Fed is more data sensitive, 1 cF     t;t+1 >  1    cM
                                                                                                 t;t+1 , an
increase in aggregate demand, gt , leads to a decrease in the expected output gap in the next period.
How does this happen? An increase in demand a¤ects the extent of disagreement: it increases the Fed'      s
optimism compared to the market, because the Fed reacts to the data more than the market. As this
happens, the market anticipates a Fed belief shock similar to the one in Section 5.1, which leads to a
lower expected output gap.
    Next recall from Eq. (7) that the equilibrium output gap depends on the surprises in the market'      s
                                        M             F   M
                                             yt+1 ] Et Et+1 [~
expectation for the future output gap, Et+1 [~                 yt+1 ] . Using Eq. (B:8), we obtain,
                                                                      "                    #
                     M                  F     M                               1 cM
                                                                                 t;t+1               F
                    Et +1    [~
                              yt+1 ]   Et    Et+1    yt+1 ] = Dt+1
                                                    [~                                         gt   gt .       (B.9)
                                                                               1 cFt;t+1

                                                                                             F
The surprise in the expected output gap depends on the surprise in the demand shock, gt gt     , because
this determines the surprise in the extent of disagreement and the implied Fed belief shock.
    Substituting Eq. (B:9) into Eq. (7) from Section 3:2, we obtain
                                                       "                      #!
                                                               1 cM
                                                                  t;t+1                  F
                                   y
                                   ~t =     1 + Dt+1                               gt   gt .
                                                                1 cFt;t+1


Combining this with the di¤erence equation (B:4), the output gap satis...es Eq. (B:2) also in period t.
    The proof at the end of the section completes the remaining steps. Among other things, we show that
the di¤erence equation (B:4) has a unique solution fDt g, that satis...es the properties in the proposition.
                                        F     M
In particular, Dt < 1 if and only if C0   < C0  . For intuition, suppose the Fed is more data sensitive
                       F              M
than the market, 1 ct;t+1 > 1 ct;t+1 . In this case, the market expects the Fed to react to shocks
more than (what the market thinks) is appropriate. Therefore, the bundled Fed belief shock dampens



                                                                60
the direct impact of the demand shock [cf. (B:9)]. Conversely, when the Fed is less data sensitive,
1 cF t;t+1 < 1 cMt;t+1 , the bundled Fed belief shock ampli...es the direct impact of the shock.


Comparative statics of demand shocks. To shed further light on the mechanism, we next
describe how a demand shock in period 0 a¤ects the forward and the dot curves in the next period 1.
Recall that agents'conditional belief in period 1 reects a combination of their prior beliefs and the shock
in period 0 [cf. (B:1)]:

                              j
                             g1 = cj        j
                                   0;1 g + u0 + 1           cj
                                                             0;1 g0 for j 2 fF; M g .                     (B.10)

                                               F     M
Suppose agents'prior beliefs are the same, g0    = g0   = g, so that agents initially have no disagreements.
As a benchmark, suppose the initial shock in period 0 is the same as agents' prior, g0 = g. In this
                                                                             F       M
benchmark, agents' conditional belief is also the same as their prior, g1       = g1    = g. Therefore, the
forward and the dot curves in period 1 are also the same [cf. (B:6 B:7)].
     Now consider what happens when the economy experiences a positive demand shock, g0 = g + g0
with g0 > 0. First consider the case in which the Fed is more data sensitive, 1 cF         0;1 > 1      cM
                                                                                                         0;1 . In
this case, Eq. (B:10) illustrates that a greater shock induces both agents to become more optimistic, but
                                       F       M
with a greater e¤ect on the Fed, g1      > g1     > 0. Therefore, the curves shift as if there is a common-
optimism shift, as in Section 3.4, combined with a Fed belief shift, as in Section 4. In particular, the
dot curve increases more than the forward curve-- especially for more distant horizons. The left panel of
Figure 9 illustrates this case. Conversely, when the Fed is less data sensitive, 1 cF 0;1 < 1   cM
                                                                                                 0;1 , a greater
                                                                                               M          F
demand shock has a larger e¤ect on the market'     s optimism than the Fed'   s optimism, g1 > g1           > 0.
Consequently, the forward curve increases more than the dot curve-- especially for more distant horizons--
as illustrated by the right panel of Figure 9.
     This analysis also provides a complementary intuition for why heterogeneous data sensitivity changes
the output impact of demand shocks [cf. Figure 8]. When the Fed is more data sensitive than the market,
a positive demand shock increases the dot curve more than the forward curve [cf. the left panel of Figure
9]. This generates a dampened increase in output, because the market considers the Fed'           s additional
reaction a "mistake"   -- driven by a Fed belief shock as in Section 5.1. Conversely, when the Fed is less
data sensitive than the market, the shock increases the dot curve less than the forward curve [cf. the
right panel of Figure 9]; and this induces an ampli...ed e¤ect on output since the market considers the
Fed' s muted reaction a "mistake."

    We next complete the sketch proof of Proposition 7. The proof relies on the following generalization
of Lemma 2.
                                                  F    M
Lemma 3. Consider the setup with arbitrary C0       ; C0 . Consider the mean belief at the beginning of
period s about the conditional mean belief (about aggregate demand) in a subsequent period t    s. For
                            0
each agent j 2 fF; M g and j 6= j , we have:
                                        h i
                                      j    j    j
                                    Es   gt  = gs  .
                                       h 0i       0                    0
                                          j          j0
                                     j
                                    Es  gt   = cj
                                                s;t gs + 1           cj    j
                                                                      s;t gs .


    As before, each agent expects the other agent's conditional belief about aggregate demand in a future
period to be a weighted average of the other agent's current belief and its own belief. The weights depend


                                                       61
         0.068                                                               0.068



         0.067                                                               0.067



         0.066                                                               0.066



         0.065                                                               0.065



         0.064                                                               0.064



         0.063                                                               0.063



         0.062                                                               0.062



         0.061                                                               0.061



          0.06                                                                0.06


                 1   2   3      4     5        6           7      8                  1     2   3       4       5   6   7   8




Figure 9: The comparative statics of an increase in the initial demand shock, g0 = g + g0 with
  g0 = 0:01. The black solid lines illustrate the e¤ects for the case analyzed in the main text
in which the Fed and the market have common data sensitivity. The left panel (resp. the right
panel) illustrates the e¤ects when the Fed has greater (resp. smaller) data sensitivity than in
the baseline, while the market has the same data sensitivity as in the baseline.

                                                       0
on the other agent's relative con...dence, cj
                                            s;t . Intuitively, the agent expects the other agent to learn from
the data with a speed that depends on the other agent'        s data sensitivity. The proof is omitted (it is a
straightforward extension of the proof of Lemma 2 presented in Section 3.3).

Proof of Proposition 7. We ...rst characterize the solution to the di¤erence equation (B:4), fDt g, and
establish its properties. We then characterize the equilibrium interest rate as well as the forward curve
and the dot curve.
    To solve the di¤erence equation, we ...rst rewrite it as:

                                          Dt = 1 + Ct Dt+1 with lim Dt = 1,                                                    (B.11)
                                                                                     t!1

where we de...ne
                                                      Ct = cF
                                                            t;t+1            cM
                                                                              t;t+1 :                                          (B.12)

As a ...rst step, we claim:
                                                   jCt j       jC0 j < 1 for each t.                                           (B.13)
                                                                  j
                                                                C0  +t
To prove this claim, we observe that cj
                                      t;t+1 =                   j
                                                               C0 +t+1
                                                                           implies:

                                                            F                M
                                                           C0               C0
                                           Ct =        F +t+1                M +t+1
                                                                                    .
                                                      C0                    C0

This in turn proves the claim since,
                                                F           M
                                               C0          C0
                              jCt j        F                M
                                                                  = jC0 j = cF
                                                                             0;1                   cM
                                                                                                    0;1 < 1.
                                          C0   +1          C0 + 1

                                                                      62
Here, the last inequality follows since cF      M
                                         0;1 ; c0;1 2 (0; 1).
   We next iterate Eq. (B:11) forward to obtain:

                   Dt = 1 + Ct + Ct Ct+1 + ::: + Ct Ct+1 :::Ct+n + Ct Ct+1 :::Ct+n Dt+n .

Taking the limit of the expression as n ! 1 and using limn!1 Dt+n = 1 and jCt j                 jC0 j < 1 [cf.
(B:13)], we obtain:
                                             1
                                             X
                                    Dt = 1 +   Ct Ct+1 :::Ct+n .                                       (B.14)
                                                    n=0
                                                       1
Note also that jCt j    jC0 j < 1 implies jDt j     1 jC0 j . Thus, there exists a unique and ...nite solution
characterized by (B:14).
                                                                                       F      M
     Next consider the properties of the solution. First consider the case in which C0    > C0  . This implies
 F         M
ct;t+1 > ct;t+1 for each t, which in turn implies Ct > 0 for each t. Then, the closed-form solution in
(B:14) implies Dt > 1 for each t.
                                          F      M
     Next consider the case in which C0      < C0  . This implies cF          M
                                                                     t;t+1 < ct;t+1 for each t, which in turn
implies Ct < 0 for each t. For this case, we next show Dt 2 (0; 1) for each t. This proves Dt satis...es the
properties in the proposition.
     To show the claim, ...rst note that for an arbitrary " > 0 we have DT 2 (0; 1 + ") for su¢ ciently large
T (since limt!1 Dt = 1). Let " = 1= jC0 j 1 and note that it is strictly positive [cf. (B:13)]. Suppose
Dt+1 2 (0; 1 + ") for some t + 1. Then, Eq. (B:11) implies:

                         Dt = 1 + Ct Dt+1 > 1       jCt j (1 + ")   1   jC0 j (1 + ") = 0.

Here, the second inequality uses jCt j jC0 j [cf. (B:13)] and the last equality substitutes the de...nition
of ". Thus, we have Dt > 0. Likewise, we have

                                             Dt = 1 + Ct Dt+1 < 1,

where the inequality follows since Ct < 0 and Dt+1 > 0. It follows that, for any Dt+1 2 (0; 1 + "), we
have Dt 2 (0; 1) (0; 1 + "). By induction, this proves Dt 2 (0; 1) for each t.

    Next consider the equilibrium interest rate. Using Eq. (B:8), we obtain

                                   F  M
                                  Et Et    yt+1 ] = Dt+1 cM
                                       +1 [~
                                                                 M
                                                          t;t+1 gt
                                                                            F
                                                                           gt .

Substituting this into Eq. (6) from Section 3:2, we solve for the equilibrium interest rate as:

                                               F
                                     it =   + gt + Dt+1 cM      M
                                                         t;t+1 gt
                                                                         F
                                                                        gt .

This proves Eq. (B:5).
    Next consider the forward and the dot curves. Fix a period s and a subsequent period t s. Consider
the interest rate in period t. Taking the expectation of Eq. (B:6) according to the market'  s belief in




                                                          63
period s, we obtain,

               M
              Es [it ]   =   + 1    Dt+1 cM      M
                                          t;t+1 Es
                                                    F
                                                   gt + Dt+1 cM      M
                                                              t;t+1 Es
                                                                        M
                                                                       gt
                         =   + 1    Dt+1 cM
                                          t;t+1   cF    F
                                                   s;t gs + 1    cF    M
                                                                  s;t gs + Dt+1 cM      M
                                                                                 t;t+1 gs
                                M
                         =   + gs + cF
                                     s;t 1    Dt+1 cM
                                                    t;t+1
                                                             F
                                                            gs     M
                                                                  gs .

Here, the second line uses Lemma 3 to evaluate the higher order belief. This proves Eq. (B:6).
   Likewise, taking the expectation of Eq. (B:6) according to the Fed' s belief, we obtain,

               F
              Es [it ]   =   + 1    Dt+1 cM      F  F         M      F  M
                                          t;t+1 Es gt + Dt+1 ct;t+1 Es gt

                         =   + 1    Dt+1 cM      F         M      M M
                                          t;t+1 gs + Dt+1 ct;t+1 cs;t gs + 1    cM    F
                                                                                 s;t gs
                                F
                         =   + gs + Dt+1 cM      M
                                          1;t+1 gs
                                                         F
                                                        gs .

This establishes Eq. (B:7) and completes the proof of the proposition.




                                                   64
