                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES


       DOES POVERTY CHANGE LABOR SUPPLY? EVIDENCE FROM MULTIPLE
                     INCOME EFFECTS AND 115,579 BAGS

                                      Abhijit Banerjee
                                        Dean Karlan
                                     Hannah Trachtman
                                     Christopher R. Udry

                                      Working Paper 27314
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27314


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2020


Approval from the Yale University Human Subjects Committee, IRB 0705002656, 1002006308,
1006007026, and 1011007628; and from the Innovations for Poverty Action Human Subjects
Committee, IRB Protocol 19.08January-002, 09December-003, 59.10June-002,and
10November-003.494. Thanks to the Ford Foundation, and 3ie for funding. Thanks to Nathan
Barker, Caton Brewster, Abubakari Bukari, David Bullon Patton, Sébastien Fontenay, Angela
Garcia, Yann Guy, Samantha Horn, Sana Khan, Hideto Koizumi, Matthew Lowes, Elizabeth
Naah, Michael Polansky, Elana Safran, Sneha Stephen, Rachel Strohm, and Stefan Vedder for
outstanding research assistance and project management, and in particular Bram Thuysbaert for
collaboration. The authors would like to thank the leadership and staff at Presbyterian
Agricultural Services (PAS) for their partnership. Thanks to Frank DeGiovanni of the Ford
Foundation, Syed Hashemi of BRAC University, and Aude de Montesquiou and Alexia Latortue
of CGAP for their support and encouragement of the research. No authors have any real or
apparent conflicts of interest, except Karlan is on the Board of Directors of Innovations for
Poverty Action, which participated in oversight of the implementation. All data and code will be
available upon publication at the IPA Dataverse (doi pending). The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Abhijit Banerjee, Dean Karlan, Hannah Trachtman, and Christopher R. Udry. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Does Poverty Change Labor Supply? Evidence from Multiple Income Effects and 115,579
Bags
Abhijit Banerjee, Dean Karlan, Hannah Trachtman, and Christopher R. Udry
NBER Working Paper No. 27314
June 2020
JEL No. H31,J22,O12

                                         ABSTRACT

The income elasticity of labor supply is a central parameter of many economic models. We test
how labor supply and effort in northern Ghana respond to exogenous changes in income and
wages using a randomized evaluation of a multi-faceted grant program combined with a bag-
making operation. We find that recipients of the grant program increase, rather than reduce, their
supply of labor. We argue that simple models with either labor or capital market frictions are not
sufficient to explain the results, whereas a model that allows for a positive psychological
productivity effect from higher income does fit our findings.


Abhijit Banerjee                                Hannah Trachtman
Department of Economics, E52-540                Department of Economics
MIT                                             Yale University
50 Memorial Drive                               PO Box 208268
Cambridge, MA 02142                             New Haven, CT 06511
and NBER                                        htrachtm@gmail.com
banerjee@mit.edu
                                                Christopher R. Udry
Dean Karlan                                     Northwestern University
Kellogg Global Hub                              Department of Economics
Northwestern University                         Weinberg College of Arts and Sciences
2211 Campus Drive                               2211 Campus Drive #3247
Evanston, IL 60208                              Evanston, IL 60208
and CEPR                                        and NBER
and also NBER                                   christopher.udry@northwestern.edu
dean.karlan@gmail.com
1      Introduction
The income elasticity of labor supply is one of the central parameters of economic
models. Under the standard assumption that consumption and work are not
strong complements, it is easy to derive the prediction that any increase in
income will reduce labor supply. This has important implications for the design
of social policies, where for example a reduction in labor supply would lower the
net income gains.
    The basic argument for why we should expect this negative labor supply
response is well-known. Making the standard assumptions that the utility from
consumption is u(c), the disutility of labor supply is v (l) and the relation be-
tween consumption and labor supply is c = f (l) + t, where f is income and is
some increasing concave function of labor supply and t is a transfer, we imme-
diately get a first order condition

                                   u (f (l) + t)f (l) = v (l)
from which it follows that any increase in t will reduce the marginal utility
of income and therefore labor supply. A number of important assumptions
go into this much-used framework that predicts higher income will lower labor
supply. First, as pointed out by Benjamin (1992) many years ago, we need
that t does not directly raise the marginal product of labor. In other words,
we cannot have f (l, t) with flt (l, t) > 0. As Benjamin (1992) also points out,
this is typically ruled out by either the assumption of perfect capital markets
(in which case t should not enter f (l, t)) or by the assumption that household
labor and market labor are perfect substitutes at the margin (in which case
fl (l, t) = w, where w is the market wage). However neither of these assumptions
seem particularly plausible especially in the context of low income families in
developing countries (LaFave et al., 2020). Therefore a transfer may actually
directly raise the marginal product of labor, thus making this kind of investment
productivity effect quite relevant.
     A second reason why the expected income effect may be absent or even go
the other way is that consumption (or income) and labor supply may be com-
plements. In other words it is possible that the disutility of effort takes the
form v (l, c) with vlc (l, c) < 0, at least for the very poor. The idea that a me-
chanical nutrition-productivity relationship generates complementarity between
consumption and work lies at the heart of the earliest models of a poverty trap
(Leibenstein, 1957; Dasgupta and Ray, 1986). In these models, a better-fed
worker provides more effort. We call this a physiological productivity effect.
More recently, psychological models of poverty traps have made a similar argu-
ment, arguing that low levels of psychological well-being generate similar theo-
retical predictions for how income may boost labor supply­what we will call a
psychological income effect. One reason this may be slightly different from the
physiological models is that the effect may go through income or even potential
income rather than consumption.1
    1 For   example, people may be relieved by the fact that they do not need to worry so much



                                                1
     One body of work, summarized in Mullainathan and Shafir (2013), has sug-
gested that people living under any form of scarcity exhibit "tunnel vision,"
focusing so intently to allocate their scarce resources that they neglect other
margins and make sub-optimal decisions as a result. The psychological effects
of financial strain may have concrete effects on productivity in the labor market
(Kaur et al., 2019; Fink et al., 2018). Another body of work, summarized in
Haushofer and Fehr (2014), investigates the effects of poverty on risk-taking
and time-discounting. Positive income shocks have been shown to reduce risk
aversion (Tanaka et al., 2010), and negative income shocks have been shown
to increase present-biased behavior (Haushofer and Fehr, 2019). These effects
may operate via economic circumstances (i.e. anticipating future liquidity con-
straints), but they may also operate through preferences: poverty alleviation has
been shown to reduce negative affect and stress (Haushofer and Shapiro, 2016),
which have in turn been shown to influence risk-taking and time-discounting
(Kandasamy et al., 2014). A final body of work examines the relationship be-
tween poverty and aspirations. Several theoretical papers explore how both
individuals (Dalton et al., 2016) and economies (Genicot and Ray, 2017) can
become trapped when aspirations and outcomes are jointly determined, and
there is emerging evidence that outcomes can indeed affect aspirations (Lyb-
bert and Wydick, 2017). Taken together these bodies of evidence support the
idea that additional income might have a physical or psychological productivity
effect that plays off against the conventional income effect.
     Consistent with this set of theories, the evidence from a number of recent
field experiments suggests that the income effect on labor supply is often not
negative. Using data from a number of cash transfer programs around the world
that had a built in randomized controlled trial, Banerjee et al. (2017) shows
that cash transfers to low income households have no effect on labor supply,
either at the intensive margin or at the extensive margin. Banerjee et al. (2015)
and Bandiera et al. (2017) report on evidence from a six-country study and
a one-country study, respectively, of the Graduation program, a multi-faceted
program built around an asset transfer to very poor households, and both find
that the intervention led to higher income and labor supply. The positive impact
persisted to the end of reported measurement periods, between three and five
years after the initial intervention.
     This evidence, while suggestive, has two important potential limitations.
First there is concern with the measurement of labor supply. If labor supply
is measured with noise, we may not pick up the negative effect. Indeed the
measurement error may not be classical and the estimate may be biased. For
example, if much of the labor supply response is in the form of reduced (unmea-
sured) effort, it could be that the person is doing less on the job and eventually
will be fired, but we do not observe this long-term outcome.
     Second, these experiments do not shed light on the mechanisms involved.
This is evident with the Graduation program which was multi-faceted by de-
about meeting basic needs (because they can earn more if need be) and therefore be more
productive per hour even if they work less hours and therefore actually earn no more.



                                          2
sign: it involves both the transfer of a productive asset to households who are
very plausibly credit constrained (so an increase in t, which may shift the f (l, t)
function) and encouragement and hand-holding for the program recipients, in-
tended to shift their v (.) functions. In the case of cash transfers there is also
the possibility that the cash is used to fund investment in a productive asset
(Gertler et al., 2006), but many of the physical and psychological mechanisms
highlighted above might be triggered by the cash transfer as well.
    With this context in mind, we make two contributions by building on our
study of the Ghana Graduation program, (also called "Graduating the Ultra
Poor", and here onward referred to as "GUP"), which was part of the set of
studies reported on in Banerjee et al. (2015)). First, we provide better measure-
ment of labor supply and still find a non-negative income effect on labor supply.
Second, we provide evidence that what we call the psychological productivity
effect is the source of the observed departure from the traditional income effect.
    A key to both contributions is a novel measurement exercise involving a bag-
making operation. GUP treatment and control villages were randomly chosen
to have bag production units. Those who were invited to work in these units
were offered piece rate contracts to produce bags, and all inputs were provided.
The number of bags they produced as well as their quality was carefully graded
and the piece rate depended on quality, so we have a reliable measure of how
much effort individuals put into bag-making. Each bag-making unit was also
randomly assigned to produce either simple or more complex bags.
    For those in the bags production sub-groups, the comparison of GUP and
control households tells us that GUP increases participation in bags, bags pro-
duction, and earnings from bags. These effects are individually statistically
significant, and the q values after adjusting for multiple hypothesis testing are
0.10, 0.10 and 0.17. Moreover there is an increase in productivity in bags, which
is not statistically significant overall but highly statistically and economically
significant for complex bags, with GUP individuals spending a third less time
per bag. If we interpret productivity as measuring effort per minute spent on
producing bags, it represents an alternative dimension of labor supply. This
increase in productivity cannot be attributed to complementary capital invest-
ment in bag making because all inputs are provided by the researchers, thus we
attribute this effect to a psychological or physiological productivity effect.
    The increase in labor supply on bags along both of these dimensions among
GUP-bags households relative to control-bags households is not countered by
any evident decline in labor or effort supplied to other productive activities. We
estimate that GUP-bags households supply only about two percent fewer hours
to all forms of productive labor (producing bags, farming, business operations,
animal production and home labor) than do control-bags households, and this
difference is nowhere near statistically significant at conventional levels. Nor is
there evidence of a decline in effort conditional on number of hours.
    To get at a measure of effort we start from the fact that there is essentially
no wage labor in our context. Individuals either work on their own farms or
run their own businesses. In both of these cases the household is the residual
claimant and the effective labor supply, including any differences in effort, should

                                         3
be reflected in the income from the activity, which we measure, in addition
to the reported labor time on the activity. We do not see any evidence that
GUP households are supplying less total effort in either of these occupations.
Relative to control bags households, the average GUP-bags households spend
21 minutes fewer per day on farming but produce about 10% more.2 Moreover
we see little evidence that they are making labor-saving investments, which
would allow earnings from agriculture to go up even when effort has gone down.
Expenditure on herbicides (which is labor-saving) is slightly higher among GUP-
bags households, but expenditure on (labor-using) fertilizer is also higher. There
is no difference in hired labor between GUP-bags and control-bags households.
GUP-bags households, relative to control-bags households, spend 33% more
time on their businesses (p=0.06) and appear to earn more than twice as much,
though this effect is not statistically significant (p=0.16). We do not have data
on whether the business adopted labor saving innovations but given how small
the businesses are, the absence of hired labor and the simple technologies (shea
butter production, petty trading) this seems unlikely. Finally, GUP households
report spending a bit more time on animals after two years, which makes sense
given that most of them have additional goats to care for, but animal revenue
does not rise significantly. Both are small relative to farming and business time
and revenue.3
    It is striking that GUP-bags households supply more overall effort because
these households earn substantially and statistically significantly more than the
control bags households across all the sources of earnings and cash transfers
during bag-making ($20.9 more per month, more than double the control-bags
monthly earnings of $17.9, p<0.01) while spending roughly the same amount
of time on productive labor.4 Based on their higher earnings we would expect
them to value leisure relatively more and therefore supply less labor. Taken
together, this evidence rejects the idea that the GUP effect on labor supply is
negative.
    Turning to our second question, the same evidence is very consistent with
the existence of what we have called physiological or psychological productivity
effects, and not the investment productivity effect. The bag-making operation
we created allows us to make this distinction. The investment productivity
effect implies that households would increase their investment in capital towards
productive activities as a result of the increase in the marginal product of labor.
But the bag making operation provided no such opportunity: all capital (cloth
    2 This effect is not statistically significant, but see below for the evidence from one particular

sub-treatment­high unconditional cash transfers ("high UCT") for GUP-bags households­
where it is much larger and statistically significant
    3 Given that both animal time use and earnings are low relative to other activities, and

since we do not have data on animal revenue during the bags program nor any measure of
animal costs, we do not focus on livestock activities in the remainder of the paper.
    4 Breaking this down, GUP-bags households earn $7 more monthly than control-bags in

self-reported income, $3 more from bag-making, and $11 more in unconditional consumption
support. We include administrative data on bags earnings, since most households do not
appear to have included their bags earnings in their reports of wage income; removing it
makes no difference in the estimate.



                                                  4
materials basically) was provided by us, the researchers, and nothing such as
sewing machines were viable in this context. Thus the nutrition or psychology
productivity effect is the appropriate framework to consider in this context.
    However the one important question that remains is whether the GUP effect
is merely an income effect. The issue is, as mentioned already, that the GUP
program was multifaceted and had a number of components that went beyond
just providing an asset. However the experimental design included two arms
that allows us to address this possibility.
    The "savings only" arm in the experiment allows us to test whether the
GUP effect comes just from the savings intervention. If the households were
savings constrained this would have made it more lucrative for them to work
harder and earn more. Perhaps this is what is driving the observed effects. In
the "SOUP" (Savings Only Ultra-Poor program) treatment households received
a weekly visit from a nonprofit organization to collect deposits into a bank
account with a partnering financial institution. The bags intervention was then
cross-cut with the SOUP treatment allowing us to test whether the observed
complementarity between GUP and labor supply also shows up with SOUP.
While the SOUP intervention by itself has an effect on household consumption
and assets comparable to the GUP effect, and also raises household earnings
(this effect is substantially, though not statistically significantly, smaller than the
GUP effect), we find no evidence of a positive productivity effect on bag-making
coming from SOUP. In fact the point estimates of SOUP on bag productivity are
strongly negative (while the GUP effect is positive) and the difference between
them is close to being statistically significant (p=0.13).
    In other words, the complementarity between GUP and bag productivity is
not the result of the savings component of GUP. This also tells us that the effect
is unlikely to be driven by the physiological effect of consumption because the
SOUP intervention had a similar effect on consumption as the GUP intervention,
but not the same effect on bags productivity.5
    GUP also had a pure encouragement component­for the first 24 months
of the program households were visited weekly by NGO staff who encouraged
them to believe that they can and should aim higher. Could this encourage-
ment, rather than the extra income, be the source of the productivity effect? To
address this question we make use of the fact that the GUP households received
weekly unconditional cash support during each lean season. For the bags house-
holds, during the bags program the amount of this unconditional support was
randomly varied between $1.3 and $3.9 per week. Unlike the basic GUP effect,
this is a pure income shock to the household, since all the GUP-bags households
received the exact same set of interventions.
    The labor supply effects of this rather substantial pure income shock (which
amounts to a 34% increase in total income in the lean season)6 align with our
   5 It does not rule out the possibility that the GUP effect was at least partly the result of

anticipated future consumption, since the households may have reason to think that GUP will
have a more durable effect on household well-being than SOUP.
   6 During bag-making, GUP households reported $12.7 of monthly income and received $14.7

in bags earnings, on average. Converting weekly transfers to monthly, 11.2/(12.7+14.7+5.6)



                                              5
previous findings. The high UCT households are, unsurprisingly, richer than
the low UCT households, but work roughly the same amount per day. They
work slightly less on the farm and slightly more at their business, but neither
difference is statistically significant. The value of their harvest is higher while
business earnings are similar. The high UCT households use more (labor-using)
fertilizer and less (labor-saving) herbicide, and hire less outside labor than do
low UCT households. In other words, there is no evidence of the high UCT
households working less or putting less effort into non-bag-making activities.
The high UCT households do participate more in bags production, produce
more bags, earn more from bags and take fewer minutes per bag, though none
of these differences is statistically significant. In other words, while there is
some evidence of the high UCT households working harder and being more
productive on bags, there is no evidence of a negative income effect. This has
important implications for interpreting which of the components of the GUP
program may be driving the results. Since amongst the GUP households, high
UCT recipients worked more than low UCT recipients, we infer that at least
some of the psychological productivity effect (rather than an investment effect
or a physiological effect) comes from the positive income shock component of
the program. The encouragement component may or may not be additive on
top of that.
    This paper contributes to a large literature on labor markets in developing
countries (e.g. Lewis (1954); Rosenzweig (1988); Foster and Rosenzweig (1996);
Goldberg (2016); Guiteras and Jack (2018)). It relates to work on the rela-
tionship between credit constraints and labor supply (e.g. Kochar (1999); Rose
(2001); Jayachandran (2006); Fink et al. (2018)), and most directly builds on
work understanding the effects of positive income shocks, through transfers or
other mechanisms, on labor supply (e.g. Baird et al. (2018); Kaur et al. (2019)).
Finally, it contributes to the large body of work that attempts to unpack the
determinants of effort (e.g. Breza et al. (2018); Brune (2016); Brune et al.
(2019); Kaur et al. (2015)), including the potential importance of psychological
well-being and its link to income (Mani et al., 2013; Shah et al., 2012).
    We start by presenting the overall experimental design in Section 2. Section 3
then presents the model that we use to interpret the results. Section 4 describes
our data and empirical methods. Section 5 presents the results on the impact of
GUP on standard economic outcomes and labor supply outside of bag-making.
Section 6 presents the evidence from the bag-making program, first comparing
GUP and SOUP, and then high and low unconditional transfers. We then use
these results and the theory in Section 3 to try to make the case for a strong
complementarity between consumption/income and labor supply/effort. We
conclude in Section 7.
= 34%. Again, we include bags earnings since most households did not appear to include bags
earnings in reported wage income; if we remove them, the income shock is even larger.




                                            6
2      Experimental Design
We partnered with Presbyterian Agricultural Services (PAS), a local NGO in
northern Ghana with prior experience doing extension work and promotion of
savings groups, including a prior randomized controlled trial with Innovations
for Poverty Action (Karlan et al., 2017). While it was PAS field agents who en-
gaged in the direct field implementation, Innovations for Poverty Action coordi-
nated the implementation with senior management of PAS. PAS first identified
poor communities in poor regions in northern Ghana, and in each identified com-
munity, staff members then facilitated a Participatory Wealth Ranking (PWR)
in which members of the community worked together to rank households by
economic status. Finally, PAS staff members returned for a verification of the
households judged to be the poorest.
    We begin by describing the randomized design of the Graduation program in
Ghana, and then move on to explain the sub-treatments within the bag-making
exercise.

2.1      GUP and SOUP Treatment Designs
Table 1 Panel A shows the assignment of households and villages to GUP, SOUP
and control, and the cross-cutting bags measurement village assignments. Each
village was assigned GUP, SOUP, or control, and then within each treatment
village, half of sample households actually received the treatment intervention,
and half served as control households within treatment villages. Thus there is
a two-level randomization: at the village level to assign the treatment arm, and
then at the household level within village to assign treatment or control status
to specific households.
    In GUP villages, 51% of sample households were assigned to the GUP treat-
ment. The GUP program included six components: (1) the transfer of a pro-
ductive asset; (2) skills training for the management of the asset, (3) life skills
training and mentorship, via weekly household visits over two years, (4) a weekly
cash stipend for consumption support, worth between $6 and $9 PPP depend-
ing on family size, during each lean season, (5) access to a savings account at a
local bank and deposit collection, and (6) some basic health services and health
education. The first component, the productive asset transfer, was provided at
the beginning of the program, and households were permitted to choose a pack-
age of productive assets from a set list. Most households chose a package that
included four goats.7 The skills training, in which participants learned how to
take care of the asset (e.g., when to vaccinate goats), took place at the start of
the program, and then also as part of weekly household visits by the PAS field
officer. The household visits also provided the backbone for delivering compo-
nents three through six. The third component, a "hand-holding" or life-skills
component, provided nudges to help the household focus on building productive
assets to generate positive change in long-term outcomes, and more generally,
    7 Other   assets included hens, pigs, and inputs for the production of shea, maize, and
sorghum.


                                              7
to set aspirations and plans for coping with current problems and improving the
future. The consumption support was explicitly intended to help this process in
the short-run, by helping to absorb short-run shocks that could lead to house-
holds consuming the transferred assets. The sixth component, health, included
basic education on health and hygiene as well as enrollment in the national
health insurance scheme (about $2 per month).8
    In SOUP villages, 59% of sample households were assigned to the SOUP
treatment. These households received a visit from the field officer to collect sav-
ings, but did not receive any other components of the program.9 The remaining
households in SOUP villages were assigned to the SOUP control group.

2.2     Bag-making
We designed an employment program offering wages for the production of cloth
bags, and implemented it such that it cross-cut the three GUP treatment groups
(GUP, SOUP, and control). Half of the villages (120) were then randomly se-
lected to receive the Bags Program, as shown in Table 1 Panel A. In GUP and
SOUP villages selected to receive the Bags program, all sample households as-
signed to GUP or SOUP were invited to participate. In control villages selected
to receive the employment program, half of sample households were invited to
participate. This amounts to 1098 households: 397 control, 313 GUP, and 388
SOUP.
    Table 1 Panel B presents the details of two sub-treatments within the bags
measurement exercise. First, we varied the complexity of the bag at the village
level. Of the 120 villages, 60 were assigned to produce a simple bag, and 60 were
assigned to produce a complex bag. The main difference between the complex
and simple bag was that while the simple bag has basic "running stitches" on
the hem and the strap, the complex bag alternates one "running stitch" with
four "chain stitches," a slightly more complex stitch in a pattern that requires
counting. Importantly, because of the difficulty of this pattern, it was harder to
meet quality standards (discussed below).
    Second, we varied the amount of unconditional consumption support, in the
form of a cash transfer, received by GUP-bags households. This was varied
at the village level, and was either USD 1.31 or USD 3.92. Since GUP-bags
households also received earnings from bags, this was designed to be about
half as much as what GUP-no-bags households received (between USD 6 and 9
   8 Among households assigned to GUP, there was an additional sub-treatment: for half of

the households, the field officer who visited them weekly also collected savings deposits. For
these households, the treatment is equivalent to the combination of GUP and SOUP. We
find no evidence that adding savings collection to GUP makes a difference in its impact on
consumption or income; see Banerjee et al. (2020)
   9 Among households assigned to SOUP, there was an additional sub-treatment: half re-

ceived savings accounts and deposit collection without a match ("SOUP without match") and
half received savings accounts and deposit collection with a 50% match ("SOUP-match").
Specifically, for every GHC 1 deposited, households in this group received a matching contri-
bution of GHC 0.50. At the onset of the program, there was a maximum match of GHC 1.50
GHC per week (for a GHC 3 deposit) but this cap was eventually removed.



                                              8
depending on household size).10
    The program began with four days of training for each community, after
which the bag production began. During production, GUP, SOUP, and Control
Field Agents visited each community on a weekly basis. At each visit, they
collected new bags, distributed replacement fabric (according to the number of
bags collected), and paid wages for bags submitted two weeks prior. Households
could submit a maximum of ten bags per week. In the two weeks between when
bags were collected and when wages were paid, quality checks were carried out
by program facilitators. There are 18 quality standards for simple bags, and 25
quality standards for complex bags. Bags were assigned one point for meeting
the quality standards at the "excellent" level, half a point for "satisfactory," and
zero points for "unsatisfactory." At the end of the quality check, the final quality
score was calculated and the bag was classified as high, mid, or low quality.
    Wages were paid with a two-week lag. Each week, program facilitators in-
formed households of the composition of high, mid, and low quality bags sub-
mitted two weeks prior, and distributed payment accordingly. Baseline wages
were either USD 0.40 or USD 0.91. Bags judged to be high quality earned the
baseline wage plus USD 0.13, bags judged to be mid quality earned the baseline
wage, and bags judged to be low quality bags earned the baseline wage minus
USD 0.13. The wage was not affected by whether the bag was simple or com-
plex. Every four weeks, bags program facilitators returned to communities to
give feedback and remedial training.


3     A model of labor supply
                                                               c
The utility from a certain income c is given by u(               )), where  is a shifter for
the utility function. A higher  is meant to capture the impact of the savings
intervention, which makes it possible to spread the extra consumption over
a longer future, hence raising the marginal utility of income. The household
production function is f (l, t), where the inclusion of t represents the possibility
that the transfers raise the marginal product of labor. In other words we assume
that fl (l, t) > 0, fll (l, t) < 0, ft (l, t)  0 and flt (l, t)  0. As noted, a necessary
condition for this is that there are imperfections in both the capital market
and the labor market. The disutility of labor supply l is given by v (l, T )),
where the inclusion of T is aimed to capture the relation between the various
  10 We also varied the wage at the village level over time. Every four weeks, villages were

assigned a different baseline wage: USD 0.40 or USD 0.91. Women were informed of the
payment per bag they would be receiving for bags made in a given week at the start of that
week. Bags produced in week 1 of a given wage rotation would be collected at the end of
week 1 and inspected for quality over the course of weeks 2 and 3. Payment for the bags
produced during week 1 would be given to the producer at the end of week 3. For this reason,
there is a lag between when the wage rate changes and when individuals start receiving
higher wages, and the data show that responsiveness to wage rate changes is lagged by three
weeks (see Appendix Table 2 Panel A). Since the pattern and timing of responses to wage
changes indicates that there were delays between the announcement of wage changes and full
understanding of their effect, we do not focus on these results in the main part of the paper,
but show our estimates of wage elasticities in Appendix Table 2 Panel B.



                                              9
interventions and labor supply. In other words it is possible that T = t, but
we want to allow for possibility of interventions that shift labor supply without
providing an income transfer (such as the encouragment). We assume that
vl (l, T ) > 0, vll (l, T ) > 0, vT (l, T )  0 and vlT (l, T )  0. One case where we
might expect vT (l, T ) > 0 and vlT (l, T ) > 0, is when T = t, income transfers
boost consumption and greater consumption raises labor supply. However as
already mentioned, there are other possible channels. Finally we assume that
c = f (l, t) + t.
     The first order condition for utility maximization is

                               f (l, t) + t
                         u                    fl (l, t) = vl (l, T ).
                                     
                                                                 dl
Suppose that t = t(T ) with t (T ) > 0. It is evident that dT        < 0 as long as
                                             dl
flt (l, t) = 0 and vlT (l, T ) = 0. However dT can be positive if either flt (l, t) > 0
or vlt (l, T ) < 0. As before we call these two sources of a non-traditional income
effect the investment productivity effect and the psychological/ physiological
productivity effect.
     Result 1: A necessary condition for the income effect on labor supply not
to be negative is that there has to be either the investment productivity effect
and the psychological/physiological productivity effect.
     For our second result, we permit the household to have access to two pro-
duction technologies, so that

                             c = f a (la , t) + f b (lb , t) + t,
where f a (.) represents the bag making opportunity.
   The household now maximizes

                        f a (la , t) + f b lb , t + t
                  u                                      - v (la + lb , T )
                                      
by choosing la and lb .  represents the relative cost of effort in the two tasks.
Now suppose fla      a
               a t (l , t) = 0. The first order condition with respect to l
                                                                            a
                                                                              yields
                                  c
                             u      ) fla   a
                                        a (l , t) = vl (l, T )
                                  
.
    We wish to compare la (T ) with la (T ) where t(T ) > t(T ). Now suppose
c(T )  c(T ) and therefore u (c(T )) < u (c(T )). Moreover let lb (T )  lb (T ).
Then if it also true that la (T )  la (T ) then l(T )  l(T ). Now if vlT (l, T ) = 0,
then vl (l(T ), T )  vl (l(T ), T ). In this case the only way to satisfy the first
order condition is for fla       a                          a      a
                           a t (l , t) > 0. Conversely, if fla t (l , t) = 0 then it must

be the case that vlT (l, T ) < 0. We summarize this as:
    Result 2: If there is one activity where there is no investment productiv-
ity effect, and the labor supply to that activity is greater despite the fact the
household is richer and is working no less, then there must be a psychologi-
cal/physiological productivity effect on that activity.

                                              10
    The last observation is about . If  goes up, say because of savings collec-
tion, the household's marginal utility of income goes up and therefore both its
labor supply and its income must both go up.
    Result 3: If  goes up, the household's labor supply and its income must
both go up.


4     Data and Empirical Methods
4.1     Data
The final sample was selected from the households identified as the poorest in
their poor communities as described in section 2.2. Participants come from
three areas of Northern Ghana corresponding to three agricultural "stations"
run by PAS: Tamale, Langbensi, and Sandema. We restrict all of our analysis
to villages with more than 30 compounds, as for logistical reasons, we assigned
all pure control villages with fewer than 30 compounds to no-bags. This leaves
93 bags villages and 72 non-bags villages.
    We have three sources of data. First, we have weekly administrative data
on labor supply (the number of bags submitted), the quality of each bag, and
the resulting earnings. Second, we have time use surveys in which households
reported how they spent their time the previous day. We administered these
surveys five times monthly during the bags program, to 1051 bags households
and 470 no-bags households.11 Third, we have a series of standard and compre-
hensive household surveys that were part of the larger program evaluation of
the Graduation program (Banerjee et al. 2015). These include a baseline sur-
vey, three shorter midline surveys, a two-year follow-up survey and a three-year
follow-up survey. These surveys included questions about income, consumption,
agricultural outcomes, business outcomes, and welfare. The second midline sur-
vey is used heavily, as it took place during the bags program. Midline surveys
were conducted with about one third of the full sample, so for this survey, we
have data on 1070 households, including 343 bags households and 727 no-bags
households.

4.2     Orthogonality
Tables 2 and 3 show baseline survey data across treatment groups. We have
baseline imbalance on average age, land area, monthly per capita consumption,
monthly household income, and the food security index. We had intended to
re-randomize, but due to a coding error, it did not happen. As a result, in every
regression, we also control for the five aforementioned variables at baseline.
  11 In our time use survey, rather than asking about time spent on bags directly, we asked

only about "wage labor (including bags)" in order to maintain a strong separation between the
evaluation team and the team that was implementing the bags program. We thus impute time
on bags by taking the answer to a question about time on wage labor, and subtracting average
time on wage labor from the control-no-bags, GUP-no-bags, and SOUP-no-bags households
for each bags group, respectively. See Appendix Table 1 for details.



                                             11
4.3     Method of Analysis
We use two main specifications for our three types of data: one for the analysis
of individual-level outcomes measured in our two-year survey (Equation 1); and
one for the analysis of individual-month level time use outcomes, or individual-
week level bag-making outcomes, measured during the bags program (Equation
2). Any deviations from these specifications or additional details will be reported
in table notes.

                 Yi =  + Ti + Yi0 + Wistrata + interviewer +              i              (1)

                      Yit =  + Ti + Wistrata + stationt +           it                   (2)
    Yi(t) is outcome Y for individual i at either month or week t, Ti is a treatment
dummy, Yi0 is the baseline value of outcome Y for individual i (only used in
Equation 1 since we do not have baseline data for time use or bag-making),
Wistrata is a vector of baseline controls that consists of the variables we used
for re-randomization plus the five variables that were imbalanced at baseline,
interviewer are interviewer fixed effects, and stationt are either station  week
or station  month fixed effects. We cluster standard errors at the village level,
since both GUP/SOUP and bags were assigned at the village level.12
    We use the Benjamini-Hochberg (Benjamini and Hochberg 1995) and pro-
cedures put forward in Anderson 2008 to compute q-values that correct for the
multiple hypotheses within each table (and sometimes within panels). We do
not extend these corrections beyond the boundary of an individual table (or
panel) because the substantive aspects of the hypotheses we test change dra-
matically across tables. We decided to focus on theoretically related hypotheses,
and our tables (panels) are organized exactly on such lines.


5     Impact Results for the Basic Treatments
5.1     Effects of GUP and SOUP
In Table 4 Panel A we report on the basic treatments, GUP and SOUP, including
both bags and non-bags households. Columns 1-5 report data collected at two-
years; Columns 6 and 7 report time use data collected during the bags program,
averaged over the five monthly surveys.13 GUP and SOUP households spend
  12 For some comparisons, this is conservative, since within GUP-no-bags, GUP-bags, SOUP-

no-bags, SOUP-bags, and control-bags villages, each household in the sample was randomly
assigned treatment. Comparing, say, GUP-bags to control-no-bags would not require clus-
tering at the village level, because those GUP-bags households could have been individually
assigned control-no-bags. But comparing GUP-bags to control-bags requires village-level clus-
tering, because GUP-bags households could not have been individually assigned to control-
bags.
  13 We use average time use data here so that we can use the specification from Equation 1,

consistent with the rest of the table. In the remainder of the paper, when we report time use
data we will not average over surveys, and will use the specification from Equation 2



                                             12
the same amount time providing productive labor as do control households, and
report the same amount of leisure time (each of the estimated treatment effects is
smaller than four percent of the control mean, and statistically indistinguishable
from zero at any conventional level of significance). The GUP treatment raised
the value of livestock owned by the household by more than 30 percent relative
to control (itt = $73, s.e. = 16). SOUP households also acquire more livestock
(itt = $32, s.e. = 16), but the net increase is significantly less than that for
the GUP households. On the other hand, as column 2 reports, SOUP has as
large an effect on total asset value as GUP (and both are statistically different
from control). The pattern for income (in column 3) is similar: both SOUP and
GUP have positive point estimates, but the GUP effect is almost twice as large
as the SOUP and is the only one that is significant. There are no statistically
significant effects on consumption or health (columns 4 and 5).
    To finish this section, we describe the results for the GUP-no-bags and
SOUP-no-bags interventions, reported in Table 4 Panel B. This is of special
interest because GUP-no-bags is the classic GUP intervention. GUP-no-bags
households report statistically significantly lower amounts of leisure than con-
trol no-bags households, and also that they spend more time on productive
labor (although this later effect is not statistically significant at conventional
levels). SOUP-no-bags households also report less leisure time and more pro-
ductive labor supply than control no-bags households, but neither coefficient is
statistically significant (nor can either be distinguished from its corresponding
GUP effect). The effects of GUP-no-bags and SOUP-no-bags on livestock, total
assets and income parallel those of GUP and SOUP overall: GUP-no-bags has
a stronger effect on livestock than SOUP-no-bags, they have similar impacts on
total assets, and GUP-no-bags has the largest and only statistically significant
impact on income. Neither GUP-no-bags nor SOUP-no-bags has a noticeable
impact on health, but SOUP-no-bags does increase consumption.
    These program impacts indicate, first, that self-reported income was higher
among GUP households, both with and without bags, at the end of the two-year
program. Second, they show no evidence of a reduction in labor supply.

5.2    Are we missing the effect on effort?
We find no evidence so far that being a beneficiary of GUP, which raised house-
hold earnings, reduced household labor supply. However at this point it is useful
to address one additional concern. Is it possible that GUP beneficiaries used
their extra income to buy more labor for their farming or other businesses and
therefore are putting less direct effort into those, which allows them to work
harder at the other occupations? As already noted, we do not see evidence of
this in our measure of time spent on productive labor, but perhaps it shows up in
measures of effort. To get at this we now examine GUP-induced changes in agri-
culture, which is the dominant household enterprise, and non-farm enterprises
in Table 5.
    We see that while GUP-bags recipients work somewhat less on their farms
compared to control-bags households (column 5), there is no difference in the


                                       13
amount of hired labor they use (column 1). At the same time we see only
minimal evidence of labor-saving expenditures, the most important of which
would be herbicide. Column 2 shows that there is a statistically significant
increase in expenditure on herbicide among GUP-bags household, which is large
relative to the control mean, but the absolute magnitude is very small. As
a point of comparison, the increase in herbicide equals about two percent of
the average use by farmers in this region (calculated from data from the same
agroclimatic zone from a representative set of farmers in villages with fewer
than 50 compounds (Udry, 2019)). Moreover, there is a more sizable increase in
fertilizer expenditure, which is complementary with labor input because of its
effects on weed growth and output (and here the increase equals 10 percent of
the average use in the region, calculated from same regional data). Agricultural
earnings are no lower for GUP-bags households--the point estimate is positive
(column 8). Moreover GUP-bags has no impact on residual productivity, which
is the residual from regressing harvest value on input expenditure, acreage and
labor time, and is an attempt to measure the effort the household is putting into
agriculture (column 9). In other words there is no evidence that the GUP-bags
households are neglecting their agricultural business.
    The same holds for their other businesses--the effect on business revenue
(column 10) and earnings (Column 11) is positive, albeit not statistically signif-
icant --and the effect on time spent on the business is positive and statistically
significant (column 6). We do not have measures of labor substitution for these
businesses, but given the (tiny) scale of the businesses, this seems unlikely.
    One other activity where there may be a related concern is household work.
We do not have any measure of effort for household work but there is no dif-
ference in the time spent on household work by GUP-bags, Control-bags and
SOUP-bags households. The last possibility, discussed in the introduction, is
wage labor. Wage labor is extremely uncommon in our sample. In control-
no-bags, average monthly wage labor earnings are USD 1.13, and only 16%
of households have positive wage earnings in a month. In terms of time, in
control-no-bags, average time spent on wage labor is 6.2 minutes daily, and only
4.8% of households spent any time on wage labor yesterday.14 Appendix Table
1 shows that during the bags program, GUP-bags households did earn $0.92
less in monthly wage income relative to control-bags. Thus there may be some
substitution from wage labor, but this is very small relative to the increases in
earnings across the other sources.

5.3     Summary at this point
Taken together these results suggest that GUP increases income (even without
the consumption support), while not increasing leisure or reducing labor sup-
ply. From Result 1 in our theoretical model, these are consistent with either
an investment productivity effect or an psychological/physiological productiv-
ity effect from the GUP intervention. The weak impacts on consumption and
   14 Demand for wage labor is also low: in control-no-bags, yearly expenditure on wage labor

is USD 4.21 and only 10.4% of households demand any labor from the market in a year.


                                             14
health shown in Table 4 Panel B suggest that nutritional or other physiological
mechanisms cannot explain the observed increases in labor supply, and from
now on we will drop reference to the physiological channel. However, at this
point we cannot rule out the investment productivity effect or, for example, the
possibility that savings collection may be driving these results (as suggested by
Result 3). In particular the SOUP outcomes reported above are not clearly
enough differentiated from the outcomes of either the control group or GUP,
making it difficult to interpret the mechanisms underlying the observed changes
from SOUP. To make further progress we turn to the bags intervention.


6     The Evidence from Bags
6.1    Descriptive Statistics on Bags
Of the 1098 clients who were eligible to participate in the employment program,
91.3% chose to make bags at some point over the six months. Over the course of
the study, we collected 116,488 bags. On average, the 1098 potential participants
produced 4.2 bags per week. Among clients who participated in a given week,
the average number of bags submitted was 7. Most people submitted either
zero or 10 bags, as demonstrated in Figure 1. Over the course of the study, 35%
of bags collected were low quality, 34% were mid quality, and 31% were high
quality. Figure 2 shows the distribution of earnings, broken down by complex
and simple bags, and holding wage rate constant. Both have a mode at zero
(consistent with Figure 1), and the simple bags do show a slight shift towards
more earnings (undoubtedly because the task was easier).

6.2    GUP Effects on Bags Production and Comparisons
       with SOUP
The positive effect of the GUP program on the supply of effort to bags pro-
duction is shown in Panel A of Table 6. GUP participants are more likely to
participate in bag production, produce a larger number of bags and earn more
from bags production than control-bags. On the other hand SOUP participants
are actually less likely to produce bags, produce less bags and earn less from
bags production than control-bags. The difference with control bags is not sig-
nificant, but SOUP-bags participants under-perform GUP-bags participants on
almost every measure (for example, there is a twenty-three percent point gap in
bags participation rates)
    The differences become more stark when we focus in Panel B of Table 6 on
complex bags, which as mentioned, was one of the arms of the bags treatment.
GUP households produce more complex bags than control bags households,
whereas SOUP households produce many fewer complex bags than control bags
and a fortiori than GUP-bags. In fact SOUP spend much more time per dollar
earned on complex bags than they do on simple bags, whereas there is no such
difference for GUP households. Together, these results indicate that savings


                                       15
collection does not appear to be the reason why GUP-bags participants earn
more than control-bags participants and work no less hard. Indeed, improved
access to savings is associated with substitution of labor towards household
businesses and away from bags, perhaps due to an improved ability to manage
risk or timing of working capital needs.
    The fact that GUP-bags participants earn more from and work no less hours
at non-bags occupations than control-bags households and the fact they produce
more bags also sheds light on the possible mechanisms in operation. Specifically,
since no investment is needed in bag production, Result 2 tells us that the
psychological productivity effect must be in operation.
    What remains to be settled however is the source of the psychological pro-
ductivity effect. This is because an important part of the GUP intervention
was encouragement and hand-holding of the beneficiaries and this could have
directly shifted the cost of effort. To rule out this possibility we turn to the
experimental variation in the unconditional cash transfer.

6.3     High UCT versus Low UCT effects on Bags Produc-
        tion and What They Tell Us
Table 7 compares the outcomes of GUP participants receiving a high level of
unconditional cash transfers with those getting less. Column 1 shows that the
bags production index is higher for GUP households receiving high UCT than
for low UCT, but the difference between the two is not statistically different from
zero at conventional levels of significance.15 However harvest value and residual
productivity are statistically significantly higher for the high UCT households
than the low UCT households, suggesting that if there is any crowd out of
farming effort due to the GUP intervention, it is happening only for the low
UCT households. The high UCT GUP households also spend less on hired
labor and herbicide, which is labor-saving, and more on fertilizer (though this
last estimate is not statistically significantly different from zero) than low UCT
households. While the high UCT households spend less time producing bags,
they produce no less (in fact, they produce more) than low UCT households.
    This is striking evidence of the psychological productivity effect. The high
UCT households are more productive at farming, and no less productive in
business. They earn more overall and produce more bags in less time. It appears
that the fact of receiving the high UCT is encouraging those households to
produce more from the same amount of time. We cannot rule out the possibility
that the differences between GUP-bags and control-bags are in part driven by
an encouragement effect. That said, the fact that a transfer amounting to 34%
of total income did not reduce labor supply to any activity, and indeed appears
to have increased labor supply to farming, provides strong evidence for the
existence of a psychological productivity effect.
 15 In Table 7 we show only the estimate for the bag production index; in Appendix Table 3

we report estimates for each component.




                                           16
7    Conclusion
The idea that there may be positive rather than negative income effects on labor
supply has a long pedigree. This paper provides support for this view based on
a sequence of field experiments designed for this purpose.
    We find that GUP has a positive effect on income, but does not reduce labor
supply, and in fact raises production of bags and especially production of com-
plex bags. This is not driven by the savings component, as SOUP participants
produce far fewer bags than GUP, and fewer complex bags than even control.
It cannot be exclusively driven by the encouragement component of GUP (a
sequence of household visits by the implementing non-profit organization), as
GUP households with high unconditional transfers do not reduce their labor
supply relative to those with low transfers, and in fact appear to work much
harder on their farms.
    Taken together, these findings provide strong evidence of a psychological
productivity effect, and should strengthen the case for well-designed transfer
programs, especially for the very poor.




                                      17
References
Baird, S., McKenzie, D., and Özler, B. (2018). The effects of cash transfers on
  adult labor market outcomes. IZA Journal of Development and Migration,
  8(1):22.
Bandiera, O., Burgess, R., Das, N., Gulesci, S., Rasul, I., and Sulaiman, M.
  (2017). Labor markets and poverty in village economies. The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 132(2):811­870.
Banerjee, A., Duflo, E., Goldberg, N., Karlan, D., Osei, R., Parienté, W.,
  Shapiro, J., Thuysbaert, B., and Udry, C. (2015). A multifaceted program
  causes lasting progress for the very poor: Evidence from six countries. Sci-
  ence, 348(6236):1260799.
Banerjee, A., Karlan, D., Osei, R. D., Trachtman, H., and Udry, C. (2020).
  Unpacking a multi-faceted program to build sustainable income for the very
  poor. Working Paper 24271, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Banerjee, A., Rema, H., Gabriel, K., and Benjamin, O. (2017). Debunking the
  myth of the lazy welfare recipient: Evidence from cash transfer programs
  worldwide. World Bank Research Observer, 32(2):155­184.
Benjamin, D. (1992). Household composition, labor markets, and labor de-
  mand: Testing for separation in agricultural household models. Econometrica,
  60(2):287­322.
Breza, E., Kaur, S., and Shamdasani, Y. (2018). The morale effects of pay
  inequality. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133(2):611­663.
Brune, L. (2016). The effect of lottery-incentives on labor supply: Evidence
  from a firm experiment in malawi. Working paper.
Brune, L., Chyn, E., and Kerwin, J. T. (2019). Pay me later: A simple em-
  ployerbased saving scheme. Working paper.
Dalton, P. S., Ghosal, S., and Mani, A. (2016). Poverty and aspirations failure.
 The Economic Journal, 126(590):165­188.
Dasgupta, P. and Ray, D. (1986). Inequality as a determinant of malnutrition
 and unemployment: Theory. The Economic Journal, 96(384):1011­1034.
Fink, G., Jack, B. K., and Masiye, F. (2018). Seasonal liquidity, rural labor
  markets and agricultural production. Working Paper 24564, National Bureau
  of Economic Research.
Foster, A. D. and Rosenzweig, M. R. (1996). Comparative advantage, infor-
  mation and the allocation of workers to tasks: Evidence from an agricultural
  labour market. The Review of Economic Studies, 63(3):347­374.



                                      18
Genicot, G. and Ray, D. (2017). Aspirations and inequality. Econometrica,
 85(2):489­519.
Gertler, P., Martinez, S., and Rubio-Codina, M. (2006). Investing cash transfers
 to raise long term living standards. Working Paper 3994, The World Bank.
Goldberg, J. (2016). Kwacha gonna do? Experimental evidence about labor
 supply in rural Malawi. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
 8(1):129­49.
Guiteras, R. P. and Jack, B. K. (2018). Productivity in piece-rate labor markets:
 Evidence from rural Malawi. Journal of Development Economics, 131:42­61.
Haushofer, J. and Fehr, E. (2014). On the psychology of poverty. Science,
  344(6186):862­867.
Haushofer, J. and Fehr, E. (2019). Negative income shocks increase discount
  rates. Working paper.
Haushofer, J. and Shapiro, J. (2016). The short-term impact of unconditional
  cash transfers to the poor: Experimental evidence from Kenya. The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 131(4):1973­2042.
Jayachandran, S. (2006). Selling labor low: Wage responses to productivity
  shocks in developing countries. Journal of Political Economy, 114(3):538­
  575.
Kandasamy, N., Hardy, B., Page, L., Schaffner, M., Graggaber, J., Powlson,
 A. S., Fletcher, P. C., Gurnell, M., and Coates, J. (2014). Cortisol shifts
 financial risk preferences. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
 111(9):3608­3613.
Karlan, D., Savonitto, B., Thuysbaert, B., and Udry, C. (2017). Impact of
 savings groups on the lives of the poor. Proceedings of the National Academy
 of Sciences, 114(12):3079­3084.
Kaur, S., Kremer, M., and Mullainathan, S. (2015). Self-control at work. Journal
 of Political Economy, 123(6):1227­1277.
Kaur, S., Mullainathan, S., Schilbach, F., and Oh, S. (2019). Does financial
 strain lower worker productivity? Working paper.
Kochar, A. (1999). Smoothing consumption by smoothing income: Hours-of-
 work responses to idiosyncratic agricultural shocks in rural India. Review of
 Economics and Statistics, 81(1):50­61.
LaFave, D. R., Peet, E. D., and Thomas, D. (2020). Farm profits, prices and
  household behavior. Working Paper 26636.
Leibenstein, H. (1957). Economic backwardness and economic growth. Wiley,
  New York.

                                       19
Lewis, W. A. (1954). Economic development with unlimited supplies of labour.
  Manchester School, 22(2):139­191.
Lybbert, T. J. and Wydick, B. (2017). Hope as aspirations, agency, and path-
  ways: Poverty dynamics and microfinance in Oaxaca, Mexico. In The Eco-
  nomics of Poverty Traps, NBER Chapters, pages 153­177. National Bureau
  of Economic Research, Inc.
Mani, A., Mullainathan, S., Shafir, E., and Zhao, J. (2013). Poverty impedes
 cognitive function. Science, 341(6149):976­980.
Mullainathan, S. and Shafir, E. (2013). Scarcity: Why having too little means
 so much. Times Books/Henry Holt and Co.
Rose, E. (2001). Ex ante and ex post labor supply response to risk in a low-
  income area. Journal of Development Economics, 64(2):371­388.
Rosenzweig, M. R. (1988). Labor markets in low-income countries. Handbook
  of Development Economics, 1:713­762.
Shah, A. K., Mullainathan, S., and Shafir, E. (2012). Some consequences of
  having too little. Science, 338(6107):682­685.
Tanaka, T., Camerer, C. F., and Nguyen, Q. (2010). Risk and time preferences:
  Linking experimental and household survey data from Vietnam. American
  Economic Review, 100(1):557­71.
Udry, C. (2019). Information, market access and risk: Addressing constraints
 to agricultural transformation in Northern Ghana. Draft Report.




                                     20
                                          Table 1: Experimental Design
                                 Panel A: Intervention and Bags Assignments

        Intervention          Bags           #     Household      #
    Village Assignment Village Assignment Villages Assignment Households
                                          no bags                   34            untreated              526

             control                                                              untreated              376
                                            bags                    42
                                                                                   treated               397

                                                                                  untreated              328
                                          no bags                   39
                                                                                   treated               353
              GUP
                                                                                  untreated              314
                                            bags                    39
                                                                                   treated               313

                                                                                  untreated              238
                                          no bags                   38
                                                                                   treated               345
             SOUP
                                                                                  untreated              272
                                            bags                    39
                                                                                   treated               388


            TOTAL                                                  231                                  3850

                                   Panel B: Bags Sub-Treatment Assignment

 Intervention Village Bags Simple/Complex Bags UCT         #         #
  Assignment - Bags      Sub-treatment    Sub-treatment Villages Households
                                            simple                        n/a                21                189
       control-bags

                                           complex                        n/a                21                208


                                                                      high UCT               10                69
                                            simple
                                                                      low UCT                10                90
        GUP-bags
                                                                      high UCT                9                79
                                           complex
                                                                      low UCT                10                75


                                            simple                        n/a                19                202
       SOUP-bags

                                           complex                        n/a                20                186


          TOTAL                                                                              120            1098
Panel A shows intervention treatment assignments (GUP, SOUP, and control) and assignment to the Bags program. Both
were assigned at the village level. Within each village assigned to GUP or SOUP, about half of sample households were
treated with GUP or SOUP, respectively. All treated households in bags villages received the Bags program. In control
villages assigned to bags, about half of sample households were selected to receive the bags program. Panel B shows sub-
treatments within the Bags program. All sub-treatments were randomized at the village level such that al individuals who
received the Bags program received identical sub-treatment assignments. Control-Bags = intervention control villages
assigned to Bags. GUP-bags GUP intervention villages assigned to bags. SOUP-bags = SOUP intervention villages
assigned to bags. Simple = assigned to sew the simple bag. Complex = assigned to sew the complex bag. high UCT =
GUP intervention households with Bags who received an unconditional cash transfer of USD 3.92 each week. low UCT =
GUP intervention households with Bags who received an unconditional cash transfer of USD 1.31 each week. All monetary
values are reported in 2014 USD, Purchasing Power Parity (PPP) terms.




                                                          21
                                      Table 2: Household Level Descriptive Statistics for Baseline Indicators, Intervention Treatments
                                                                           Means and Standard Deviations
                                          ctrl-no-bags       GUP-no-bags       SOUP-no-bags          ctrl-bags         GUP-bags           SOUP-bags        p-value, F-test
                                                                                                                                                              joint sig
        household size                         7.16               7.61               7.28               7.18                7.29              7.48              0.69
                                              (3.88)             (4.16)             (3.72)             (3.50)             (3.62)             (3.51)
        average age, household                25.57              25.02              25.13              24.77              24.37              23.04              0.00
                                             (10.90)            (10.55)            (10.69)             (9.68)             (9.11)             (8.10)
        land area (acres)                      4.54               4.50               4.84               4.65                5.03              4.82              0.56
                                              (3.92)             (4.02)             (4.12)             (3.76)             (3.88)             (3.94)
        monthly per cap cons. (USD)           58.96              54.00              62.61              58.58              59.24              58.55              0.15
                                             (38.68)            (34.49)            (40.88)            (39.14)            (41.87)            (36.97)
        monthly HH income (USD)               42.34              42.60              48.74              41.12              45.07              45.49              0.67
                                             (56.76)            (58.84)            (56.77)            (53.07)            (50.13)            (56.63)
        savings balances (USD)                 2.40               1.63               2.78               1.65                2.46              3.11              0.47
                                             (11.98)             (8.54)            (13.91)             (9.86)            (11.06)            (13.97)
        food security index                    0.00               0.03               0.16               -0.14              0.14               0.19              0.00
                                              (1.01)             (1.02)             (1.11)             (0.91)             (1.05)             (1.07)
        asset value index                      0.03               0.03               0.09               0.03                0.00              0.02              0.95
                                              (1.07)             (1.01)             (1.12)             (1.02)             (0.73)             (0.77)
        nancial inclusion index                0.00               0.00               0.05               -0.08              -0.08              0.19              0.08




22
                                              (0.96)             (0.94)             (1.07)             (0.84)             (0.76)             (1.36)
        physical health index                  -0.06              0.00               0.00               0.03               0.13               0.00              0.12
                                              (1.02)             (1.07)             (1.04)             (0.98)             (0.93)             (0.99)
        mental health index                    0.00               -0.04              0.14               -0.08              0.03               0.08              0.15
                                              (1.02)             (0.97)             (1.00)             (1.02)             (1.02)             (1.01)
        political involvement index            0.00               0.09               -0.16              0.06               0.00               0.01              0.06
                                              (1.00)             (0.99)             (1.01)             (0.99)             (1.00)             (1.00)
        female empowerment index               0.00               0.11               -0.09              0.02               -0.12              0.00              0.11
                                              (0.99)             (1.03)             (0.99)             (1.01)             (1.02)             (1.00)

     We report means and standard deviations for key indicators at baseline. Indices are centered around mean baseline value. The last column contains the p-value from an
     F-test of joint signicance of all treatments. See Appendix for components of all indices.
                                        Table 3: Household Level Descriptive Statistics for Baseline Indicators, Bags Sub-Treatments
                                                                           Means and Standard Deviations
                                          ctrl-bags      ctrl-bags    GUP-bags        GUP-bags      GUP-bags       GUP-bags      SOUP-bags      SOUP-bags       p-value,
                                           simple        complex      simple, low    simple, high   complex,       complex,        simple        complex       F-test joint
                                                                         UCT            UCT         low UCT        high UCT                                        sig
        household size                       6.96          7.38           6.59            7.71           8.13           7.28          7.58          7.38          0.82
                                            (3.37)        (3.60)         (3.19)         (4.30)         (4.24)         (2.81)        (3.37)         (3.64)
        average age, household              24.20         25.28          26.87          23.02          24.45          22.74         22.72          23.36          0.34
                                            (8.50)       (10.61)        (11.36)         (7.37)         (9.12)         (6.72)        (7.43)         (8.73)
        land area (acres)                    4.76          4.54           3.45            5.01           6.50           6.17          5.01          4.63          0.03
                                            (4.21)        (3.30)         (3.09)         (4.11)         (3.83)         (3.82)        (4.03)         (3.82)
        monthly per cap cons. (USD)         51.98         64.57          46.03          51.17          73.18          75.58         63.31          53.64          0.00
                                           (33.04)       (43.08)        (35.19)        (34.71)        (48.80)        (44.15)       (37.22)        (36.06)
        monthly HH income (USD)             41.37         40.89          25.69          43.46          71.51          56.17         53.74          36.99          0.02
                                           (58.20)       (47.93)        (30.06)        (43.75)        (77.74)        (48.24)       (66.85)        (42.03)
        savings balances (USD)               1.46          1.82           4.27            1.43           1.76           1.73          2.54          3.70          0.68
                                            (8.16)       (11.18)        (15.16)         (6.20)         (9.46)         (9.48)       (12.37)        (15.43)
        food security index                  -0.28          0.00          -0.13           0.28          0.08            0.36         0.31           0.06          0.00
                                            (0.79)        (0.99)         (0.86)         (1.15)         (1.02)         (1.10)        (1.05)         (1.07)
        asset value index                    -0.10          0.15          -0.12           0.00          0.12            0.10         0.06           0.00          0.59
                                            (0.87)        (1.13)         (0.66)         (0.71)         (0.96)         (0.67)        (0.78)         (0.75)




23
        nancial inclusion index              0.00          -0.14          0.00           -0.05          -0.21          -0.10         0.08           0.30          0.14
                                            (0.89)        (0.79)         (0.91)         (0.75)         (0.57)         (0.66)        (1.18)         (1.51)
        physical health index                0.00          0.06           0.12            0.27          -0.09           0.11          0.00          0.03          0.30
                                            (0.97)        (0.98)         (1.01)         (0.61)         (1.12)         (0.94)        (1.02)         (0.97)
        mental health index                  -0.20          0.02          -0.10           0.18          0.00            0.07         0.14           0.01          0.34
                                            (0.96)        (1.06)         (1.02)         (1.10)         (0.96)         (0.93)        (1.07)         (0.95)
        political involvement index          0.06          0.06           0.03            0.12          -0.14          -0.08          0.06          0.00          0.90
                                            (0.99)        (0.99)         (1.00)         (0.98)         (1.01)         (1.01)        (0.99)         (1.00)
        female empowerment index             0.05          0.01           0.10           -0.10          -0.39          -0.27         -0.06          0.00          0.49
                                            (0.98)        (1.04)         (1.07)         (0.95)         (1.07)         (0.96)        (1.02)         (0.97)

     We report means and standard deviations for key indicators at baseline. Indices are centered around mean baseline value. The last column contains the p-value from an
     F-test of joint signicance of all treatments. See Appendix for components of all indices.
                                  Table 4: Intervention Treatment Eects at Two Years
                                              Panel A: Impacts of GUP and SOUP
                                                 livestock   asset    monthly  monthly                 physical      time      time
                                                    value    value household cons. per                  health      prod.     leisure
                                                                      income    capita                  index       labor
                                                     (1)       (2)       (3)      (4)                      (5)        (6)       (7)
GUP                                    itt         72.92     74.85      7.49     1.13                     0.04       3.55      -4.55
                                       se         (17.61) (38.64)      (2.54)   (1.62)                  (0.03)     (10.41)    (6.11)
                                       pval          0.00     0.05      0.00     0.48                     0.24       0.73      0.46
                                       qval          0.00     0.16      0.03     0.58                     0.36       0.80      0.56
SOUP                                   itt         32.09     83.33      4.00     2.91                    -0.01      -9.44      1.97
                                       se         (14.65) (39.53)      (2.49)   (1.64)                  (0.05)     (11.87)    (7.59)
                                       pval          0.03     0.04      0.11     0.08                     0.85       0.43      0.80
                                       qval          0.11     0.12      0.25     0.20                     0.85       0.54      0.83
Ctrl Mean                                          240.17   589.48     36.59    44.15                    -0.16     597.71     127.42
Ctrl SD                                            348.59   764.13     43.08    30.15                     0.84     128.32     114.42
Obs                                                 2909     2900       2907     2880                    2767       1221       1221
GUP - SOUP = 0                         pval          0.05     0.86      0.25     0.35                     0.36       0.29      0.43
                                              Panel B: Impacts by Bags Treatment
                                                 livestock   asset    monthly            monthly      physical       time      time
                                                    value    value household             cons. per     health       prod.     leisure
                                                                       income             capita       index        labor
                                                     (1)       (2)        (3)                (4)          (5)         (6)        (7)
control-bags                           itt          -3.16    56.57       2.48               2.98        -0.02       44.44      -27.63
                                       se         (16.21) (46.06)       (2.49)             (2.01)      (0.05)      (12.87)     (6.70)
                                       pval          0.85     0.22       0.32               0.14         0.65        0.00       0.00
                                       qval          0.85     0.34       0.45               0.29         0.74        0.01       0.00
GUP-no-bags, UCT $6-$9                 itt         77.20    104.70       9.40               2.73         0.01       23.67      -30.43
                                       se         (23.75) (47.92)       (3.33)             (2.07)      (0.04)      (18.43)    (10.39)
                                       pval          0.00     0.03       0.01               0.19         0.76        0.20       0.00
                                       qval          0.02     0.11       0.03               0.34         0.81        0.34       0.03
GUP-bags, UCT $3.9 or $1.3             itt         64.73     72.67       6.44               0.63         0.05       30.61      -18.22
                                       se         (21.75) (54.46)       (3.32)             (1.63)      (0.05)      (11.32)     (7.50)
                                       pval          0.00     0.18       0.05               0.70         0.35        0.01       0.02
                                       qval          0.03     0.34       0.16               0.78         0.47        0.04       0.07
SOUP-no-bags                           itt         26.77    107.61       4.97               5.09         0.03       28.11      -13.26
                                       se         (18.55) (49.79)       (3.14)             (1.99)      (0.05)      (21.88)    (14.60)
                                       pval          0.15     0.03       0.12               0.01         0.63        0.20       0.37
                                       qval          0.30     0.11       0.25               0.06         0.73        0.34       0.48
SOUP-bags                              itt         34.92     91.45       4.22               1.99        -0.07       14.01      -14.24
                                       se         (20.01) (50.65)       (3.36)             (1.61)      (0.08)      (12.68)     (8.47)
                                       pval          0.08     0.07       0.21               0.22         0.37        0.27       0.09
                                       qval          0.20     0.20       0.34               0.34         0.48        0.39       0.22
Ctrl Mean                                          242.93   578.33      35.94              43.64        -0.17      575.48     137.46
Ctrl SD                                            356.19   760.35      42.14              29.43         0.85      125.66     111.80
Obs                                                 2909     2900        2907               2880        2767        1221        1221
Panel A shows average eects of GUP and SOUP; the omitted group is control households (bags and non-bags) in any village. Panel
B shows eects by bags sub-treatment; the omitted group is control non-bags households in any village. The sample is restricted
to villages with more than 30 compounds. We include surveyor xed eects and control for stratication variables, imbalanced
variables (average household age, food security index, land area, monthly per capita consumption, and monthly household income),
whether or not household was treated with bags (Panel A only), and baseline value of the outcome when possible. Standard
errors clustered at village level. We use the Benjamini-Hochberg step-up method to compute q-values, considering all tests in
the table. Columns 1-5 are taken from the two-year survey; Columns 6-7 are averages over the ve monthly time use surveys
administered during the bags program. Livestock value is the total number of livestock owned times the median reported price
for each animal. Asset value is the total number of assets (including livestock, household and productive assets, and stocks),
valued using asset prices relative to the price of goats from other countries. Monthly household income is monthly self-reported
household income, computed as the sum of income from the household's business, farm, wage labor, and (revenue from) animals.
Monthly consumption per capita is self-reported monthly consumption per capita, including both food and non-food expenditure.
Physical health index includes two variables. The rst is the average daily living score, which is the mean of four variables:
capacity bathing, capacity lifting, capacity walking, and capacity working (each measured on a scale from 1 being easily done to
4 being unable to do). The second is sick day, which is 1 if the member did not miss a day of work due to illness in the last year,
0 otherwise. Time productive labor is minutes spent yesterday spent on bags or wage labor, agriculture, business, animals, and
home labor (time spent on children, cleaning, cooking, collecting rewood, shopping, or fetching water). Time leisure is minutes
spent yesterday on religious activities, social activities, ceremonies, traveling, personal care, and resting. All monetary values are
reported in 2015 USD, Purchasing Power Parity (PPP) terms.
                                                                 24
                                                        Table 5: Productive Non-Bags Labor during Bag-Making
                                (1)            (2)              (3)           (4)       (5)        (6)           (7)          (8)         (9)       (10)         (11)
                            expenditure    expenditure      expenditure      time      time       time          time        harvest    residual   business     business
                              on labor     on herbicide     on fertilizer    bags      eld       business    home labor      value      prod.     revenue      income
     GUP-bags       itt         2.59            3.83           20.06          -2.12    -20.96      9.22         1.18         59.31       -4.52      14.97        8.76
                    se         (3.54)          (2.11)         (13.35)       (11.64)    (9.80)     (4.80)       (11.79)      (55.62)    (64.00)     (11.66)      (6.05)
                    pval         0.47           0.08            0.14           0.86     0.04       0.06         0.92          0.30        0.94        0.21        0.16
                    qval         0.69           0.30            0.39          0.94      0.27       0.30          0.94         0.50        0.94        0.46        0.39
     SOUP-bags      itt         -0.59           1.27           17.49         -21.85    -24.02     10.06          4.41        -22.20     -60.59       -9.47       -2.94
                    se         (2.18)          (2.32)         (20.01)       (12.37)   (10.86)     (4.74)       (11.42)      (70.42)    (54.77)      (6.16)      (2.56)
                    pval         0.79           0.59            0.39           0.08     0.03       0.04         0.70          0.75        0.28        0.13        0.26
                    qval         0.92           0.81            0.61          0.30      0.27       0.27          0.91         0.92        0.50        0.39        0.50
     Ctrl Mean                   4.02           3.83           57.58        112.94    206.61      28.48        299.27       408.47      -13.50      13.94        6.54
     Ctrl SD                   15.67           10.82           88.11        106.61    185.65      78.23        155.09       461.91     349.39       55.61       24.83
     Obs                         272            272             272           1978      3442       3442         3442          272         266         287         287
     Eects of treatments on productive non-bags labor outcomes for the bags sample, during the bag-making period. The omitted group is control-bags households.
     The sample is restricted to villages with more than 30 compounds. We include surveyor xed eects and control for stratication variables, imbalanced vari-
     ables (average household age, food security index, land area, monthly per capita consumption, and monthly household income), and baseline value of the out-
     come when possible. Standard errors clustered at the village level. We use the Benjamini-Hochberg step-up method to compute q-values, considering all tests
     in the table. Expenditure on labor, herbicide, fertilizer are expenditures in the last 12 months, measured in the midline survey during the bag-making period.




25
     Time on bags, eld, business, and home labor are minutes spent yesterday on bags, agriculture, business, and home labor, respectively, measured in ve monthly
     surveys during bag-making (on average, 78% of the 1098 bags households were found and surveyed each month). We compute time on bags by taking the answer to
     a question about time on wage labor, and subtracting average time on wage labor from the control-no-bags, GUP-no-bags, and SOUP-no-bags households for each
     bags group, respectively. See Appendix Table 1 for details. For this outcome we exclude one of the stations, Langbensi, that reported zero time spent on wage labor.
     Harvest value is the total revenue from harvest, measured in the midline survey six months after the bag-making period. Residual productivity contains the residuals
     from a regression of harvest value on input expenditure, acreage, and average time on eld. Business revenue and income pertains to all non-agricultural businesses
     and is measured in the midline survey during the bag-making period. All monetary values are reported in 2014 USD, Purchasing Power Parity (PPP) terms.
           Figure 1: Bags




Figure 2: Bags Earnings by Complexity




                 26
                                              Table 6: Bag Production
                                            Panel A: Eects of GUP, SOUP
                                                    (1)               (2)            (3)           (4)           (5)
                                             bags production     number of     participates      bags      minutes per
                                                  index             bags          (0/1)        earnings    dollar earned
any GUP                              itt           0.28              1.14          0.12           0.66        -117.91
                                     se           (0.12)           (0.50)         (0.05)        (0.35)        (97.61)
                                     pval          0.03              0.03          0.02           0.06          0.23
                                     qval          0.10              0.10           0.10          0.17          0.41
any SOUP                             itt           -0.17            -0.65          -0.11         -0.33         227.98
                                     se           (0.13)           (0.49)         (0.06)        (0.38)       (221.55)
                                     pval          0.19              0.18           0.06          0.39          0.31
                                     qval          0.37              0.37           0.17          0.49          0.45
Ctrl Mean                                          0.00              3.76           0.58          2.45         676.09
Ctrl SD                                            1.00              3.97           0.49          3.01        1316.80
Obs                                               18816            18816          18816         18816           1661
any GUP - any SOUP                   pval          0.00              0.00           0.00          0.03          0.13

                                             Panel B: Eects of Complex
                                                   (1)            (2)       (3)                   (4)             (5)
                                            bags production number of participates              bags       minutes per
                                                 index          bags     (0/1)                earnings     dollar earned
control complex                     itt           -0.18         -0.94     -0.06                 -0.70          376.85
                                    se           (0.13)        (0.51)    (0.06)                (0.36)        (116.92)
                                    pval          0.18           0.07      0.30                  0.05           0.00
                                    qval           0.37          0.19      0.45                  0.17            0.02
GUP simple                          itt           0.23           0.66      0.10                  0.51          148.59
                                    se           (0.16)        (0.68)    (0.06)                (0.52)        (133.75)
                                    pval          0.16           0.33      0.12                  0.33           0.27
                                    qval           0.37          0.45      0.31                  0.45            0.45
GUP complex                         itt           0.11           0.63      0.08                 -0.02           90.75
                                    se           (0.20)        (0.82)    (0.09)                (0.48)        (127.30)
                                    pval          0.57           0.45      0.38                  0.96           0.48
                                    qval           0.64          0.54      0.49                  0.96            0.56
SOUP simple                         itt           -0.08         -0.30     -0.09                 -0.07          280.71
                                    se           (0.19)        (0.73)    (0.08)                (0.58)        (216.30)
                                    pval          0.68           0.68      0.29                  0.90           0.20
                                    qval           0.73          0.73      0.45                  0.93            0.37
SOUP complex                        itt           -0.46         -2.08     -0.21                 -1.39          854.84
                                    se           (0.12)        (0.44)    (0.07)                (0.31)        (377.08)
                                    pval          0.00           0.00      0.00                  0.00           0.03
                                    qval           0.00          0.00      0.03                  0.00            0.10
Ctrl Mean                                         0.17           4.59      0.62                  3.07          472.56
Ctrl SD                                           1.07           4.24      0.49                  3.30          918.84
Obs                                              18816         18816     18816                 18816            1661
GUP complex - ctrl complex          itt           0.29           1.57      0.14                  0.68         -286.09
GUP complex - ctrl complex          pval          0.14           0.05      0.14                  0.15           0.03

In Panel A, we show eects of GUP and SOUP on bag-making labor supply for bags households. The omitted group is
control-bags households (i.e. those who received neither GUP nor SOUP but were assigned to the bags program). In Panel
B, we show eects of being assigned the complex bag by treatment on bag-making labor supply for bags households. The
omitted group is control-bags households with simple bags. In both panels, the sample is restricted to villages with more
than 30 compounds. We control for stratication variables and imbalanced variables (average household age, food security
index, land area, monthly per capita consumption, and monthly household income). Columns 1-4 report weekly data with
station-week xed eects (896 people over 21 weeks). The bags production index is a standardized index of the variables
in columns 2-5, centered around the control-bags mean. Column 5 reports monthly data with station-month xed eects,
since this measure incorporates time use data (time use data was collected on only a monthly basis; on average, 78% of
the 1098 bags households were found and surveyed each month). Standard errors clustered at the village level. We use the
Benjamini-Hochberg step-up method to compute q-values, considering all tests in the table. We compute minutes per dollar
earned by taking average daily earnings over the course of the month as the denominator, and time on bags (measured once
in the month) as the numerator. We compute time on bags by taking the answer to a question about time on wage labor,
and subtracting average time on wage labor from the control-no-bags, GUP-no-bags, and SOUP-no-bags households for each
bags group, respectively. See Appendix Table 1 for details. All monetary values are reported in 2014 USD, Purchasing Power
Parity (PPP) terms.
                                                           27
                                                                      Table 7: Eects of High vs. Low UCT
                                          (1)           (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)          (6)          (7)      (8)       (9)          (10)          (11)       (12)
                                      bags prod.     harvest    residual    exp.       exp.         exp.         time      time      time          time        business   business
                                        index          value     prod.     labor     herbicide    fertilizer     bags      eld     business    home labor      revenue    income
     GUP, UCT $3.9             itt       0.37        138.60      94.92      -2.62      -0.32        26.20       -28.90    -25.13    14.85         11.73         10.58       6.42
                               se       (0.17)       (64.83)    (60.56)    (3.48)     (1.72)       (14.72)     (12.55)   (11.82)    (5.95)       (11.38)       (12.44)     (5.36)
                               pval      0.03           0.03      0.12       0.45       0.85         0.08         0.02     0.04      0.01          0.31          0.40       0.23
                               qval      0.14          0.14       0.29       0.57       0.85         0.21         0.14     0.14      0.14          0.46          0.53       0.39
     GUP, UCT $1.3             itt       0.17         -46.51    -136.67      9.45      9.36         11.91        18.19    -16.15     2.75         -10.95        21.01      12.00
                               se       (0.15)       (79.86)    (70.00)    (5.09)     (3.20)       (19.20)     (13.66)   (12.74)    (6.07)       (17.66)       (21.26)     (9.31)
                               pval      0.25           0.56      0.05       0.06       0.00         0.54         0.19     0.21      0.65          0.54          0.32       0.20
                               qval      0.39          0.61       0.18       0.19       0.10         0.61         0.38     0.38      0.68          0.61          0.46       0.38
     Ctrl Mean                           0.00        408.47      -13.50      4.02       3.83        57.58      112.94    206.61     28.48        299.27         13.94       6.54
     Ctrl SD                             1.00        461.91      349.39    15.67       10.82        88.11      106.61    185.65     78.23        155.09         55.61      24.83
     Obs                                18816           272       266        272        272          272         1978      3442      3442          3442          287        287
     high UCT - low UCT        pval      0.35          0.04       0.01       0.07       0.01         0.49        0.01      0.55      0.11          0.22          0.69       0.63
     Dierences in labor supply between GUP high UCT and GUP low UCT for bags households, during the bag-making period. The omitted group is control-bags households. The
     sample is restricted to villages with more than 30 compounds. We include surveyor xed eects and control for stratication variables, imbalanced variables (average household
     age, food security index, land area, monthly per capita consumption, and monthly household income), and baseline value of the outcome when possible. Standard errors
     clustered at the village level. We use the Benjamini-Hochberg step-up method to compute q-values, considering all tests in the table. Bag Production Index is a standardized
     index of weekly bags submitted, weekly participation (0/1), bags earnings, and minutes per dollar earned, centered around the control-bags mean. Harvest value is the total




28
     revenue from harvest, measured in the midline survey six months after the bag-making period. Residual productivity contains the residuals from a regression of harvest
     value on input expenditure, acreage, and average time on eld. Expenditure on labor, herbicide, fertilizer are expenditures in the last 12 months, measured in the midline
     survey during the bag-making period. Time on bags, eld, business, and home labor are minutes spent yesterday on bags, agriculture, business, and home labor, respectively,
     measured in ve monthly surveys during bag-making (on average, 78% of the 1098 bags households were found and surveyed each month). We compute time on bags by taking
     the answer to a question about time on wage labor, and subtracting average time on wage labor from the control-no-bags, GUP-no-bags, and SOUP-no-bags households for
     each bags group, respectively. See Appendix Table 1 for details. For this outcome we exclude one of the stations, Langbensi, that reported zero time spent on wage labor.
     Business revenue and income pertains to all non-agricultural businesses and is measured in the midline survey during the bag-making period. All monetary values are reported
     in 2014 USD, Purchasing Power Parity (PPP) terms.
                                               Appendix Figure 1: Timeline




In the top part of the timeline we show program activities, and in the bottom part we show data collection. During the
employment program we conducted additional time use surveys each month, over ve months.




                             Appendix Figure 2: Simple Bag (left) and Complex Bag (right)




The simple bag has running stitches on the hem and strap. The complex bag has a more complicated pattern on the hem and
strap: a sequence of four chain stitches alternating with one running stitch.




                                                 Online Appendix Page 1
                            Appendix Table 1: Justifying Imputation of Time Spent on Bags
                                                            (1)                                  (2)
      VARIABLES                              Monthly Wage Income (USD)           Time Bags and/or Wage Labor


      GUP-no-bags                                          -0.78                                -5.55
                                                          (0.31)                                (4.96)
      SOUP-no-bags                                         -0.36                                -2.54
                                                          (0.65)                                (3.65)
      control-bags                                         0.21                                 77.98
                                                          (0.39)                                (5.69)
      any GUP-bags                                         -0.92                                74.96
                                                          (0.27)                                (6.85)
      SOUP-bags                                            -0.25                                56.97
                                                          (0.58)                                (6.57)


      Observations                                          864                                  789
      Ctrl Mean                                            1.130                                6.220
      any-GUP-bags = GUP-no-bags                           0.590                                  0
      SOUP-bags = SOUP-no-bags                             0.890                                  0

This table shows levels of monthly wage income and time spent on bags and/or wage labor across treatment groups. In Column
1, we can see that within each treatment groupcontrol, GUP, and SOUPthere is very little dierence in wage income
between bags and no-bags, despite large dierences in time spent on bags and/or wage labor, as shown in Column 2. Therefore,
we assume that any dierences in time spent on "time bags and/or wage labor" within each treatment group, between bags and
no-bags, can be attributed to time spent on bags. We thus impute time spent on bags by taking the time spent on "time bags
and/or wage labor" for each bags participant, and subtracting the mean time spent on "time bags and/or wage labor" from the
corresponding no-bags treatment group. For example, for a GUP-bags participant, we subtract the mean time spent on "time
bags and/or wage labor" in GUP-no-bags to impute time spent on bags.




                                                Online Appendix Page 2
                                         Appendix Table 2: Wage Elasticity Results
            Panel A: Evidence of Responsiveness to Wages Received for Previously Submitted Bags
                           (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)              (5)          (6)            (7)
    VARIABLES          IHS(bags)      IHS(bags)     IHS(bags)      IHS(bags)      IHS(bags)      IHS(bags)      IHS(bags)


    log(wage)             0.02           -0.00          0.10          -0.02             0.15        -0.11          0.19
                         (0.04)         (0.05)         (0.07)         (0.04)           (0.07)      (0.04)         (0.07)


    Observations         23,058         14,822         8,236         16,470            6,588       13,146         9,912
    consecutive                           no             yes
    experience                                                                                       no             yes
    fourth week                                                         no              yes

                      Panel B: Elasticity Estimates with respect to the 3-Week Lagged Wage
                                                                        (1)
                                                 VARIABLES          IHS(bags)


                                                 log(wage(t-3))        0.16
                                                                      (0.05)


                                                 Observations         19,764
                                                 experience             no

Panel A provides evidence that participants were responsive to wages they were receiving for bags submitted previously, as
opposed to the correct relevant wage for the bags they were making. We examine elasticities by three sub-groups. First, we look
at participants who were randomly assigned two consecutive high wage months and two consecutive low wage months (39/120
villages, and 363/1098 participants). Second, we look at participant-weeks that were the fourth week in the wage month.
Participants were paid wages with a two-week lag. If participants only fully internalized the wage change upon receiving new
wages, then they should take the new wage into account only for bags produced in the fourth week of the month. (The new
wage is active in the rst week of production; wages for these bags are paid in the third week, and thus only bags collected in
the fourth week are produced with experience of new wage.) Finally, we dene "experience" to mean either the fourth week of
the month, or for "consecutive" participants, any week in the second consecutive month with the same wage. Given this
evidence, Panel B shows elasticity estimates with respect to the 3-week lagged wage.




                                                  Online Appendix Page 3
Appendix Table 3: Eects of High vs. Low UCT - Components of Bags Production Index

                                        (1)            (2)           (3)                (4)
                                    number of     participates      bags            minutes per
                                       bags           (0/1)       earnings         dollar earned
  GUP, UCT $3.9             itt        1.46            0.16          0.86             -164.21
                            se        (0.67)          (0.07)        (0.49)            (113.28)
                            pval       0.03            0.03          0.09               0.15
                            qval       0.13            0.13          0.23               0.31
  GUP, UCT $1.3             itt        0.77            0.08          0.44              -82.20
                            se        (0.66)          (0.07)        (0.41)            (130.70)
                            pval       0.24            0.22          0.28               0.53
                            qval       0.32            0.32          0.32               0.53
  Ctrl Mean                            3.76            0.58          2.45              676.09
  Ctrl SD                              3.97            0.49          3.01             1316.80
  Obs                                 18816           18816         18816               1661
  high UCT - low UCT        pval       0.44            0.41          0.49               0.59

  Dierences in labor supply between GUP high UCT and GUP low UCT for bags households. The
  sample is restricted to villages with more than 30 compounds. We control for stratication variables,
  imbalanced variables (average household age, food security index, land area, monthly per capita
  consumption, and monthly household income), and baseline value of the outcome when possible.
  Columns 1-4 report weekly data with station-week xed eects (896 people over 21 weeks). Column
  5 reports monthly data with station-month xed eects. (Time use data was collected on only a
  monthly basis for roughly 60% of households over 5 months, and only about 60% of households were
  found each month.) Standard errors clustered at the village level. We use the Benjamini-Hochberg
  step-up method to compute q-values, considering all tests in the table. Standard errors clustered at
  the village level. We compute minutes per dollar earned by taking average daily earnings over the
  course of the month as the denominator, and time on bags (measured once in the month) as the
  numerator. We compute time on bags by taking the answer to a question about time on wage labor,
  and subtracting average time on wage labor from the control-no-bags, GUP-no-bags, and SOUP-no-
  bags households for each bags group, respectively. All monetary values are reported in 2014 USD,
  Purchasing Power Parity (PPP) terms.




                                    Online Appendix Page 4
                                                                    Appendix: Variable Denitions and Construction

                         Variable                Denition
                         animal revenue,         Revenue from animal sales, births, slaughters, and animal product sales in the last 6 months. Each revenue
                         (monthly, USD)          stream is computed by multiplying the reported number of animals or products sold/born/slaughtered for revenue
                                                 and multiplying it by the reported sale price (if available) or the median sale price. We sum over all four animal
                                                 revenue streams and then divide by six.
                         asset value (USD)       We ask about all of the assets owned by the household. We calculate the price in goats for each asset by using
                                                 price data from other countries, as in Banerjee et al. (2015). We then sum the total asset value in goats, and
                                                 multiply by the price of goats (average of median buy price and sell price across villages).
                         asset value index       We ask about all of the assets owned by the household. We calculate the price in goats for each asset by using
                                                 price data from other countries, as in Banerjee et al. (2015). We then sum the total asset value in goats, and
                                                 standardize it into an index around the baseline mean.
                         bags earnings           Weekly earnings from bags submitted (not including any unconditional consumption support), paid with a
                                                 two-week lag. Earnings depend on number of bags submitted, the relevant wage (which varied each month), and
                                                 the quality of each bag. If the wage was GHC 0.70, mid-quality bags earned GHC 0.70, high-quality bags earned
                                                 GHC 0.80, and low-quality bags earned GHC 0.60. If the wage was GHC 0.30, mid-quality bags earned GHC 0.30,
                                                 low-quality bags earned GHC 0.20, and high-quality bags earned GHC 0.40. For the measure used in Figure 2, we
                                                 hold the wage constant; we assume that all mid-quality bags earned GHC 0.50, low-quality bags earned GHC
                                                 0.40, and high-quality bags earned GHC 0.60.
                         bags production index   Standardized index of four variables, centered around control-bags mean. The variables are: number of bags,
                                                 participates (0/1), bags earnings, and minutes per dollar earned.
                         business income         Monthly business revenues minus expenses. For each business within the household, we ask about how many
                         (monthly, USD)          months in the last year the business was operating, how many months were "normal" (neither higher nor lower
                                                 than last month), how many months were "high prot," and how many months were "low prot." We ask about




Online Appendix Page 5
                                                 sales and prots in the last month, as well as prots in normal, high, and low months. We use the ratio of last
                                                 month's prots to high and low prots to impute sales in high and low prot months, compute total sales in the
                                                 last year by summing over sales in normal, high, and low months, and divide by the number of months the
                                                 business was operating to get monthly revenue. We do the same exercise for expenses.
                         business revenue        For each business within the household, we ask about how many months in the last year the business was
                         (monthly, USD)          operating, how many months were "normal" (neither higher nor lower than last month), how many months were
                                                 "high prot," and how many months were "low prot." We ask about sales and prots in the last month, as well
                                                 as prots in normal, high, and low months. We use the ratio of last month's prots to high and low prots to
                                                 impute sales in high and low prot months, compute total sales in the last year by summing over sales in normal,
                                                 high, and low months, and divide by the number of months the business was operating to get monthly revenue.
                         crop income (monthly,   Harvest sale value minus expenditure on inputs (annual), divided by twelve. To get harvest sale value, we ask
                         USD)                    about the quantity of each crop sold in the last year. If the units of harvested crops are the same as the units of
                                                 sold crops and we have the sale price, then we use this price to compute the sale value of each crop, and then sum
                                                 over crops. Otherwise, we use the median price for that crop. To get expenditure on inputs, we ask about
                                                 expenditures on manure, fertilizer, labor, herbicide, insecticide, and other inputs in the last year, and then sum
                                                 over all categories.
                         expenditure on          Expenditure on fertilizer in the last year.
                         fertilizer (USD)
                         expenditure on          Expenditure on herbicide in the last year.
                         herbicide (USD)
                         expenditure on labor    Expenditure on farm labor in the last year.
                         (USD)
                         female empowerment      Standardized index of ve variables, centered around baseline means. Each variable is the answer to the question
                         index                   ""To what extent do you believe yourself able to make your own decisions concerning X?" The categories X are
                                                 food, school expenses, health expenses, visiting friends, and purchases. They are measured on a scale from 1 to 3.
                         nancial inclusion       Standardized index of two variables, centered around the baseline mean. The rst variable is the total amount
                         index                   received in loans by the household in the last year. The second variable is the total savings balances at the time of
                                                 the survey.
                         food security index     Standardized index of three variables, centered around baseline means. The rst two variables equal 0 if the
                                                 household answered "all year" or "during the lean season only" to the following questions, about adults and kids,
                                                 respectively: "Did adults/kids ever reduce number of meals per day or reduce portions over the past year?" The
                                                 third variable equals 0 if the household answered "all year" or "during the lean season only" to the question "Did
                                                 adults ever skip entire days without eating?"
                         harvest value (USD)     We ask about the quantity of each crop sold in the last year. If the units of harvested crops are the same as the
                                                 units of sold crops and we have the sale price, then we use this price to compute the sale value of each crop, and
                                                 then sum over crops. Otherwise, we use the median price for that crop.
                         livestock value (USD)   Sum of values of goats, fowl, pigs, sheep, and cows. To get the value of each animal, we rst take the average of
                                                 the median buy price and the median sell price across villages. We then multiple this price by the number of
                                                 animals owned in the household.
                         mental health index     Standardized index of three variables, centered around baseline means. The rst is economic satisfaction,
                                                 measured on a scale from 1 to 5. The second is a standardized index of ve measures: feeling sad, crying, not
                                                 eating, not working, and feeling restless, measured on a scale from not at all, hardly ever, some of the time, or




Online Appendix Page 6
                                                 most of the time. The third is whether the individual was not worried in the last year (0 if the member
                                                 experienced a period of worry in the last year, 1 otherwise).
                         minutes per dollar      We rst compute the minutes spent on bags yesterday (see below). Since time use surveys were conducted once
                         earned                  per month, we have one measure of this for each month. We then divide this by the average daily earnings for the
                                                 month. (This variable is thus measured with error, as some households spent no time yesterday but had high
                                                 average monthly earnings, while others spent lots of time yesterday but had very low average monthly earnings.)
                         monthly per capita      For food consumption, we ask about household consumption of a variety of food products in the last month, and
                         consumption (USD)       multiply the amounts by median prices to get expenditure. For non-food consumption, we ask about monthly and
                                                 yearly expenses on a wide variety of goods and services that are typically consumed on a monthly (yearly) basis.
                                                 Total monthly consumption per capita is the sum of monthly household food and non-food consumption, divided
                                                 by the household size.
                         monthly household       total of monthly business income, crop income, wage income, and animal revenue (we do not have animal income
                         income (USD)            because we were unable to collect data on costs associated with animals).
                         number of bags          Weekly bags collected.
                         participates (0/1)      1 if the household submitted at least 1 bag that week, 0 otherwise.
                         physical health index   Standardized index of two variables, centered around baseline means. The rst is the average daily living score,
                                                 which is the mean of four variables: capacity bathing, capacity lifting, capacity walking, and capacity working
                                                 (each measured on a scale from 1 being easily done to 4 being unable to do). The second is whether or not they
                                                 did not take a sick day (1 if the member did not miss a day of work due to illness in the last year, 0 otherwise).
                         political involvement   z-score of attendance at village meetings in the last year (1 if the person attended a village meeting in the last 12
                         index                   months, 0 otherwise), centered around baseline mean.
                         residual productivity   The residuals from a regression of harvest value on input expenditure, acreage, and time eld.
                         savings balances        We ask about the total amount saved in various locations (a private bank, at home, with a friend, etc.) and sum
                         (USD)                   them all together.
                         time bags               We take the answer to a question about minutes spent on wage labor yesterday, and subtract average minutes
                                                 spent yesterday on wage labor from the control-no-bags, GUP-no-bags, and SOUP-no-bags households for each
                                                 bags group, respectively. In the appendix we conrm that there is no evidence that the bags treatment had an
                                                 eect on wage income, so we assume it also did not aect time spent on wage labor. (We did not ask directly
                                                 about time on bags because we were worried that it would compromise the separation between the evaluation and
                                                 implementation teams.) We exclude one of the stations, Langbensi, that reported zero time spent on wage labor.
                         time business           Minutes spent on household business yesterday.
                         time home labor         Minutes spent on home labor yesterday. Home labor includes cleaning, cooking, collecting rewood, shopping, and
                                                 fetching water.
                         time eld                Minutes spent on the farm yesterday.
                         time productive labor   Minutes spent on wage labor (including bags), business, home labor, and eld, yesterday.
                         time leisure            Minutes spent on leisure activities yesterday (resting, socializing, etc.)
                         wage income             We ask about each instance of paid labor in the last nine months within the household, the quantity of time
                         (monthly, USD)          worked, and the total earnings from that activity. We sum the total earnings and divide by nine to get monthly
                                                 household wage income.




Online Appendix Page 7
