                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         HOLIDAY, JUST ONE DAY OUT OF LIFE:
                      BIRTH TIMING AND POST-NATAL OUTCOMES

                                        Mireille Jacobson
                                        Maria Kogelnik
                                         Heather Royer

                                       Working Paper 27326
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27326


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2020




We thank Catherine Miao, Molly Schwarz, and Sam Valdez for excellent research assistance, two
anonymous referees, the editors, David Card, David Lee, Thomas Lemieux, as well as Rodney
Andrews and participants at the Defense against the Dark Arts conference at the University of
Michigan for useful comments. Maryte Gylys provided an excellent summary of the medical
literature on inductions while she was a medical student at UC-Irvine. John DiNardo inspired and
instigated this work by noting the depression of births around major holidays. He thought that one
could use holidays to look at the effect of induction on birth outcomes. All mistakes are our own.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Mireille Jacobson, Maria Kogelnik, and Heather Royer. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Holiday, Just One Day Out of Life: Birth Timing and Post-natal Outcomes
Mireille Jacobson, Maria Kogelnik, and Heather Royer
NBER Working Paper No. 27326
June 2020
JEL No. I11,I12,J13

                                            ABSTRACT

Fewer births occur on major US holidays than would otherwise be expected. We use California
data to study the nature and health implications of this birth date manipulation. We document
18% fewer births on the day of and just after a holiday. Cesarean sections account for roughly
half of the decline. Using insights from the tax bunching and test score manipulation literature,
we show that "missing" holiday births are displaced to a window of time 11 days before the
holiday through 16 days after the holiday. Delivery type does not change over this window,
consistent with a pure retiming of births rather than an increase in the use of procedures such as
cesarean sections. Despite the change in timing, we find little evidence of any adverse health
consequences for babies born around a holiday. Even among high-risk pregnancies, which are
more likely to be retimed, we find a minimal impact of holiday-related birth timing manipulation
on infant health. Finally, while some of the retiming seems to be driven by patients' preferences,
provider incentives appear to play a crucial role in holiday-related birth retiming. At Kaiser
Permanente hospitals, where systemwide financial incentives discourage providers from
electively timing births, the dip in births on holidays is less than for hospitals overall. This
suggests that holiday retiming occurs more frequently among providers who face less of a
disincentive to electively schedule births.

Mireille Jacobson                               Heather Royer
The Leonard Davis School of Gerontology         Department of Economics
University of Southern California               University of California, Santa Barbara
3715 McClintock Ave                             2127 North Hall
Los Angeles, CA 90089-0191                      Santa Barbara, CA 93106
and The Paul Merage School of Business          and NBER
and also NBER                                   royer@econ.ucsb.edu
mireillj@usc.edu

Maria Kogelnik
North Hall
University of California at Santa Barbara
Santa Barbara, CA
kogelnik@umail.ucsb.edu
I.       Introduction 


         The role of medical intervention in childbirth has risen over time. Cesarean section
(i.e., the delivery of a baby via a surgical procedure) rates have increased steadily from 21%
in 1996 to 31.9% in 2016. 1 Similarly, rates of induction and stimulation of labor (two
methods of precipitating a birth) have grown considerably. Labor induction rates among
singleton births, for example, increased from 10% in 1990 to over 23% in 2012 (Osterman
and Martin 2014b). With the growth of these techniques, medical professionals are able to
time deliveries quite precisely. In the case of cesarean section, the birth can be timed to a
particular day and hour.
         The appropriate use of cesarean sections is a matter of considerable interest, with
many health care stakeholders and policymakers embarking on quality improvement
initiatives to reduce elective use of these procedures. These efforts stem in part from a
growing body of evidence demonstrating the harms from cesarean delivery in low-risk
pregnancies (e.g., see Card, Fenizia and Silver 2018). The implications of birth timing
through labor induction or stimulation are less clearly understood. Likewise, the optimal
timing of these interventions remains mostly unclear. The decision of whether or not and
when to intervene is all the more important given the association of neonatal health with
longer term outcomes such as infant mortality, education, and earnings (Almond et al. 2005;
Black et al. 2007; Royer 2009; Figlio et al. 2014). Because of selection ­ the set of women
who undergo cesarean sections, labor induction or labor stimulation is nonrandom ­ it is
challenging to understand how these interventions affect outcomes.
         We argue that holidays provide a useful quasi-experiment in this regard. Figure 1
documents the distribution of the number of births across three types of days: major
holidays, weekends, and neither major holidays or weekends for two samples ­ the United
States 1968-1988 and California 2000-2016.2 The number of births per day is approximately
2 standard deviations lower on major holidays than on non-holiday, non-weekend days.
Similar to the holiday drop in births, births decline over the weekend, when fewer medical


1Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/delivery.htm
2The inclusion of the entire United States in this figure is for illustrative purposes as we focus our attention on
California for 2000 to 2016. Publicly available data for the United States only include exact date of birth for
years prior to 1989, starting in 1969.

1
practitioners schedule deliveries. The drop in births as a consequence of holidays is well-
documented elsewhere (Borst and Osley 1975; MacFarlane 1978; Rindfuss et al. 1979;
Mangold 1981; Cohen 1983; Hawe et al. 2001; Hong et al. 2006; Goodman, Nelson,
Maciosek 2005; Bauer, Bender, Heining, Schmidt 2013; Gelman et al. 2013; Martin et al.
2018). For the most part, however, this literature does not characterize how holiday births
are displaced over time or study the consequences of this displacement for delivery or birth
outcomes.
           To uncover the effects of holidays, we utilize data on the universe of California
births between 2000 and 2016. These data, which capture almost 9 million births, allow us to
detail the effects of holidays not only on birth timing, but also on delivery methods (e.g.,
vaginal versus cesarean section) and birth outcomes (e.g., birth weight, Apgar scores, delivery
complications). Although unique, California is ethnically and racially diverse and accounts
for over 12% of the US population and of annual births.3 For 2016, the use of cesarean
section in California matched the national average.4
           We begin by systematically documenting the depression of births around major US
holidays. This requires careful consideration of the appropriate counterfactual, both because
births exhibit regular seasonal and within-week patterns and because holidays impact the
distribution of births in a broad region of the event. Comparing Monday holidays to births
on Wednesday, when births are commonly scheduled, or on Sunday, when they are rarely
scheduled, would bias our estimates. Taking into account these day-of-week effects is critical
to appropriately quantifying the impact of holidays on births. Furthermore, because holidays
cause births to be displaced, comparing birth counts on the holiday versus on the days just
before (or just after) the holiday would likely be biased if births are systematically elevated
before (or after) the holiday. Accounting for seasonal patterns is also critical because we are
interested in the effects of holidays on the timing of delivery and not the timing of
conception.
           To determine the period over which births around a holiday appear to be retimed,
we use insights from the tax bunching and test score manipulation literature (Saez 2010;
Chetty et al. 2011; Kleven and Waseem 2013; Diamond and Persson 2017; Dee et al. 2018).
Unlike analyses of test score or income tax manipulation, which push observations in one

3   See https://www.kff.org/other/state-indicator/number-of-births/
4   Source: https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/pressroom/sosmap/cesarean_births/cesareans.htm

2
direction (e.g., above a test score threshold as in Dee et al. 2018 or before a tax deadline as in
Dickert-Conlin and Chandra 1999), holidays can shift births both before and after they
would otherwise occur. Thus, we identify a "manipulation window," which in our setting is
the days both before and after a holiday during which some births are shifted due to the
holiday. As the "missing mass" of births due to the holiday (i.e., fewer births than otherwise
would be expected) must be counteracted with an "excess mass" of births (i.e., more births
than otherwise would be expected), our manipulation window is the period of time around a
holiday for which the sum of the missing mass and the excess mass is closest to zero.
         Using this zero net mass heuristic, we identify a manipulation window that spans the
period from 11 days prior to 16 days after the holiday.5 This implies that the manipulation of
births around holidays occurs over 4 weeks. However, three-quarters of the manipulation is
contained within +/- 1 week of the holiday. To create a counterfactual set of births, we
match births within this roughly 4-week manipulation window to the closest day just outside
the window that falls on the same day of the week. For days prior to the holiday, this means
we compare births on day d with births on day d-14. For days following the holiday, each day
d is contrasted with day d+21. These nearest-day, day-of-week matched controls enable us to
isolate the holiday effect from strong seasonal and within-week cyclical patterns in births.
Relative to this counterfactual, we estimate that about 500 births or 18% of births on the day
of the holiday and the day just after are shifted to other days within the manipulation
window. About 50% of the decline across these two days is due to a reduction in cesarean
sections. The remainder is roughly split between spontaneous vaginal births and vaginal
births after an induction or stimulation of labor. The relative reduction in births on the
holiday is larger for high-risk births, defined as births to a mom with a prior cesarean
section, a breeched birth, a multiple birth pregnancy, or with an infection such as HIV.
About 65% of high-risk births that would have otherwise occurred on the holiday are shifted
away from the holiday.
         Although the births retimed due to holidays are selected, we can use outcomes for all
births in the holiday manipulation window to understand the reduced-form impact of
holiday birth timing manipulation. Using logic invoked in Diamond and Persson (2017), who


5 The total number of births moved to the period before versus after the holiday is roughly equal, although the

pre and post periods themselves are unequal such that displacement of a similar number of births occurs over
more post than pre-holiday days.

3
study the effect of test score manipulation on earnings, we compare birth outcomes for days
in the manipulation window to counterfactual days just outside the manipulation window.
Following this methodology, we find little evidence of adverse effects on outcomes in the
holiday manipulation window. Our reduced-form holiday effect on birthweight, for example,
is a reduction of 2 grams off of a mean of about 3300 grams. We find no other meaningful
changes in a host of other outcomes, including newborn conditions, labor complications,
low Apgar scores, admission to the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) or the use of
assisted ventilation. These estimates are small from a health perspective even if we inflate
them by reasonable approximations of the fraction of retimed births to generate an implied
IV estimate of the effect of retimed births on outcomes. Scaling by the roughly 500 births
out of 40,000 that are retimed over the 28-day holiday manipulation period implies a roughly
160 gram or 4.8% reduction in birth weight due to holidays. Even among high-risk
pregnancies, we find little impact of holiday-related birth timing manipulation on infant
health. For high-risk births, our implied IV estimates suggest reductions in birth weight on
the order of 50 grams. These findings contrast with the adverse effects found in papers on
cesarean sections (e.g., Card, Fenizia and Silver 2018), although those papers contrast the
starker effect of using the procedure versus not.
        A key distinction of our work is that it largely compares the effects of changes in the
scheduling of procedures that likely would have happened absent the holiday. We base this
assertion on the fact that we find no net changes in delivery type within the manipulation
window. While we cannot rule out compositional changes in the use of interventions, with,
for example, some births that would have been spontaneous retimed via cesarean section
and other births that would have been cesarean section delayed to the point of becoming
spontaneous, the fact that we find no changes in interventions on the extensive margin
suggests our results speak largely to the effect of the optimal timing of these interventions.
        This paper adds to an extensive literature on the effect of holidays on the number of
births. Most of this earlier work, which we discuss below, focuses on international settings or
uses data from earlier years, when both cesarean sections and inductions were far less
frequent. More recently, Gelman et al. (2013) and follow-on analysis at fivethirtyeight.com
analyze US births and establish similar patterns of birth counts on holidays as we do in this




4
paper.6 Martin et al. (2018), in an analysis of UK births, probe deeper into understanding the
holiday effect by examining changes in delivery type on holidays.7 Like Gelman et al. (2013),
Martin et al. (2018) show neither how holiday births are displaced over time, nor what the
consequences of this displacement are for delivery or birth outcomes.8 Our work fills these
gaps by exploring the dynamics of retimed births, i.e., how births are temporally displaced
around holidays; the manner of the retiming, i.e., how delivery types change on holidays and
across the period of displacement; and the health consequences of these changes.
         More broadly, this paper provides insights on how the timing of delivery through
medical interventions impacts infant health. Based on scheduling manipulations due to
holidays, the re-timing of interventions within plus or minus two weeks has only very small
(and likely medically and economically insignificant) effects on infant health outcomes. This
finding is noteworthy given that ACOG's consensus recommendations concerning birth
generally fall within a few weeks of a due date, depending on the precise condition of the
baby or mom (see Spong et al. 2011). In addition to informing general obstetric practices,
these results are also instructive for hospitals setting policies about delivery timing and
staffing around the holidays.
         This paper also adds to the economics literature on the relationship between
financial incentives to time deliveries and post-natal health outcomes. Schulkind and Shapiro
(2014) find that the annual dependent tax deduction allowance shifts deliveries from January
to December, lowering birth weight and Apgar scores. Borra et al. (2016; 2018) find that the
revocation of a baby bonus in Spain led to reductions in birth weight and increases in
hospitalization rates. Our paper is distinct from these two in that our main estimates, which
exclude January 1st as a holiday of interest, represent responses to holidays independent of
financial incentives. In contrast to tax incentives or baby bonuses, which require specific
knowledge to take advantage of them, major holidays likely affect the timing decisions of a
larger population. Perhaps most importantly, while the response to these financial incentives


6  Source: https://fivethirtyeight.com/features/some-people-are-too-superstitious-to-have-a-baby-on-friday-
the-13th/
7 As Martin et al. (2018) analyze data from England and Wales, where planned cesarean sections account for

only 11% of all births, their work may have more limited insights in the US context.
8 Previous studies document higher rates of perinatal and/or neonatal mortality on holidays (Macfarlane 1978;

Stephansson et al. 2003; Hong et al. 2006). These effects, which do not consider the outcomes of the displaced
births, may be due to the selection of births on holidays and/or the experience and level of hospital staffing on
holidays. Similar increases in mortality rates have been found on weekends relative to weekdays (Gould et al.
2003; Hendry 1981; Mathers 1983; Hamilton and Restrepo 2006; Pasupathy et al. 2010; Restrepo et al. 2018).

5
necessarily means moving a birth earlier, holiday-related retiming provides more flexibility.
Births can, in principle, be shifted both before and after the holiday. This greater flexibility in
retiming may account for some of the differences in outcomes between our own paper and
that of papers studying deadline-based tax incentives and baby bonuses.
        Finally, our results are informative for regression discontinuity research designs
based on birth dates. Since holidays impact births by as much as 2 weeks away, many birth
date-based regression discontinuity designs risk comparing outcomes for births that are
affected by holiday-related retiming. Moreover, the typical donut regression discontinuity
approach (Barreca, Lindo, and Waddell 2016) to address potential selection near a
discontinuity threshold would require a wide period removed from the analysis (i.e., the 28-
day window). With the exclusion of those dates, the regression discontinuity may be less
appealing because the groups on either side may be inherently less comparable. Our work
implies that research using a birth-date based regression discontinuity approach should
consider, the proximity of the date to any major holiday and remove the data roughly 2
weeks on either side of the holiday, at least as a robustness check.
        In the remainder of the paper, we first describe a conceptual model for
understanding how holidays may affect birth timing in Section II. We present our empirical
approach in Section III and our results in Section IV. We present a set of robustness checks
and sensitivity analyses in Section V. In Section VI we discuss analyses focused on
interpretation and mechanisms and in Section VII we conclude.


II.     Conceptual Framework: How Holidays affect Birth Timing and Outcomes


        Why might holidays affect the use of medical interventions to time births? The
reasons are multifold and include preferences for leisure at the time of the holiday among
both patients and health care providers, financial incentives, as well as cultural beliefs.
        For many holidays (e.g. 4th of July, Thanksgiving), medical providers and parents may
have a strong disutility for a birth during that period. As holidays are often associated with
social and family gatherings, working on that day or giving birth on that day may generate
large utility costs. Consequently, hospitals often compensate their staff via extra pay or extra
time off if they are working on a holiday, and thus have some incentives to reduce their staff
on holidays and reschedule procedures that might otherwise have been scheduled for a

6
holiday.
        In the case of New Year's, parents expecting a new child around January 1st face
incentives to expedite the birth of their child to qualify for a tax exemption in the current
year. In the US, the timing of births around January 1st is sensitive to the annual child tax
benefit, as these benefits are not prorated (Lalumia, Sallee and Turner 2015; Schulkind and
Shapiro 2014; Dickert-Conlin and Chandra 1999).9 To disentangle the effect of holidays
from financial incentives, we focus specifically on holidays that are likely to coincide with
time off and social gatherings, but not with financial incentives. For this reason, we exclude
New Year's from our main analysis.
        Furthermore, being born on a certain day may be associated with good or bad luck.
In countries and among ethnic groups that follow the lunar calendar, for example, births are
more common on auspicious days and less common on inauspicious days (Lo 2003; Lin,
Xirasagar, Tung 2006; Almond et al. 2015). Likewise, in the US, births are more common on
Valentine's Day and less common on Halloween (Levy, Chung and Slade 2011). In addition,
some parents might prefer that their child's birthday does not coincide with a fixed day
holiday, such as Christmas or July 4th. Similar to inauspicious dates, some dates, such as
September 11 after 2001 and Friday the 13th have "negative" connotations. Because such
days are unlikely to enter medical providers' utility function, we use these dates later to
isolate demand-side influencers (separate from supply-side shifters) in birth timing.
        Irrespective of the motivation, providers can intervene to time a birth through the
use of a cesarean section, induction, or stimulation of labor. A cesarean section is the
surgical delivery of a child through the mother's abdomen. It can be used to time a birth
quite precisely, down to the exact day. Induction and stimulation of labor are less invasive
but allow for a less precise timing of births. Induction of labor refers to techniques to
stimulate uterine contractions prior to the onset of spontaneous labor (Grobman et al.
2018). Similarly, stimulation of labor, also known as augmentation of labor, refers to
techniques that help labor progress after the onset of spontaneous labor. The process of
inducing or stimulating labor is usually achieved through administering drugs such as
oxytocin. Other methods of precipitating labor include membrane stripping to detach the


9 Two other well-documented policies provide incentives for birth timing manipulation: baby bonuses (Gans

and Leigh 2009; Brunner and Kuhn 2014; Borra, Gonzalez and Sevilla 2018)) and family leave (Neugart and
Ohlsson 2013; Tamm 2013; Jürges 2017).

7
fetal membranes from the cervix, nipple stimulation, and acupuncture (Bouvlain, Stan, and
Iron 2005; Kavanagh, Kelly, and Thomas 2005; Smith and Crowther 2013; Modlock,
Nielsen, and Uldbjerg 2010). Clinical guidelines often use the terms induction and
stimulation interchangeably. Inductions enable the timing of a birth within a 1 to 3-day
window. 10 The decision to use these procedures is not costless and involves important
tradeoffs. Indications for a planned or scheduled cesarean section, as distinguished from an
emergency cesarean section, include mechanical obstructions like placenta previa, meaning
the placenta covers the cervix; breech position, meaning the fetus is not in the head down
position; multiple births, such as twins or triplets and maternal infections, such as HIV,
which face increased transmission risk during active labor (Berghella et al. 2018).11 Since the
late 1980s, one of the most important reasons to plan a cesarean section is a prior delivery
via cesarean section (Oster 2018). Many hospitals prohibit vaginal births after a previous
cesarean section (VBAC births) to reduce the risks of a uterine rupture. In 2017, 87% of
pregnant women in the US who had a previous cesarean section subsequently delivered via
cesarean section.12
         The optimal use and timing of cesarean sections is a source of considerable debate.
Non-labor deliveries lead to changes in stress operation, immune response, and altered
epigenetic functioning based on experiments in non-human species (Black et al. 2015).
Individuals born via cesarean section have higher rates of infant hospitalization, obesity, and
type 1 diabetes (Black et al. 2015). While this medical literature is correlational, Card, Fenizia
and Silver (2018) show - using differential distance to high or low cesarean section rate
hospitals - that even low-risk pregnancies face higher risks, particularly acute respiratory
conditions, when delivered by cesarean section. Consequently, planned cesarean sections are
largely timed weighing the underlying health risks precipitating a cesarean section against
worries about insufficient respiratory development. The American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists (ACOG) recommends that most cesarean sections take place at 39 weeks


10 Analysis of nearly 11,000 women undergoing labor induction finds that over 65% reach active labor, or 5-cm

dilation, within 6 hours of induction and over 96% within 15 hours (Grobman et al. 2018). Median time to
delivery after the active phase is 4 hours and the 95th percentile is 13 hours for nulliparous women with
epidural analgesia; time to delivery decreases slightly with parity and without epidural analgesia (Zhang et al.
2010b).
11 Unscheduled or emergency cesarean sections are typically performed when clinicians perceive imminent risk

such as fetal distress, a lack of blood and oxygen flow through the umbilical cord, placenta abruption (the
disconnecting of the placenta from the uterine wall), stalled labor, or a baby being too large for the birth canal.
12 Source is authors' calculation of the 2017 Detailed Natality Files.


8
or later, as earlier cesarean sections are associated with adverse respiratory and neonatal
outcomes (Tita et al. 2009).13 Typical indications for labor induction and stimulation include
a post-term pregnancy and premature labor rupture of membranes ("water breaking") along
with several of the precursors to cesarean sections, including hypertension, preeclampsia,
and    maternal       diabetes     (Grobman         et   al.   2018).     Clinicians      generally     consider
induction/stimulation medically indicated when the risks of continued pregnancy outweigh
the maternal and fetal risks of delivery earlier than may have occurred spontaneously. Unless
the fetus or mother is at risk, ACOG does not recommend inducing a birth before 39 weeks
of gestation.14 For late-term pregnancies (pregnancies in the 41st week), induction is to be
considered and in the post-term pregnancies (pregnancies in the 42nd week or later),
induction is recommended.15 The risks associated with induction are minimal, particularly in
comparison to those associated with cesarean sections. A recent randomized-controlled
evaluation of labor induction among low-risk first-time mothers documents reduced rates of
cesarean sections without adverse perinatal outcomes (Grobman et al. 2018). ACOG,
however, continues to list infection, uterine rupture, increased risk of cesarean section, and
fetal death as potential risks of induction.16
         An intervention to alter a birth's timing in response to a holiday can have one of two
effects on the delivery process: 1) the delivery method is altered, which will most likely also
alter the delivery timing, or 2) the delivery timing alone is altered. In the first scenario, a birth
may have been intended to be spontaneous in absence of the holiday, but then is delivered
via cesarean section, induction or stimulation as a result of the holiday. In the second
scenario, a birth may have been planned to happen via cesarean section, induction, or
stimulation even in the absence of the holiday, but the timing of that procedure may be



13 A classic obstetrics textbook (Edmonds, 2008) recommends planning the delivery of twins at 37 to 38 weeks.
Even with multiple acute risks present, consensus recommendations typically suggest cesarean section
scheduling after 36 weeks of gestation, although recommendations vary by condition (see Sprong et al. 2011).
ACOG guidelines have become more cautious about early planned cesarean sections over time.
14 Source: https://www.acog.org/Patients/FAQs/Induction-of-Labor-at-39-Weeks?
15 Several observational studies suggest that cesarean section rates are higher among induced births (Bailit et al.

2015; Luthy et al. 2004). The experimental literature finds otherwise. Hannah et al. (1992) find no differences in
outcomes, with the exception of lower cesarean section delivery rates in women with uncomplicated pregnancies
at 41 weeks or more duration randomized to induction of labor versus watchful waiting (or "expectation
management"). Nielsen et al. (2005) found no differences in cesarean section rates among women between 39
and 42 weeks of gestation and favorable pre-labor cervix (or "Bishop scores") randomized to induction versus
expectant management. Meta-analyses come to similar conclusions (Saccone et al. 2015; Walker et al. 2015)
16 Source: https://www.acog.org/Patients/FAQs/Labor-Induction


9
altered as a result of it. We refer to holiday-related changes in delivery type as extensive
margin changes and changes in the timing of a delivery type as intensive margin changes.
            While our data do not allow us to fully separate these two scenarios, as described
later, we can estimate the overall effect of holidays on the prevalence of the different
delivery types. This information allows us to answer the question of whether a holiday
increases the overall incidence of cesarean sections. A priori, we would expect the second
scenario would be more common as it does not conflict with ACOG guidelines discouraging
the use of cesarean sections for uncomplicated pregnancies and implies only a rescheduling
of procedures among people already intending to use them.
            Given the decision to time a birth to avoid a holiday, when are such births likely to
be (re)scheduled? Consider a birth with a due date near a holiday. To avoid the holiday,
providers can decide to schedule the birth before or after the holiday. Having a birth early
increases the health risks to newborns and moms. But scheduling the birth after the holiday,
particularly among pregnancies that are nearly full term, raises the risk that a woman goes
into spontaneous labor, a process that for some complications (e.g., breech birth, eclampsia),
providers want to avoid. Moreover, for births past the due date, risks of delaying birth
include high birth weight (a precursor for diabetes) and perinatal mortality (Galal et al. 2012).
For births very near term, the probability of imminent birth is high. Among spontaneous
vaginal births in the United States in 2017, only 8% of births occurred before 38 weeks of
gestation and 68% of births were between 38 and 40 weeks of gestation inclusive; 24% of
births occur after 40 weeks.17 For births far from term, the risk of labor naturally starting is
lower, although high-risk births may have higher probabilities of early delivery. In sum, it is
ex-ante plausible that births may be shifted to occur before or after a holiday. As discussed
above, both providers and patients can impact the decision to retime a birth. Below, we
perform several analyses to test the importance of the supply (i.e., clinician-driven) versus
demand (i.e., patient-driven) channels. First, we separately examine births around September
11th (after 2001) and Friday the 13th, as these days arguably affect the demand to (re)schedule,
while leaving the supply side of medical professionals unaffected. Second, we separately
consider the impact of holidays on the pattern of births at Kaiser Foundation Hospitals, a
closed HMO system that has a disincentive to schedule elective delivery. Both analyses,


17   Based on authors' calculation using the 2017 Detailed Natality Files.

10
which we discuss in more detail below, suggest that while patients' preferences matter,
providers play a considerable role in birth timing.
        Ultimately, our interest is in not just the impact of holidays on birth timing, but the
consequences, if any, of this behavior on maternal and infant health. Most directly, holidays
may impact maternal and infant health through the timing of delivery and choice of delivery
method, but also through several other ways: First, holidays may affect birth outcomes
through the supply of medical professionals. Staffing may be reduced on holidays. Second,
holidays may affect the quality of staffing. If working on a holiday is undesirable, less
experienced workers with lower seniority may be requested to work on a holiday. Junior staff
may also get a higher marginal utility from enhanced holiday pay (e.g., time and a half), and
may therefore self-select to work holiday shifts. Finally, holidays may have indirect or
external effects on birth outcomes if the rescheduling of some births causes congestion in
hospitals on days proximate to holidays. That is, holiday-related retiming of some births may
impact the capacity of hospitals to attend to the needs of other deliveries. Although to the
extent these are predictable changes, holidays likely adjust their staffing accordingly.


III.    Empirical Approach


Data
        Our primary data source is the restricted-access 2000-2016 California Birth Statistical
Master Files. These data cover the universe of California births during this period and come
from birth certificate information that the parents and medical provider fill out at the time of
birth. These data include demographic information (e.g., age, education) for the parents,
health conditions/outcomes of the mother and infant (e.g., gestational diabetes, birth weight,
gestational length), and the use of medical interventions (e.g., cesarean section, induction,
and stimulation). Crucial to our approach, these data include the exact date of birth of the
infant. With such information, we can document precisely the displacement of births across
the holiday period.
        Table 1 provides some basic descriptive statistics on the interaction of holidays with
births and delivery methods. Births average 1442 per day, but are systematically lower on
holidays and weekends (with a mean of about 1100 births per day) than on other days. The
data on delivery mode make clear that this is a result of scheduling. The number of cesarean

11
section deliveries is nearly 50% lower on holidays and weekends than on other days.
Induced/stimulated births are about 28% lower. Spontaneous vaginal births are also lower
on holidays (by about 15%), although they account for a much higher share of births on
holidays (52%) than on other non-weekend days (44%).


Selection of Holidays
         Not all holidays are likely to impact the timing of births. Moreover, it is not a priori
obvious which holidays should matter most for patients or providers. As a uniform selection
rule aimed at isolating holidays that patients or medical providers may want to avoid because
of the joint utility of leisure (i.e., I enjoy the holiday because my friends and families also
have that day off), we first consider federal holidays for which salaried workers typically get
paid time off. This set contains New Year's Day, Presidents' Day, Memorial Day,
Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving, and Christmas. We exclude Martin Luther
King Day and Veterans Day from the analysis because many private sector workers do not
get paid time off on these days. We further exclude Christmas and New Year's Day in our
main analysis for two reasons: First, they coincide with changes in tax incentives to time
births. Our interest is in holiday-related birth timing, not in holiday + incentive-related
timing. Second, the pattern of birth timing manipulation around these holidays looks quite
different from that of other holidays, spanning a much wider interval. This unusual pattern is
likely due to the fact that many individuals take time off during the week between Christmas
and New Year's. We provide supplementary estimates that include Christmas and New
Year's as holidays to show that our qualitative findings are not materially affected by their
exclusion.


Determining the Holiday Manipulation Window
         To determine the effect of a holiday, we first need to establish which days around a
holiday are impacted by it, what we refer to as the "manipulation window." To do this, we
borrow the insight from the public finance bunching and test score manipulation literatures
(e.g., Kleven 2016; Diamond and Persson 2017; Dee et al. 2018) that within a manipulation
region, the missing mass ­ in our case, the drop in births around the holiday ­ must equal
the excess mass ­ in our case, the rise in births away from the holiday. To identify our
manipulation region, we perform a grid search around all holidays collectively to determine

12
the region over which the net change in births including the holidays themselves is closest to
zero. Specifically, we calculate the net change in births (i.e., the excess mass minus the
missing mass) for a combination of start and end dates for the manipulation region. We
begin with a 3-day minimum period on each side of the holiday working towards a 21-day
maximum period on each side of the holiday. In practice, excess mass is defined as occurring
when (births ­ expected births) > 0. Similarly, missing mass is defined as (births ­ expected
births) < 0. Ex ante, there are 19*19=361 possible manipulation periods.
         Calculation of the "optimal" window necessitates an appropriate counterfactual.
That is, it is necessary to know how many births would have happened on each day around a
holiday in absence of the holiday. We use births in the weeks in close proximity of the
holiday but outside of the manipulation region as a counterfactual.18 The construction of this
counterfactual involves matching each date in the manipulation window with a day outside
of the manipulation window that falls on the same day of the week. We match on day of the
week because it is an important predictor of the number of births, as seen in Figure 1. Days
preceding a holiday (inclusive of the holiday) are matched with days that precede the
manipulation window and days following a holiday are matched with days that follow the
manipulation window. For each day in the manipulation window, it has a paired day for each
day outside of the window.
         Panel A of Figure 2 provides a hypothetical example for ease of illustration of this
approach. In this figure, the manipulation region is -3 to 3, i.e., holidays lead to a
displacement of births 3 days before and up through 3 days after the holiday. To create our
counterfactual, each day in the manipulation window is matched to the closest day outside
that window that occurs on the same day of the week. In this hypothetical example, the day
before the holiday (-1) is a Wednesday and is thus matched with the previous Wednesday in


18 This counterfactual selection is a departure from the bunching literature, which estimates the counterfactual
distribution via the inclusion of high order polynomials in the "running" variable (i.e., the variable determining
treatment, which is date of birth in our setting). For example, the literature on income manipulation due to
taxes specifies a polynomial function in pre-tax income to predict what the distribution of pre-tax income
would look like in the absence of tax incentives. We argue that our departure is reasonable because the
counterfactual distribution is easier to estimate in our case for two reasons. Births in the weeks surrounding the
holiday window are births that are quasi-uniformly distributed. In contrast, the income distribution exhibits
considerable curvature, so higher order polynomials are needed to properly characterize the counterfactual
distribution. Second, while discrete changes in marginal tax rates may cause some individuals to not report
income, resulting in a non-equivalence of the missing and excess masses, holiday-related birth retiming is
ultimately constrained by biology and medicine. For completeness, in results not reported, we have followed
the previous bunching literature's approach without substantive changes in our conclusions.

13
the counterfactual region (-8). The date of the holiday is matched with a day 7 days before
the holiday. The day 2 days after the holiday is matched with a day 9 days after the holiday,
and so on. Note that when the manipulation region spans a partial week, our estimation
procedure excludes some dates near the holiday. For example, in the -3 to 3 manipulation
region example, we do not include dates [4,7] and [-4,-6] in our estimation of the holiday
effect. We do this at a cost of having counterfactual dates further from the holiday (e.g., 0 is
matched to -7 rather than -4), but at the benefit of making comparisons across the same day
of the week.
        In the end, our empirical procedure amounts to estimating regressions of this form:
                        !                             !                    !

       1 !" = ! +             ! 1 !  !" +                   ! !" + !" +          ! ! + !"
                       ! !!                          ! !!                 ! !!

!" is the count of the number of births on calendar day i and year t (e.g., September 3rd,
2000). l denotes the total number of days in the manipulation window. !" are indicator
variables for each of the matched pairs (i.e., l matched pairs). For the example laid out in
Panel A of Figure 2, l would equal 7 as there are 7 days in the manipulation region.
1 !  !" is the interaction between the pair dummies and an indicator for whether
a specific day is contained within holiday interval (e.g., in our hypothetical example,
1 ! equals 1 for days -3 to +3, and 0 otherwise). !" are holiday-by-year fixed
effects (e.g., Labor Day Period 2005) and ! are day-of-the week dummies. The ! s are
the parameters of interest. They are interpreted as the excess births (if positive) or missing
births (if negative) occurring on that day as a result of the holiday.
        The possibility of overlap in the manipulation windows across holidays further
complicates this regression. For example, in regressions that include Christmas and New
Year's as holidays, the post-Christmas period will coincide with the pre-New Year's period.
We address this by allowing each date to contribute to the estimate of multiple ! s.
Additionally, we control for other holidays that do not fall into our "paid time off"-heuristic
but that may also affect birth timing, specifically Halloween and Valentine's Day. We refer to
these as "nuisance holidays" and control for these in all specifications. To control for these
nuisance holidays, we include a separate set of dummy variables, separately for each holiday,
that span the full optimal window.



14
        Appendix Figure 1 shows the excess mass minus the missing mass for each
combination of start and end dates in our grid search. Our chosen manipulation window is
such that the absolute value of this difference is closest to 0. Across all combinations of start
dates 3 to 21 days before the holiday and end dates 3 to 21 days after the holiday, the net
birth mass is lowest at -11 to +16 days around the holiday. Specifically, the algorithm yields
an "optimal" window where the excess mass ­ missing mass (i.e., the sum of the estimated
! s from (1) throughout the manipulation region) is equal to 2.2 births. Given over 40,000
births in a typical 28-day period, 2.2 births is small and meaningfully close to 0.
        In contrast to Panel A of Figure 2, which shows a hypothetical manipulation window
that is symmetric or balanced around the holiday, our optimal manipulation window is
unbalanced. To control for day of the week properly in this unbalanced window, we do not
constrain the control period to be the same distance from the holiday on either side of the
holiday. As shown in Panel B of Figure 2, with our manipulation window of [-11, +16], we
compare days before the holiday to days between 3.5 weeks and 2 weeks before the holiday;
days after the holiday are compared to days just over three weeks later. As the optimal
window is relatively wide, the counterfactual dates are as far as 37 days away from the
holiday.
        To address potential comparability concerns, we perform supplementary analyses
that (i) widen or narrow the manipulation region (shown below), (ii) consider the windows
with the second-smallest sum of the excess and missing mass (shown below), and (iii) use
higher order polynomial functions in date of birth (available upon request). All of these
analyses generate similar qualitative conclusions.


Analysis of the Holiday Effect
        With our chosen manipulation window and control days, we now fix l to 28, the total
number of days manipulated, in equation (1) and estimate:
                         !"                          !"                    !

       2 !" = ! +              ! 1 !  !" +                  ! !" + !" +          ! ! + !" .
                        ! !!                         ! !!                 ! !!

Our main set of analyses documenting the displacement of births across the holiday period
provides estimates of the ! s (i.e., how births in the holiday period compare to those outside
the holiday period).


15
       In addition to births overall, we analyze the number of births by delivery mode ­
cesarean section, induced/stimulated vaginal birth, spontaneous vaginal birth ­ to
understand how the birth timing manipulation occurs. This is done via estimating
regressions of the form of equation (2) but replacing the dependent variable !" with counts
of the number of births delivered by one of those modes (e.g., cesarean section). We also
perform the same type of analysis but with counts of births by term length category (e.g.,
pre-term vs. full term) and separately consider average gestational age by day to characterize
the relationship between holiday birth timing manipulation and gestational length.
       Using the same analytic sample and basic specification, we also consider the nature
of the selection across the holiday period by analyzing the count of births by age, race and
education of moms as well as delivery payment sources. Finally, we consider outcomes such
as birth weight and the share of births with low birthweight or low Apgar scores. Again, this
is done considering each of these outcomes as separate dependent variables.
       Regression equations (1) and (2) describe the nature of the displacement of births
due to the holiday by day. To understand the overall impact of the holiday on outcomes, we
run a more aggregated regression that considers the average effect across the manipulation
window rather than the day-by-day effects. Specifically, we contrast births in the
manipulation window with the counterfactual births outside the manipulation window to
derive a reduced-form effect of the holiday. This approach is robust to selection within the
manipulation period (e.g., births on holidays are selected such that comparisons of the
outcomes of births within the window would lead to biased estimates of the effect of
holidays) but assumes no selection into the optimal holiday manipulation window from the
counterfactual window. We can partially test the no-selection-assumption by comparing the
observable background characteristics of mothers within the manipulation window to those
from counterfactual days. Diamond and Persson (2017) in their study of the long-run effects
of test score manipulation adopt a similar logic by comparing outcomes of students in the
manipulated region with the outcomes of students just outside of the manipulated region.
        To estimate the total reduced-form impact of holidays, we adopt an estimating
equation analogous to equations (1) and (2) but aggregate the per-day holiday effect into one
holiday effect. That is, we estimate the following equation:




16
                                                   !"                    !

       3 !" = ! + ! !" +                                  ! !" + !" +          ! ! + !" 
                                                   ! !!                 ! !!

where !" is a dependent variable of interest for a calendar date i in a particular year t (e.g.,
number of births, number of cesarean section births, mean gestation, mean birth weight).
The key variable of interest is 1 !" , an indicator for the 28-day period
around a holiday (i.e., a birth occurring between -11 and 16 days around a holiday). The
coefficient on this indicator, ! , captures the reduced form effect of birth timing
manipulation on mean daily outcomes over the holiday period. 
        Holidays will not impact all births in the manipulation window. Thus, to get a sense
of the effect of a birth timing manipulation, we want to scale our reduced-form effects by
the fraction of births in the manipulation window whose timing is manipulated. To do this,
we divide the estimates from (3) by an estimate of the fraction of births in the manipulation
region that are retimed due to the holiday. We provide such implied IV estimates mainly as a
benchmark to gauge the size of our effects, as it is challenging to credibly identify the exact
fraction of manipulated births. These implied IV estimates are intended to capture the size
of the effect of a birth being manipulated as opposed to the reduced-form effects, which
capture the effect of a birth being in the holiday manipulation window. 
        One reasonable estimate of the fraction manipulated is the ratio of the dip in births
very proximate to the holiday (the day of the holiday + the day after) to the number of total
births occurring in the manipulation window. This scaling factor implicitly assumes that the
manipulation is local to the holiday and that it is the manipulated births alone that are
impacted by the rescheduling. If, for example, a holiday shifts a birth from 1 day before the
holiday to occurring 2 days after, such a manipulation would not be captured in our
calculation of the manipulated fraction. Holiday-related rescheduling could, in principle,
have a domino effect, whereby other scheduled births around the holiday are shifted due to
resource constraints. Such reshuffling of scheduled births would also not be captured by our
measure of manipulated births. As we will discuss later in more detail, this possibility would
imply that the fraction of manipulated births by which we inflate our estimates is a lower
bound of the effect of a birth manipulation. Thus, any scaled up estimates of the effect of
birth timing manipulation on the outcomes studied here are upper bounds. 



17
        As discussed above, holiday-related shifting may also impose externalities on births
that are not retimed due to the holidays. For example, a disproportionate shifting of births to
the few days before or a few days after the holiday could cause congestion at some hospitals.
To the extent that any such externality affects measured outcomes for births that are not
directly manipulated, this would be captured in our aggregate outcome analysis.
        Across all outcomes, we estimate equations (1), (2), and (3) using linear regression
models. Because we analyze counts of births and deliveries by type, however, we also
perform sensitivity checks using Poisson regression models for these outcomes.
Qualitatively, our results are insensitive to model choice. 


IV.     Results


        Our results follow in several steps. First, we document the effect of the holidays on
the timing of births using the exact date of birth from the California birth files. Second, we
examine how those patterns vary by delivery type. Third, we study how the manipulation
affects gestational length, which is directly impacted by birth timing manipulation. Fourth,
we characterize the type of births affected by holiday timing. Fifth, we analyze the effects on
birth outcomes. Finally, given that negative birth outcomes are relatively rare, we repeat the
analysis for the sample of "high-risk" births (defined below). This sample has both a high
probability of being scheduled and, independent of scheduling, of experiencing adverse
outcomes.


Change in Births Around Holidays
        Figure 3 plots the estimated !  from equation (2) or the change in daily births
across the holiday period, the 11 days before to 16 days after the holiday as determined by
our "optimal" window, relative to the counterfactual days either before or after the holiday
period. Time zero is the holiday. As expected, the number of births is lower on the holiday
itself than would otherwise be expected. The same is true of the day after the holiday, i.e.,
t=+1. We estimate a combined decline of roughly 512 births on the day of and just after a
holiday. Given a mean of 1447 births per day in the analytic sample, this represents an
almost 18% reduction in births over the 2-day period than would be otherwise expected.
        Figure 3 makes evident that the holiday period is marked by a hollowing out of the

18
birth distribution across days. The missing mass from the holiday and the day after are
pushed both earlier and later than would have occurred in absence of the holiday. Although
the shift in births is largest within the first week before and after the holiday, there are
sizeable relative increases in births even as much as 14 days away. That is, holidays lead to a
shift of births within an interval of roughly 2 weeks before and 2 weeks after the holiday.
         The general pattern of displacement, i.e., the hollowing out of the birth distribution
around a holiday, is quite similar when we include Christmas and New Year's in the analysis
(see Appendix Figure 2). One modest difference is that births decline the day before as well
as the day after the holiday relative to counterfactual days. This is mostly driven by a
reduction in births on Christmas Eve. The drop in births is also slightly larger when
Christmas and New Year's are included, consistent with heterogeneous effects of different
holidays. Appendix Figure 3 shows, for each holiday separately, the average number of births
on that holiday minus the average number of births on all days in the sample. The holiday
drop in births is largest for Christmas Day, followed by New Year's and Memorial Day.
         Figure 4 documents the holiday effect for California births for 4 different time
periods.19 As the mean number of births varies considerably over time, we present Poisson
estimates of equation (2) in this figure. In the early 1970s, the number of births on holidays
was roughly 15% lower than expected. As medical delivery interventions became more
common, this drop increased. Interestingly, however, the holiday effect is larger for the
2000-2002 period than for the 2014-2016 period. The fall in the holiday effect may be
attributable to ACOG's 2013 guidance on what constitutes an early-term birth and in what
instances such deliveries are warranted (ACOG 2013; Oster 2018).20
         Table 2 provides estimates of the net or aggregate impact of holidays on births per
day across the entire manipulation window based on equation (3). The table supports our
optimal holiday manipulation window choice. Specifically, the first column of Panel A
reveals that there are only an estimated 4 fewer births per day across the holiday interval,
which corresponds to a decrease of about 0.3% over the holiday period. Recall that the




19 The California data prior to 2000 are taken from the National Vital Statistics data.
20 In 2013 ACOG redefined full term birth as deliveries between 37 and 42 weeks to deliveries between 39 and
40 weeks and reclassified deliveries from 37 to 38 weeks as "early term" births (Oster 2018). ACOG also made
specific recommendations on the risk factors that warrant early term delivery, with the implication that early
(timed) deliveries should be avoided when specific risks are not involved (ACOG 2013; Oster 2018).

19
objective of the optimal window is to have this figure as close to 0 as possible.21 When
including Christmas and New Year's in the set of holidays, this figure is similarly small ­
with one more birth per day or a 0.09% increase in total births over the holiday period
(Panel B).


Change in Delivery Type Around Holidays
         Figure 5 breaks out the change in the number of births by delivery type. We create
three mutually exclusive categories: (1) births by cesarean section, (2) vaginal births after the
induction/stimulation of labor and (3) vaginal births after spontaneous labor.22 Note that the
last two categories, by definition, exclude cases that end in a cesarean section. Cesarean
sections decline by about 251, primarily the day of and the day after the holiday. This
represents a 2-day decline in cesarean sections of over 25% relative to a daily average of 443
cesarean sections. These cesarean sections are shifted to both before and after the holiday.
The same basic patterns are found for spontaneous vaginal births and vaginal births after
induction/stimulation of labor. Specifically, on the day of and just after the holiday,
spontaneous vaginal births decline by about 146, representing a decline of about 10% over
the 2-day period given an average day with 709 spontaneous vaginal births.
Induced/stimulated vaginal births decline by about 115 over the 2-day period, representing a
drop of almost 20%. The reduction in cesarean sections on the holiday and the day after
accounts for roughly 50% of the total decline in births. The remaining decline is split
between spontaneous vaginal births (27%) and stimulated/induced vaginal births (27%).23
These findings are consistent with Martin et al. (2018), which finds that the decline in births
due to UK bank holidays is driven primarily by a reduction in scheduled cesarean sections
followed by declines in induced vaginal births.24 Measured across the whole 28-day holiday
interval, we find no meaningful changes in delivery types (see Table 2, Panel A). Both
cesarean section births and induced/stimulated vaginal births decline by 2.4 to 2.7 per day.

21 This -4 births per day (or 28*(-4)=-112) is different from 2.2 births from our manipulation window selection
algorithm because of different regression specifications (equation (2) versus equation (3)).
22 We classify births that are reported as both spontaneous and induced as induced births, and those reported

as both vaginal and cesarean as cesarean sections.
23 Note the sum of C-section, spontaneous vaginal, and induced/stimulated vaginal does not equal the total

birth effect. That is because there is a small missing category (unclassified births). The holiday effect (i.e., the
day of the holiday and the day after) for the unclassified birth category is a reduction of 8 births.
24 Unlike our work, Martin et al. (2018) do not look at the complete displacement of births around the holiday

period, but instead focus on the impacts on the holiday day, the last week day before the holiday, and the first
week day after the holiday.

20
Although the estimated decline is statistically distinguishable from 0 for inductions, it
amounts to a less than 1% decline. Thus, while births and delivery types are rescheduled
across holiday intervals, the likelihood of a given delivery type (e.g., cesarean section
delivery) changes only very modestly.
        While we do not find evidence that holidays change delivery methods, we cannot
rule this possibility out either. For instance, it could be that births shift from spontaneous
vaginal births to induced vaginal births before a holiday, and from induced vaginal births to
spontaneous vaginal births after the holiday. These two effects would wash each other out
and appear as though there was no impact on delivery type. However, as best we can gather,
holidays appear to affect the timing of delivery and not the type of delivery (i.e., consistent
with the second scenario in our conceptual framework).
        The general pattern of findings is quite similar when we include Christmas and New
Year's in the analysis (Table 2, Panel B). The only notable difference is a statistically
significant, albeit very small, increase in spontaneous vaginal births. Interestingly, the
cesarean effects are negative, not positive. The point estimate implies that spontaneous
vaginal births increase by about 0.6% as a result of holidays. In other words, the
rescheduling of cesarean sections and inductions as a result of the holiday means that a few
more births are delivered without medical intervention, a clear but very small change along
the extensive margin of delivery type.


Change in Gestational Length
        A separate but related question to understanding the delivery processes underlying
the retiming of holiday births is when these births get re-timed. We analyze the number of
deliveries by ACOG's definitions of "term pregnancy." Specifically, we classify deliveries
according to the following ACOG categories: (1) pre-term, which is prior to 37 weeks
gestation; (2) early term, which is 37 0/7 weeks through 38 6/7 weeks of gestation; (3) full
term, which is 39 0/7 weeks through 40 6/7 weeks of gestation; (4) late term, which is 41
0/7 weeks through 41 6/7 weeks of gestation; and (5) post-term, which is 42 weeks of
gestation and beyond. We also consider the average length of gestation.
        Figure 6 shows the change in mean gestational age by day (Panel A) and the change
in the number of daily births according to the 5 ACOG term length categories: pre-, early,
full, late and post-term (Panels B-F, respectively). Mean gestational age is about ½ day lower

21
on the day after a holiday, with much of the change on the holiday itself. Although
statistically significant, this decline is neither medically nor economically meaningful relative
to a mean gestational age of about 275 days.
        While mean gestational age is largely unchanged across the holiday interval, the
composition of births by term length does change across the window. If holidays only
affected the timing of "elective" intervention births, we would only expect impacts on births
nearer to full-term. But births of all term lengths, with the exception of late term births,
decline on the holiday itself relative to the counterfactual. Thus, the decline in total holiday
births observed in Figure 1 is composed of births across the gestational age spectrum.
        The rise in births before the holidays is mostly attributable to an increase in the
number of full term births, whereas the increase after the holiday is largely due to a rise in
the number of early term births. Because we cannot pinpoint exactly when these births
would have happened in absence of the holidays, it is difficult to disentangle the exact
mechanisms leading to these patterns. But these results are consistent with full-term births
that would have been due on or near the holiday being moved earlier on average, and with
earlier term births that would have occurred proximate to the holiday being moved later on
average. The asymmetry of this shifting may be because medical professionals worry less
about pushing the timing of full term births to an earlier date.
        Measured across the whole 28-day holiday interval, we find no meaningful change in
gestational length (see Table 3, Panel A). Mean gestational age is about 0.03 days longer in
the holiday period, and this estimate is not statistically significant. Furthermore, the number
of full term births appears unchanged when comparing the holiday period with the control
region. In contrast, we find about 1.5 (1%) more pre-term births per day and nearly 6 (1.6%)
fewer early term births per day on average, corresponding to about 43 more pre-term and
157 fewer early term births in the holiday interval relative to the control region. On the other
hand, late term births increase by about 3.6 (2.6%) per day, and post-term births decline by
3.3 (4.2%) per day on average in the holiday interval. This implies that roughly 100 more late
term births and 93 fewer post-term births occur in the holiday interval, relative to the control
region. Taken together, the net timing of births is changed only modestly relative to what
would occur absent a holiday. When Christmas and New Year's Day are included, all the
term length results are small in magnitude and, with the exception of full term births,
consistently smaller in magnitude than the Panel A estimates. None of the estimates that

22
include Christmas and New Year's is statistically different from zero.


Nature of Selection
         Crucial to our interpretation of the impact of holiday-related birth retiming on
outcomes is an understanding of who is affected by holidays. A priori, medical providers
may be most willing to move births in cases where they already plan to schedule the delivery
but where any rescheduling may be expected to have little impact on birth outcomes. To
assess this possibility, we study how the characteristics of moms and babies differ across
days within the holiday interval.
         We first consider two measures of health risk: 1) whether the pregnancy is "low risk"
and 2) whether the mom is over age 35, the cut-off traditionally used to define "advanced
maternal age." Low risk pregnancies are defined similar to Card et al. (2018) such that all of
the following criteria apply to the birth: (i) singleton, (ii) not breech, (iii) gestation lasted at
least 259 days, (iv) mother was at least 18 and no more than 35 years old, (iv) mother did not
have preeclampsia or eclampsia, (v) mother had no more than 20 prenatal visits, (vi) baby
had no intrauterine growth restriction, and (vii) mother had no previous cesarean section.25
         However, the shift of high-risk (or non-low risk) births away from the holiday is only
apparent for the holiday itself and not, for example, the day after the holiday. This pattern is
corroborated by Panel B of Figure 7, which shows that moms of babies born on a holiday
are less likely to be of "advanced maternal age," a strong predictor of pregnancy
complications (Fretts 2018). On the other hand, as shown in Panels C and D of Figure 7,
women giving birth on a holiday are slightly less likely to be white and more likely to be
teenagers. These patterns may indicate, aside from selection according to health risk, that
socioeconomic status is a predictor of holiday birth timing, with the more advantaged births
more likely to be moved.
         While the timing of births within the holiday manipulation window is clearly
endogenous, in aggregate, births in the manipulation region versus those outside of the
manipulation period should not be subject to selection. That is, if we have chosen a valid
counterfactual, the births inside the holiday manipulation window should be ex-ante


25Card et al. (2018) also exclude current cesarean sections. Since delivery type is one of our outcomes of
interest, we do not make this restriction. In addition, as Card et al. focus on first births, we report our results
on low risk first births as well.

23
otherwise similar to our "control" births, i.e., the counterfactual births outside of the holiday
manipulation window. This assumption, which is crucial to generating valid estimates of the
effect of holidays on birth outcomes, can be partially tested by estimating equation (3) using
births categorized by the characteristics of mothers as dependent variables.
        Across the holiday manipulation window, births based on most characteristics are
balanced (i.e., being within the manipulation window is not correlated with pre-determined
characteristics), with the exception of maternal age and delivery payment type (see Table 4).
On average, 2 fewer babies per day are born to mothers older than 35 (a 1% effect), 5 more
deliveries per day are paid using public funds (a 0.8% effect), and 8.5 fewer deliveries per day
are paid using private funds (a 1.2% effect) in the holiday manipulation window. Aggregated
across the holiday interval, this amounts to 56 fewer births from older mothers, 238 fewer
deliveries using insurance and 146 more using public insurance than in the control region.
Note, however, that these characteristics are not independent. For example, two-thirds of
deliveries by older moms are private pay. None of the other coefficients are statistically
significant and, more importantly, all are small in magnitude. For example, we estimate that
about 0.2% fewer babies are born to mothers with a high school degree or less in the holiday
interval. This pattern holds in both our main holiday analysis (Panel A of Table 4), and when
we add Christmas and New Year's to the analysis (Panel B of Table 4).
        Overall, the selection effects point to no clear direction of bias. But since a
comparison of births within the manipulation window to those outside of the manipulation
window could still be clouded with selection effects, we analyze birth outcomes in the next
section both with and without controls for the background variables for which we find
statistically-significant holiday effects (i.e., maternal age and payment type).


Birth Outcomes
        Holidays shift births both before the holiday and after the holiday. Shifts in either of
these directions may have heterogeneous effects. One plausible hypothesis, supported by the
medical literature, is that moving a birth earlier may lead to an increase in adverse outcomes,
whereas moving a birth later may not. The net effect on birth outcomes would be a weighted
average of the effects on the births pushed earlier and those pushed later. In this case, the
estimated effect on outcomes would not be very informative with regard to the effect of
scheduling a birth early.

24
         Another feature worth pointing out is the degree to which births are manipulated. To
a best approximation, manipulated births are shifted by a couple of days (not a couple of
weeks). Ex-ante, one may presume that extending a pregnancy by a few days is likely to have
minimal effects on outcomes. However, given the discussions amongst ACOG and the
frequency with which birth timing is manipulated (e.g., weekends in addition to holidays),
our estimates on birth outcomes are informative as to whether these common timing
manipulations have deleterious effects. Moreover, ex ante, it is unclear whether the holiday
drop occurs exclusively because of a change in timing as opposed to a change in both the
timing of births and the mode of delivery. An alteration in the delivery mode might increase
the likelihood of adverse outcomes more than a change in the timing of delivery by a few
days.
         Figure 8 shows how mean birth weight, the fraction of births with a newborn
condition, and the fraction of births with a labor complication vary within the holiday
period. 26 The fraction of births with newborn conditions or with labor complications
increases on a holiday by about 0.5 percentage points. These estimates imply increases of
about 4% and 2.5% respectively, although neither estimate is statistically distinguishable
from zero. Babies born on the day of or the day just before or after the holiday have slightly
lower birth weight (between 20 and 30 grams lower off a mean of about 3300 grams) than
would be predicted absent the holiday. The patterns we see here, particularly on holidays, are
consistent with some of the selection effects we observed earlier (i.e., disadvantaged women
are more likely to give birth on the holiday). But for outcomes other than birth weight,
which may be sensitive to staffing levels and quality, the estimates are also congruous with
adverse impacts of reductions in the quantity or quality of staffing.
         Next, we examine the net impact of birth timing on birth outcomes over the entire
28-day holiday interval relative to the control region. As above, we use equation (3) but
consider outcomes such as mean birth weight, or the share of babies that had any newborn
conditions. These estimates are reduced-form impacts, as they average across all births in the
sample. Since only a relatively small number of births are clearly manipulated by the holiday,


26Newborn conditions include conditions related to the central nervous system, respiratory system, digestive
system, and chromosomal anomalies. There are a total of 75 possible conditions. Labor complications (which
include delivery complications) include premature rupture of membrane (>12 hours), cord prolapse, fetal
distress, anesthetic complications, unsuccessful attempt at vaginal birth after cesarean section, and maternal
blood transfusion. There are about 30 possible labor and delivery complications.

25
we also scale the reduced-form effects by an estimate of the fraction of manipulated births
to derive a "LATE." Our best estimate of the manipulated fraction is 0.013; 512 fewer births
on the holiday and day after, divided by a total of about 40,500 births in the manipulation
window. This scaling gives us a sort of IV estimate ­ the effect of manipulating the timing of
a birth, provided that the usual IV assumptions are met, including that the occurrence of
holidays only shifts births away from occurring on the holiday. We are cautious in
interpreting scaled estimates as IV estimates since we cannot measure the manipulated
fraction directly. For example, a cesarean section that would have been scheduled for 2 days
after Thanksgiving but is moved to the Tuesday before Thanksgiving would not be counted
as a manipulated birth according to our back-of-the-envelope calculation. To the extent that
we miss manipulations like this, we will be underestimating the fraction manipulated and
thus, our scaling will deliver upward-biased estimates. Nonetheless, we discuss these scaled
estimates to provide a sort of benchmark of the potential effects on manipulated births.
         As shown in Panel A of Table 5, across the full 28-day holiday interval, we find a 2-
gram lower mean birth weight relative to the counterfactual days (a 0.06% effect). Although
statistically distinguishable from zero, this difference is small.27 The "IV effect" for mean
birth weight implies reductions of roughly 160 grams. When New Year's and Christmas are
included in the analysis, the implied IV estimate is less than one-third that size, and not
statistically significant (see Panel B of Table 5). If we further control for potential selection
in the manipulation window, specifically by including the share of moms over age 35, the
share of private insurance delivery payments and the share of public insurance delivery
payments in Equation (3), the implied IV estimate is about 105 grams (see Appendix Table
1).28 For comparison, the effect of smoking on birth weight is approximately 250 grams
(Almond, Chay, and Lee, 2005) and in twin comparisons, a 150-gram difference in birth
weight would imply a 0.0045 difference in high school completion and a 0.6% difference in
earnings (Black et al., 2007).
         Since changes in birth weight at the mean may not be as meaningful as those in the
tails, we also analyze the share of births that are low birth weight (i.e., below 2,500 grams), or
very low birth weight (i.e., below 1,500 grams). We find that the share of babies with low or

27 The 2-gram decrease from holiday retiming is about the same as the lower bound of the 95th percentile

confidence interval of the estimated impact of a $1000 increase in tax benefits in Schulkind and Shapiro (2014).
28 These controls are motivated by the results in Table 4 (Panel A), as maternal age and payment types are the

only statistically significant selection categories.

26
very low birth weight is slightly higher in the holiday interval, however these effects are small
and not statistically significant (see Table 5 and Appendix Table 2). This finding is consistent
with prior work on financial-related birth timing (Schulkind and Shapiro 2014; Borra et al.
2016; Borra et al. 2018).29
         In contrast, other results imply that holidays modestly reduce the likelihood of
adverse outcomes. For example, we find that the share of births with any newborn
conditions, as well as the share of births with any labor complications, slightly decreases in
the holiday interval ­ by about 1% and 0.4%, respectively. The latter is not statistically
significant. These changes correspond to reductions of about 1.5 (1.2%) fewer births with
any newborn conditions, and 4 (0.6%) fewer births with any labor complications per day in
the holiday window. We also find slight reductions in the mean number of newborn
conditions and labor complications of about 1% and 0.3%, respectively (see Appendix Table
2). We also find declines in the share of newborns that had a low Apgar score30 (see Table 5),
that were in a neo-natal intensive care unit, or that had assisted ventilation (see Appendix
Table 2), although none of these estimates is either statistically significant or economically
meaningful.
         Taken together, these results point to no consistent negative or positive effect of
holiday birth timing on outcomes. Aside from slight reductions in average birth weight, we
find very limited evidence of adverse consequences of the re-timing of births to
accommodate major holidays. We urge some caution in overstating this finding, however:
While the reduction in births in proximity to the holiday is large, it is challenging to precisely
estimate the effect of the holiday displacement on outcomes, since births get retimed over a
relatively wide window (28 days). As John DiNardo was famous for reminding us, dividing a
reduced-form estimate by a small number will likely lead to imprecise estimates.


Sub-sample of High-Risk Pregnancies
         A potentially important caveat to our conclusions about the limited consequences of
holiday-related birth timing is that most pregnancies tend to be low risk. The low risk nature
of most births may make it difficult to pick up any real effects of birth timing. To assess this

29 We urge some caution in this interpretation. Although small and insignificant, the scaled impact implies an
increase of about 18 low birthweight births per day, or about 18% off a base of 98 births.
30 A newborn is defined to have a low Apgar score if either their 1-minute or their 5-minute Apgar score is

below 7.

27
issue, we redo the main analysis on the sample of births to women with high-risk
pregnancies, where high-risk is defined as meeting at least one of the following criteria: mom
had a prior cesarean section, baby is in the breeched position, mom has a multiple birth
pregnancy, or mom has an infection such as HIV. In our sample, about 230 or 16% of births
per day are from high-risk pregnancies. Almost all of these pregnancies result in a cesarean
section birth (94.4%).
        As in the overall sample, births from high-risk pregnancies drop on holidays (see
Figure 9 Panel A). The drop is considerable ­ 150 births off a base of 259 births from high-
risk pregnancies. As expected, given that the high rate of (planned) cesarean section delivery
among this group, the decline is almost entirely driven by cesarean sections (see Figure 9
Panel B). Across the full holiday interval, we find a very small decline in the total number of
births for the high-risk group of about 1.6 high-risk births per day. While ideally this estimate
would be as close to 0 as possible (i.e., within the holiday window, the net number of births
is 0), recall that the optimal window is derived using the full sample of births.31 Importantly,
this effect is not sizable.
         As in the full sample, early term high-risk births that would have occurred on the
holiday appear to be pushed later, and late term high-risk births are pushed earlier (see
Figure 10). However, we find no meaningful effect of birth retiming on the mean gestational
age of high-risk births across the holiday window (see Table 7 and Figure 10). Mean
gestational age increases by only about 0.1 days off a base of 269 days. In the holiday region,
there is a statistically significant and very small reduction of about 2 births with private
insurance payments (see Table 8). The estimates of other selection criteria are even smaller in
magnitude, and not statistically significant. Nonetheless, to address any concern about
selection, we control for delivery payment variables in our birth outcome regressions as a
robustness check (see Appendix Table 3).
         In Table 9, we consider the impact of the holiday on birth outcomes for the high-risk
sample (see Figure 11 for the day-by-day patterns in outcomes). The results point to no clear
health-improving or health-worsening effect of holidays. Mean birth weight decreases by just
over 1 gram, although this estimate is quite imprecise. Scaling by the roughly 159


31To be consistent with the overall sample, we used the optimal manipulation window determined by the
overall sample. If instead, the optimal manipulation window is calculated using only the sample of high-risk
births, the window is [-18, 13].

28
manipulated high-risk births out of a total of 7252 high-risk births over the holiday window
­ or the 2.2% of high-risk births that are manipulated ­ implies a decrease in birth weight on
the order of 60 grams.32 Furthermore, we estimate a small decrease in the share of newborns
with low birth weight, and the share of births with any newborn conditions. The share of
high-risk births with any labor complications, or with a low Apgar score, on the other hand,
is marginally higher in the holiday interval. However, none of these effects are statistically
significant. 
          Overall, in accordance with the results from the main sample, the mounting
evidence does not point to sizable adverse effects of birth timing manipulation. But since the
fraction of births displaced as a result of the holiday is relatively small, precise conclusions
about the size of the effects are not possible.


V.       Robustness and Sensitivity Analysis


         We perform numerous robustness and sensitivity checks. All are consistent with our
main findings that while holidays affect the timing of birth and, in some cases, mode of
delivery, they have limited negative impacts on infant health.


Poisson Regression Models
         To begin, we redo our analysis of daily births, overall and by delivery type, using
Poisson Regression Models (PRM). The PRM is better suited to the count nature of these
daily data. As shown in Appendix Figure 4, estimates from the PRM also show a hollowing
out of the birth distribution over the 28-day holiday period. Declines are observed on the
holiday itself as well as the day after, with small daily increases offsetting the declines spread
out across the rest of the holiday period.
         The PRM estimates of the decline on the holiday and the day after are quite similar
to what we find using a linear regression model of birth counts. Specifically, the PRM
implies a drop in daily births of about 23% on the day of the holiday and 10% the day after,
which is remarkably close to the 346 and 165 birth declines off a daily mean of 1447 births



32Specifically, the manipulated fraction of 2.2% is the 159 birth decline in high-risk births on the holiday off a
base of 259 high-risk births per day over 28 days or 7252 high-risk births overall.

29
from the linear regression models (i.e., reductions of 24% and 11%, respectively).33 Thus, the
use of the linear regression model appears to have limited impact on our conclusions
concerning the daily birth displacements.
         Likewise, our estimates of the aggregate or net effect of holidays on births and
delivery types across the full 28-day holiday period are remarkably similar across the two
models. The estimates in Appendix Table 4, using PRMs, imply a -0.21% decline in daily
births, a -0.4% decline in cesarean sections, a 0.08% increase in spontaneous vaginal births
and a -0.9% decline in induced/stimulated vaginal births. The analogous calculations from
Table 2, imply a -0.28% decline in daily births, -0.5% decline in cesarean sections, 0.07%
increase in spontaneous vaginal births and a -0.9% decline in induced/stimulated vaginal
births relative to their means.


Separating Holiday Effects from Day of Week Effects
         As another specification check, we restrict our analysis to those holidays that fall on
fixed dates and thus varying days of the week across years. The restricted holiday set includes
New Year's, July 4th and Christmas across 17 years. As day-of-the-week effects are strong,
this restriction allows us to better separate out the effect of holidays from any day of the
week effect. The pattern of displacement (see Appendix Figure 5 and Appendix Table 5),
however, follows the same hollowing-out pattern of the earlier figures. This suggests that our
findings are unlikely to be driven by day of the week effects.


Sensitivity to the Holiday Manipulation Window
         We next consider the sensitivity of our analysis to the manipulation window. The
optimal manipulation window was chosen such that the reduction in births right around the
holiday is fully offset with increases in births on either side of the holiday. As discussed
above, however, the length of this manipulation window and the days captured by it have
implications for the control period. Specifically, as the manipulation region becomes wider,
the matched dates are further from the holiday. To address this issue, we test the robustness
of our results to either narrowing or widening the holiday period by 3 days on either side.
Thus, we consider as the treatment period either 8 days before and 13 days after (narrower

33To interpret the PRM coefficients as percent change, we transform them as follows: eb-1. Thus, a coefficient
of -0.26 corresponds to a decline of 23%.

30
window) or 13 days before and 19 days after (wider window) the holiday. In addition, we
consider our "second-best" windows, that is, the windows which according to our grid
search led to the second-lowest absolute value of the sum of excess and missing mass. As
can be seen in Appendix Figure 1, the windows [-10,+18] and [-14,+10] both result in a net
mass of 2.4 births, rather than the 2.2 of our optimal window.
       Appendix Figure 6 shows the evolution of the displacement of births using
alternative window sizes. The broad pattern of birth displacement is not materially affected
by the window choice, which is expected given that the sharp decline in births occurs over
only 2 days and the corresponding increase is spread out over many days on either side of
the holiday. 
       When we consider the net change in births overall and by delivery type, the analysis
makes clear why the optimal [-11, 16] day window is preferred. Specifically, as shown in
Appendix Table 6, a smaller window (Panel B) implies a net drop in births of nearly 10 per
day and a wider window a net increase in births of more than 8 per day. Both of these effects
are statistically significant. It is a window in between the two that comes closer to capturing
the region over which holidays displace births. Similarly, we consider our "second-best"
windows in Panels D and E. The net drop in births for these windows is close to the optimal
window, yet slightly bigger. Thus, all these alternative windows move us further from the
zero net mass heuristic used for identification.
       The findings for selection are quite similar across all windows (see Appendix Table
7). Across all windows, we find some evidence of selection in terms of the share of deliveries
paid for via private insurance, and for three of the five windows considered, there are
significant changes in the number of deliveries paid via public programs. Overall, the degree
of selection appears to be dampened for the non-optimal windows.
       Appendix Table 8 shows our estimates of birth outcome effects as we vary the
window size. Holiday effect estimates for birth weight and numbers of births by outcomes
are sensitive to window size ­ both flip sign with the wider window and decrease in
magnitude as we change window size. However, effect sizes are very modest in magnitude
across all windows. On balance, these results support the conclusion that holiday birth
retiming does not have overwhelming negative impacts on newborn health.




31
     VI.     Interpretation and Mechanisms


Who are the Compliers?
           To better interpret our findings, we characterize the groups that are most likely to
shift their births as a result of the holiday. To do this, we estimate separately by observable
characteristics the percent of births across the manipulation period that are shifted away
from the holiday and the day after. As shown in Appendix Table 9, we estimate this scaling
factor for younger moms versus older moms, defined as age 35 and over; high-risk versus
low-risk births (first births and any parity); non-Hispanic white versus non-Hispanic black,
non-Hispanic Asian and Hispanic moms; moms with a high school education or less versus
college or more; and public versus private pay or self-pay deliveries. As we explain below, we
also consider births at Kaiser Foundation Hospitals. We find that the magnitude of the first
stage is largest for high-risk births. Based on 2.2% manipulated, the fraction of manipulated
births is about 75% higher for the high-risk group than for the sample as a whole. As the
group of high-risk births is especially likely to have a scheduled cesarean section, this is
consistent with our hypothesis that holiday effects are disproportionately driven by re-timed
rather than newly timed births.


Isolating the Role of Patient Demand versus Provider Convenience
           The conceptual framework outlined three mechanisms by which holidays could
affect infant health: the timing of delivery, the mode of delivery, and the quality and/or
quantity of staffing on holidays. It is conceivable, for instance, that some hospitals are
understaffed on holidays, or that the staff in service are less experienced on average on those
days. This might negatively affect neonatal health outcomes, and thus lead to an upward bias
of the effect of birth timing on outcomes. A separate but related question is whether any
change in delivery timing and/or mode is driven by the demand-side (patients) or the
supply-side (providers).
           Unfortunately, our data do not capture the quality or quantity of medical staff
present at birth in our data. To the extent holiday-related changes in demand are predictable,
hospitals may adjust staffing accordingly. We can, however, make some progress on the issue
of provider versus patient demand as a driver of holiday-related birth retiming. To remove
supply side factors from consideration, we focus on certain days that could plausibly affect a

32
woman's scheduling decision but seem unlikely to impact provider work schedules. 
        Specifically, we look at September 11th after 2001, and Friday the 13th, as parents may
want to avoid births on these days.34 Mothers might avoid giving birth on September 11th so
that their child's birthday is not associated with the terrorist attacks of 9/11. Furthermore,
Friday the 13th is considered unlucky in Western culture. Provided that neither of these days
has a direct impact on the staffing of hospitals, analyzing outcomes around these days can
help us to better understand the effects of (re-)scheduled deliveries separately from supply
side effects. However, to the extent that there is heterogeneity in the effects of holidays, it
may be difficult to extrapolate from these two dates.
         When estimating how September 11th and Friday 13th affect our outcomes of interest,
we largely build on our main empirical strategy. That is, we consider the time window
spanned by 11 days prior and 16 days after these days as the manipulation region and control
for all holidays. Put differently, September 11th and Friday 13th are our "holidays" of interest
in this context and actual holidays as well as Halloween and Valentine's Day are treated as
possible confounders and "nuisance holidays."
        Appendix Figure 7 suggests that approximately 115 fewer births occur on September
11th and Friday 13th on average. The change is driven largely by a decline in about 65
cesarean sections. Furthermore, there about 25 fewer inductions and spontaneous vaginal
births are happening on these days. That births get (re-)scheduled around events such as
September 11th and Friday 13th ­ which presumably leave the quality and quantity of the
supply side unaffected ­ suggests that demand side factors might account for some of the
holiday birth timing manipulations. In other words, these results suggest that holiday birth
timing manipulation might in part be driven by patients' preferences. On the other hand, the
magnitude of the change in births is only about 20% of what we find for major holidays,
suggesting that provider preferences likely play an important role in the rescheduling of
births around holidays. 
         As another test of the role of providers, we consider births at Kaiser Foundation




34To induce supply side variation, we also investigated how the annual ACOG meetings affect birth timing.
Past work (Gans, Leigh, Varganova 2007) shows evidence that births fall in United States during the meetings
by 1% but use national data and an earlier time period (1990-2003) along with a less-controlled regression
specification. However, we did not find that the meetings affected birth timing even though many of the
meetings occurred in California.

33
Hospitals, which are primarily births by Kaiser Permanente members.35 The Kaiser system,
which owns its hospitals in California, has a strong disincentive to perform elective cesarean
sections over vaginal births since they are paid per member per month rather than fee-for-
service and cesarean sections are more resource-intensive. Consistent with the idea that
provider decisions matter for retimed deliveries, our analysis finds that less than 0.65% of
Kaiser deliveries in the holiday window are retimed in contrast to about 1.26% for the
sample as a whole (see the last row of Appendix Table 9). Thus, while patient preferences
matter, the analysis here suggests that provider incentives play a crucial role in holiday-
related birth retiming. That is, one sees more holiday-related retiming where providers face
less of a disincentive to electively schedule births.




VII. Conclusions


           Consistent with previous studies, we find that births are less common on holidays.
Births that would have otherwise occurred on holidays are shifted to both the two weeks
before and after the holiday, with most of the retiming occurring within +/- 1 week. This
large window of birth timing adjustment suggests caution should be used in birth-date based
regression discontinuity research designs when the regression discontinuity relies on
birthdates near a holiday.
           We find clear evidence that holidays shift the timing of births on the intensive
margin. That is, among births scheduled via cesarean section or induction, holidays affect
the precise timing of these procedures. We find little support for the idea that holidays affect
birth timing on the extensive margin, i.e., that more births are scheduled via cesarean section
or induction as a result of holidays, given that there is no net change in delivery types.
Consistent with the conclusion that changes are largely on the intensive margin, we find that
high-risk pregnancies are more likely to be shifted as a result of holidays. That said, extensive
margin changes cannot be ruled out without knowing the intended delivery plan of mothers
in our sample.
           We also find suggestive evidence that the supply-channel (i.e., provider choice)
dominates holiday-related birth retiming. Our evidence is twofold. First, we find that in

35   The exception would be for emergency deliveries.

34
Kaiser Foundation Hospitals, where financial incentives work against elective delivery
scheduling, holiday related birth timing is a much smaller share of births around holidays
than in hospitals that lack such incentives. Second, we find modest birth retiming on Friday
the 13th and September 11 after 2001, two days that should be more salient to patients than
providers. This suggests that the demand-side channel (i.e., patient choice) plays a perhaps
more limited role in holiday-related birth timing.
          Across our sample, we find little consistent evidence of unfavorable health
consequences as a result of holiday-related birth timing. This is true for the overall sample
and the sample of high-risk births. This finding contrasts somewhat with the conclusions
from studies of deadline-based financial incentives to retime births such as Schulkind and
Shapiro (2014) and Borra et al (2016; 2018). This difference may reflect the fact that holidays
provide flexibility to retime births to either before or after the reference date whereas
financial incentives act in one direction (i.e., either move births earlier or later), or that the
set of parents who choose to time their child's birth in response to financial incentives is
selected. That said, some caution is warranted in extrapolating our findings given the
relatively small share of births (0.013 as a lower bound) that get moved across the holiday
period.
          As the rate of medical interventions in the delivery process is much higher than it
was decades ago, worries about the possible adverse effects of intervening linger. Our quasi-
experimental results, using holidays as a natural experiment, can be informative in that
regard. As the delivery mode is not impacted in aggregate, these results are most useful for
guiding decisions on when to intervene (and not on whether to intervene). Even absent our
extrapolation to understanding the effects of timing delivery interventions, this work is
beneficial for hospitals deciding on holiday policies regarding staffing and the use of medical
interventions such as cesarean sections, inductions, and stimulations. Our results suggest that
the current shifting of births to accommodate the holiday plans of both providers and
patients does not have large adverse health consequences for either newborns or their moms
at delivery.




35
VII. References

ACOG. "Clinical Management Guidelines for Obstetrician-Gynecologist. Induction of
     Labor." Practice Bulletin 10 (2009).

ACOG. "Committee Opinion." No. 560, April 2013, www.acog.org/-/media/Committee-
     Opinions/Committee-on-Obstetric-
     Practice/co560.pdf?dmc=1&ts=20151219T0215099943. Accessed January 10, 2019.

ACOG. "Guidelines for Perinatal Care." 2012, www.circulomedicodezarate.org/e-
     books/Guidelines_for_Perinatal_Care.pdf. Accessed January 4, 2019.

ACOG. "Labor Induction." 2017,            www.acog.org/Patients/FAQs/Labor-Induction.
     Accessed January 4, 2019.

Almond, Douglas, Christine Pal Chee, Maria Micaela Sviatschi, and Nan Zhong. "Auspicious
      Birth Dates among Chinese in California." Economics & Human Biology No. 18 (2015):
      153-159.

Almond, Douglas, Kenneth Y. Chay, and David S. Lee. "The Costs of Low Birth
      Weight." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 120, No. 3 (2005): 1031-1083.

Bailit, Jennifer L., William Grobman, Yuan Zhao, Ronald J. Wapner, Uma M. Reddy,
         Michael W. Varner, Kenneth J. Leveno et al. "Nonmedically Indicated Induction vs.
         Expectant Treatment in Term Nulliparous Women." American Journal of Obstetrics and
         Gynecology 212, No. 1 (2015): 103-e1.

Barreca, Alan I., Jason M. Lindo, and Glen R. Waddell. "Heaping-Induced Bias in
       Regression-Discontinuity Designs." Economic Inquiry 54, No. 1 (2016): 268-293.

Bauer, Thomas K., Stefan Bender, Jörg Heining, and Christoph M. Schmidt. "The Lunar
       Cycle, Sunspots and the Frequency of Births in Germany, 1920­1989." Economics &
       Human Biology 11, No. 4 (2013): 545-550.

Berghella, Vincenzo. "cesarean Delivery: Preoperative Planning and                  Patient
       Preparation." UptoDate, Lockwood, C (Ed), UptoDate, Waltham, MA. (2018).

Bialik, Carl. "Some People Are Too Superstitious To Have A Baby on Friday The 13th."
        FiveThirtyEight, 13 May 2018, fivethirtyeight.com/features/some-people-are-too-
        superstitious-to-have-a-baby-on-friday-the-13th. Accessed January 3, 2019. 

Black, Mairead, Siladitya Bhattacharya, Sam Philip, Jane E. Norman, and David J. McLernon.
       "Planned cesarean Delivery at Term and Adverse Outcomes in Childhood
       Health." Jama 314, No. 21 (2015): 2271-2279.




36
Black, Sandra E., Paul J. Devereux, and Kjell G. Salvanes. "From the Cradle to the Labor
        Market? The Effect of Birth Weight on Adult Outcomes." The Quarterly Journal of
        Economics 122, No. 1 (2007): 409-439.

Borra, Cristina, Libertad González, and Almudena Sevilla. "Birth Timing and Neonatal
       Health." American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 106, No. 5 (2016): 329-32.

Borra, C., L. Gonzalez, and A. Sevilla Sanz. "The Impact of Scheduling Birth Early on Infant
        Health." Journal of the European Economic Association (2018).

Borst, Lyle B., and M. Osley. "Holiday Effects upon Natality." American Journal of Obstetrics &
        Gynecology 122, No. 7 (1975): 902-903.

Boulvain, Michel, Catalin M. Stan, and Olivier Irion. "Membrane Sweeping for Induction of
       Labour." Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 1 (2005).

Brunner, Beatrice, and Andreas Kuhn. "Announcement Effects of Health Policy Reforms:
      Evidence from the Abolition of Austria's Baby Bonus." The European Journal of Health
      Economics 15, No. 4 (2014): 373-388.

Card, David, Alessandra Fenizia, and David Silver. "The Health Effects of cesarean Delivery
       for Low-Risk First Births." No. w24493. NBER working paper, 2018.

Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, Tore Olsen, and Luigi Pistaferri. "Adjustment Costs, Firm
        Responses, and Micro vs. Macro Labor Supply Elasticities: Evidence from Danish
        Tax Records." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 126, No. 2 (2011): 749-804.

Cohen, Jacob. "Applied Multiple Regression/Correlation Analysis for the Behavioral
      Sciences." Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum No. 81 (1983).

Dee, Thomas S., Will Dobbie, Brian A. Jacob, and Jonah Rockoff. "The Causes and
      Consequences of Test Score Manipulation: Evidence from the New York Regents
      Examinations." No. w22165. NBER working paper, 2016.

Diamond, Rebecca, and Petra Persson. "The long-term consequences of teacher discretion
      in grading of high-stakes tests." No. w22207. NBER working paper, 2017.

Dickert-Conlin, Stacy, and Amitabh Chandra. "Taxes and the Timing of Births." Journal of
       Political Economy 107, No. 1 (1999): 161-177.

Edmonds, Keith. Dewhurst's Textbook on Obstetrics and Gynaecology. Wiley-Blackwell, 2008.

Figlio, David, Jonathan Guryan, Krzysztof Karbownik, and Jeffrey Roth. "The Effects of
        Poor Neonatal Health on Children's Cognitive Development." American Economic
        Review 104, No. 12 (2014): 3921-55.




37
Fretts, Ruth C. "Effects of Advanced Maternal Age on Pregnancy" Updated on September
        4, 2018. https://www.uptodate.com/contents/effects-of-advanced-maternal-age-on-
        pregnancy. Accessed January 18, 2019.

Galal, M., I. Symonds, H. Murray, F. Petraglia, and R. Smith. "Postterm pregnancy." Facts,
       Views & Vision in ObGyn 4, No. 3 (2012): 175.

Gans, Joshua S., and Andrew Leigh. "Born on the First of July: An (Un)Natural Experiment
       in Birth Timing." Journal of Public Economics No. 93.1-2 (2009): 246-263.

Gans, Joshua S., Andrew Leigh, and Elena Varganova. "Minding the Shop: The Case of
       Obstetrics Conferences." Social Science & Medicine 65, No. 7 (2007): 1458-1465.

Gelman, A., John Carlin, Hal Stern, David Dunson, Aki Vehtari, and Donald Rubin: Bayesian
      Data Analysis. Chapman & Hall/CRC Texts in Statistical Science, No. 3 (2013).

Goodman, Michael J., Winnie W. Nelson, and Michael V. Maciosek. "Births by Day of
     Week: A Historical Perspective." Journal of Midwifery & Women's Health 50, No. 1
     (2005): 39-43.

Gould, Jeffrey B., Cheng Qin, Amy R. Marks, and Gilberto Chavez. "Neonatal Mortality in
       Weekend vs. Weekday Births." Jama 289, No. 22 (2003): 2958-2962.

Grobman, W.A., Rice, M.M., Reddy, U.M., Tita, A.T., Silver, R.M., Mallett, G., Hill, K.,
     Thom, E.A., El-Sayed, Y.Y., Perez-Delboy, A. and Rouse, D.J., "Labor Induction
     versus Expectant Management in Low-Risk Nulliparous Women." New England
     Journal of Medicine 379, No. 6 (2018): 513-523.

Hamilton, Patti, and Elizabeth Restrepo. "Sociodemographic Factors Associated with
       Weekend Birth and Increased Risk of Neonatal Mortality." Journal of Obstetric,
       Gynecologic & Neonatal Nursing 35, No. 2 (2006): 208-214.

Hannah, Mary E., Walter J. Hannah, Jonathan Hellmann, Sheila Hewson, Ruth Milner,
      Andrew Willan, and Canadian Multicenter Post-term Pregnancy Trial Group*.
      "Induction of Labor as Compared with Serial Antenatal Monitoring in Post-Term
      Pregnancy: A Randomized Controlled Trial." New England Journal of Medicine 326, No.
      24 (1992): 1587-1592.

Hawe, E., A. MacFarlane, and J. Bithell. "Daily and Seasonal Variation in Live Births,
      Stillbirths and Infant Mortality in England and Wales, 1979-96." Health Statistics
      Quarterly 9 (2001): 5-15.

Hendry, Robert A. "The Weekend--A Dangerous Time to Be Born?" BJOG: An International
      Journal of Obstetrics & Gynaecology 88, No. 12 (1981): 1200-1203.




38
Hong, J. S., H. C. Kang, S-W. Yi, Y. J. Han, C. M. Nam, B. Gombojav, and H. Ohrr. "A
       Comparison of Perinatal Mortality in Korea on Holidays and Working Days." BJOG:
       An International Journal of Obstetrics & Gynaecology 113, No. 11 (2006): 1235-1238.

Jürges, Hendrik. "Financial Incentives, Timing of Births, and Infant Health: A Closer Look
        into the Delivery Room." The European Journal of Health Economics 18, No. 2 (2017):
        195-208.

Kavanagh, Josephine, A. J. Kell, and Jane Thomas. 2005. "Breast Stimulation for Cervical
      Ripening and Induction of Labour," Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 3,
      Article No. CD003392.

Kleven, Henrik Jacobsen. "Bunching." 2016. Annual Review of Economics 8: 435-464.

Kleven, Henrik J., and Mazhar Waseem. 2013. "Using Notches to Uncover Optimization
       Frictions and Structural Elasticities: Theory and Evidence from Pakistan." The
       Quarterly Journal of Economics 128, No. 2: 669-723.

LaLumia, Sara, James M. Sallee, and Nicholas Turner. "New Evidence on Taxes and the
      Timing of Birth." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 7, No. 2 (2015): 258-93.

Levy, Becca R., Pil H. Chung, and Martin D. Slade. "Influence of Valentine's Day and
       Halloween on Birth Timing." Social Science & Medicine 73, No. 8 (2011): 1246-1248.

Lin, Herng-Ching, Sudha Xirasagar, and Yu-Chi Tung. "Impact of a Cultural Belief about
       Ghost Month on Delivery Mode in Taiwan." Journal of Epidemiology & Community
       Health 60, No. 6 (2006): 522-526.

Lo, J. C. "Auspicious Time and Caesarean Section." Taiwan J Public Health 22 (2003): 134-
        140.

Luthy, David A., Judith A. Malmgren, and Rosalee W. Zingheim. "cesarean Delivery after
       Elective Induction in Nulliparous Women: The Physician Effect." American Journal of
       Obstetrics and Gynecology 191, No. 5 (2004): 1511-1515.

Macfarlane, Alison. "Variations in Number of Births and Perinatal Mortality by Day of Week
       in England and Wales." Br Med J 2, No. 6153 (1978): 1670-1673.

Mangold, William D. "Neonatal Mortality by the Day of the Week in the 1974-75 Arkansas
      Live Birth Cohort." American Journal of Public Health 71, No. 6 (1981): 601-605.

Martin, Peter, Mario Cortina-Borja, Mary Newburn, Gill Harper, Rod Gibson, Miranda
       Dodwell, Nirupa Dattani, and Alison Macfarlane. "Timing of Singleton Births by
       Onset of Labour and Mode of Birth in NHS Maternity Units in England, 2005­
       2014: A Study of Linked Birth Registration, Birth Notification, and Hospital Episode
       Data." PloS one 13, No. 6 (2018): e0198183.



39
Mathers, C. D. "Births and Perinatal Deaths in Australia: Variations by Day of
       Week." Journal of Epidemiology & Community Health 37, No. 1 (1983): 57-62.

Modlock, J., Birgitte Bruun Nielsen, and N. Uldbjerg. "Acupuncture for the Induction of
      Labour: A Double-Blind Randomised Controlled Study." BJOG: An International
      Journal of Obstetrics & Gynaecology 117, No. 10 (2010): 1255-1261.

Neugart, Michael, and Henry Ohlsson. "Economic Incentives and the Timing of Births:
      Evidence from the German Parental Benefit Reform of 2007." Journal of Population
      Economics 26, No. 1 (2013): 87-108.

Nielsen, Peter E., Bobby C. Howard, Christina C. Hill, Penny L. Larson, Robert HB
       Holland, and Paul N. Smith. "Comparison of Elective Induction of Labor with
       Favorable Bishop Scores versus Expectant Management: A Randomized Clinical
       Trial." The Journal of Maternal-Fetal & Neonatal Medicine 18, No. 1 (2005): 59-64.

Oster, Emily. "Expert Behavior Change in Response to Best Practice Changes: Evidence
       from           Obstetrics."          working             paper           (2018),
       www.brown.edu/research/projects/oster/sites/brown.edu.research.projects.oster/fi
       les/uploads/DoctorResponse.pdf. Accessed January 4, 2019.

Osterman MJK and JA Martin. "Recent Declines in Induction of Labor by Gestational
      Age."      2019.       NCHS          Data        Brief       155,     2014b,
      www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/databriefs/db155.pdf. Accessed January 4, 2019.

Pasupathy, Dharmintra, Angela M. Wood, Jill P. Pell, Michael Fleming, and Gordon CS
       Smith. "Time of Birth and Risk of Neonatal Death at Term: Retrospective Cohort
       Study." Bmj 341 (2010): c3498.

Pillod, Rachel A., Mekhala Dissanayake, Yvonne W. Cheng, and Aaron B. Caughey. 2019.
        Association of widespread adoption of the 39-week rule with overall mortality due to
        stillbirth and infant death. JAMA Pediatrics 173, no. 2: 1180-1185.

Restrepo, Elizabeth, Patricia Hamilton, Fuqin Liu, and Peggy Mancuso. "Relationships
       among Neonatal Mortality, Hospital Volume, Weekday Demand, and Weekend
       Birth." Canadian Journal of Nursing Research 50, No. 2 (2018): 64-71.

Rindfuss, Ronald R., Judith L. Ladinsky, Elizabeth Coppock, Victor W. Marshall, and A. S.
       Macpherson. "Convenience and the Occurrence of Births Induction of Labor in the
       United States and Canada." International Journal of Health Services 9, No. 3 (1979): 439-
       460.

Royer, H., 2009. "Separated at Girth: US twin Estimates of the Effects of Birth
       Weight." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 1(1), 49-85.

Saccone, Gabriele, and Vincenzo Berghella. "Omega-3 Supplementation to Prevent
       Recurrent Preterm Birth: A Systematic Review and Metaanalysis of Randomized

40
       Controlled Trials." American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology 213, No. 2 (2015): 135-
       140.

Saez, Emmanuel. "Do Taxpayers Bunch at Kink Points?" American Economic Journal: Economic
       Policy 2.3 (2010): 180-212.

Schulkind, Lisa, and Teny Maghakian Shapiro. "What a Difference a Day Makes:
       Quantifying the Effects of Birth Timing Manipulation on Infant Health." Journal of
       Health Economics 33 (2014): 139-158.

Smith, Caroline, Caroline A. Crowther, and Suzanne J. Grant. "Acupuncture for Induction
       of Labour." Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 8 (2013).

Spong, Catherine Y., Brian M. Mercer, Mary D'Alton, Sarah Kilpatrick, Sean Blackwell, and
       George Saade. "Timing of Indicated Late-Preterm and Early-Term Birth." Obstetrics
       and Gynecology 118, No. 2 Pt 1 (2011): 323.

Stephansson, Olof, Paul W. Dickman, Anna LV Johansson, Helle Kieler, and Sven
       Cnattingius. "Time of Birth and Risk of Intrapartum and Early Neonatal
       Death." Epidemiology (2003): 218-222.

Tamm, Marcus. "The impact of a large parental leave benefit reform on the timing of birth
      around the day of implementation." Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 75, No. 4
      (2013): 585-601.

Tita, A.T., Landon, M.B., Spong, C.Y., Lai, Y., Leveno, K.J., Varner, M.W., Moawad, A.H.,
        Caritis, S.N., Meis, P.J., Wapner, R.J. and Sorokin, Y., "Timing of Elective Repeat
        cesarean Delivery at Term and Neonatal Outcomes." New England Journal of
        Medicine 360, No. 2 (2009): 111-120.

Walker, Kate F., Philippa Wilson, George J. Bugg, Anna Dencker, and Jim G. Thornton.
       "Childbirth Experience Questionnaire: Validating its Use in the United
       Kingdom." BMC Pregnancy and Childbirth 15, No. 1 (2015): 86.

Zhang, Jun, James Troendle, Uma M. Reddy, S. Katherine Laughon, D. Ware Branch,
       Ronald Burkman, Helain J. Landy et al. "Contemporary cesarean Delivery Practice in
       the United States." American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology 203, No. 4 (2010): 326-
       e1.

Zhang, J., Landy, H.J., Branch, D.W., Burkman, R., Haberman, S., Gregory, K.D., Hatjis,
       C.G., Ramirez, M.M., Bailit, J.L., Gonzalez-Quintero, V.H. and Hibbard, J.U.,
       "Contemporary Patterns of Spontaneous Labor with Normal Neonatal
       Outcomes." Obstetrics and Gynecology 116, No. 6 (2010): 1281.




41
Figure 1. Distribution of the Number of Births Across Different Days
A. California, 2000-2016                                            B. United States, 1968-1988




Notes: These figures show the distribution of daily births (as represented in Z-scores) for three types of days: holidays, non-
holiday weekends, and other days. The top panel is for California and the bottom panel is for the entire United States. The set of
holidays contains New Year's Day, Presidents' Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving, and Christmas
Day.
Figure 2: Graphical Representation of Estimation Strategy
A. Illustrative Example with a Hypothetical Manipulation Window




B. Estimated Manipulation Window




Notes: This figure illustrates how days in the manipulation window are matched with days of the same day of the week in the control
region. Panel (A) illustrates this for a hypothetical example for which the estimated window is [-3,+3] and all holidays fall on a Thursday.
Since the control region before and after the holiday must include days that fall on the same day of the week, the control region for this
hypothetical example contains days 7-10 before and days 8-10 after a holiday. Panel (B) illustrates the matching prodecure for the actual
estimated manipulation window, i.e., [-11,+16]. As all days are matched with the closest days that fall on the same day of the week in the
control region, the control group therefore spans 14-25 days before a holiday and 22-37 days after a holiday.
Figure 3. The Effect of a Holiday on the Daily Number of Births in California: 2000-
2016




Notes: This figure shows the effect of a holiday on the daily number of births. Plotted are regression estimates
from equation (2) with daily births as the dependent variable. On the x-axis is the day relative to the holiday (-1
=day before holiday, 1=day after holiday, etc.). On the y-axis are estimates of the day relative to holiday dummy
coefficients from equation (2) along with the 95% confidence interval.
Figure 4. The Effect of a Holiday on the Daily Number of Births in California over
Time




Notes: This figure shows the effect of a holiday on the daily number of births for different time periods
(1972-1974, 1986-1988, 2000-2002, 2014-2016). Plotted are Poisson estimates of equation (2). On the x-axis is
the day relative to the holiday (-1=day before holiday, 1=day after holiday, etc.). On the y-axis are estimates of
the day relative to holiday dummy coefficients from equation (2).
Figure 5. Shift in the Number of Births due to a Holiday by Delivery Type in California: 2000-2016

A. Cesarean Section Births                                           B. Induced/Stimulated Vaginal Births




C. Spontaneous Vaginal Births




Notes: This figure shows the effect of a holiday on the daily number of cesarean section births (Panel A), induced/stimulated
vaginal births (Panel B), and spontaneous vaginal births (Panel C). Plotted are regression estimates from equation (2). On the x-
axis is the day relative to the holiday (-1=day before holiday, 1=day after holiday, etc.). On the y-axis are estimates of the day
relative to holiday dummy coefficients from equation (2) along with the 95% confidence interval.
Figure 6. Shift in Births due to a Holiday by Gestational Length in California: 2000-2016

A. Mean Gestational Length in Days                        B. Number of Pre-Term Births                                 C. Number of Early Term Births




D. Number of Full Term Births                             E. Number of Late Term Births                                F. Number of Post-Term Births




Notes: This figure shows the effect of a holiday on the mean gestation length (Panel A) as well as the number of daily births by term length category: pre-term meaning
before 37 weeks (Panel B); early term or 37 0/7 weeks to 38 6/7 weeks (Panel C); full term or 39 0/7 weeks to 40 6/7 weeks (Panel D), late term or 41 0/7 weeks to 41 6/7
weeks (Panel E); and post-term or 42 weeks and later (Panel F). Plotted are regression estimates from equation (2). On the x-axis is the day relative to the holiday (-1=day
before holiday, 1=day after holiday, etc.). On the y-axis are estimates of the day relative to holiday dummy coefficients from equation (2) along with the 95% confidence
interval.
Figure 7. Shift in the Number of Births due to a Holiday by Maternal Characteristics in California:
2000-2016
A. Low-Risk Pregnancy                                                B. Age of Mother over 35




C. White Mother                                                      D. Teenage Mother




Notes: This figure shows the effect of a holiday on the fraction of births that are low risk (Panel A), fraction of births born to a
mother over 35 (Panel B), fraction of births to a white mother (Panel C), and fraction of births to a teenage mom (Panel D).
Plotted are regression estimates from equation (2). On the x-axis is the day relative to the holiday (-1=day before holiday, 1=day
after holiday, etc.). On the y-axis are estimates of the day relative to holiday dummy coefficients from equation (2) along with the
95% confidence interval.
Figure 8. Birth Outcomes Contrasted with Counterfactual by Day Relative to Holiday in California:
2000-2016

A. Mean Birth Weight in Grams                                          B. Any Newborn Conditions




C. Any Labor Complications




Notes: This figure shows the effect of a holiday on mean birth weight (Panel A), fraction of births with a noted newborn
condition (Panel B) and the fraction of births with a noted labor complication (Panel C). Plotted are regression estimates from
equation (2). On the x-axis is the day relative to the holiday (-1=day before holiday, 1=day after holiday, etc.). On the y-axis are
estimates of the day relative to holiday dummy coefficients from equation (2) along with the 95% confidence interval.
Figure 9. Shift in the Number of Births due to a Holiday for High-Risk Pregnancies in California:
2000-2016
A. Births                                                              B. Cesarean Section Deliveries




Notes: This figure shows the effect of a holiday for high-risk pregnancies on the daily number of births (Panel A) and the number
of cesarean section deliveries (Panel B). Plotted are regression estimates from equation (2). On the x-axis is the day relative to the
holiday (-1=day before holiday, 1=day after holiday, etc.). On the y-axis are estimates of the day relative to holiday dummies from
equation (2) along with the 95% confidence interval.
Figure 10. Shift in the Number of Births due to a Holiday by Gestational Length for High-Risk Pregancies in California: 2000-2016

A. Mean Gestational Length in Days                          B. Number of Pre-Term Births                                 C. Number of Early Term Births




D. Number of Full Term Births                               E. Number of Late Term Births                                F. Number of Post-Term Births




Notes: This figure shows the effect of a holiday on the mean gestation length (Panel A) as well as the number of daily births by term length category: pre-term meaning
before 37 weeks (Panel B); early term or 37 0/7 weeks to 38 6/7 weeks (Panel C); full term or 39 0/7 weeks to 40 6/7 weeks (Panel D), late term or 41 0/7 weeks to 41 6/7
weeks (Panel E); and post-term or 42 weeks and later (Panel F) for high-risk pregnancies. Plotted are regression estimates from equation (2). On the x-axis is the day relative
to the holiday (-1=day before holiday, 1=day after holiday, etc.). On the y-axis are estimates of the day relative to holiday dummy coefficients from equation (2) along with
the 95% confidence interval.
Figure 11. Birth Outcomes Contrasted with Counterfactual by Day Relative to Holiday for High-
Risk Births in California: 2000-2016
A. Mean Birth Weight in Grams                                       B. Any Newborn Conditions




C. Any Labor Complications




Notes: This figure shows the effect of a holiday on mean birth weight (Panel A), fraction of births with a noted newborn
condition (Panel B), and the fraction of births with noted labor complication (Panel C) for high-risk pregnancies. Plotted are
regression estimates from equation (2). On the x-axis is the day relative to the holiday (-1=day before holiday, 1=day after
holiday, etc.). On the y-axis are estimates of the day relative to holiday dummy coefficients from equation (2) along with the 95%
confidence interval.
Appendix Figure 1. Excess Births - Missing Births for Varying Windows around a Holiday
                                                                                       Days after holiday

                               21    20    19    18    17    16    15    14    13    12    11    10    9     8     7     6     5     4     3
                         21    1021 943.1 888.1 810.2 797.2 746.0 638.8 561.1 527.7 477.9 457.9 384.3 349.4 328.2 279.6 325.6 313.2 296.0 220.1
                         20    1040 977.0 909.7 852.2 774.9 771.8 703.4 436.2 375.7 313.0 261.8 189.2 124.9 110.9 268.0 291.5 283.3 246.1 194.4
                         19   963.3 919.1 892.9 849.3 802.8 806.0 749.2 418.4 355.7 294.0 246.1 174.7 116.4 106.0 293.6 304.1 289.2 254.7 197.2
                         18   870.5 860.6 843.8 825.3 792.0 794.0 732.6 359.0 299.2 240.6 194.3 125.5                  75.7    69.9 272.1 280.6 266.0 225.6 166.9
                         17   814.6 810.3 805.2 774.8 750.3 738.7 682.0 299.4 246.4 191.3 151.4                93.2    52.6    52.8 258.7 272.5 255.1 217.2 157.4
                         16   750.8 746.8 740.0 717.7 697.5 668.3 613.4 257.3 206.9 155.2 114.2                63.0    29.5    39.5 264.4 273.4 253.0 207.8 142.3
                         15   686.7 683.0 673.7 641.9 616.9 587.7 540.3 211.2 166.5 117.0              73.6    29.5      4.6   16.2 245.7 253.1 228.2 179.6 112.7
   Days before holiday




                         14   638.8 627.7 616.0 577.1 550.6 520.8 481.3 171.8 126.8            79.5    41.3      2.4 -21.1      -7.0 220.7 223.1 198.2 152.0              90.6
                         13   399.0 329.4 263.2 211.8 164.6 134.8 119.3         26.8     -7.5 -47.1 -94.7 -133.7 -172.0 -174.8 -71.2 -62.2 -57.2 -88.5 -106.4
                         12   327.3 259.5 192.9 141.5      95.6   68.0   56.5 -63.8 -96.3 -130.1 -173.0 -200.5 -231.0 -225.8 -114.2 -103.9 -99.9 -129.4 -143.3
                         11   250.7 178.5 112.0     63.4   24.4    2.2    -3.4 -112.7 -132.7 -153.3 -186.6 -199.1 -222.0 -213.5 -154.2 -136.8 -131.8 -156.6 -166.4
                         10   185.8 110.4    41.9    -2.4 -34.0 -50.4 -48.6 -144.9 -158.9 -169.2 -192.6 -202.2 -222.9 -218.1 -160.8 -140.3 -136.2 -157.4 -168.3
                         9    119.4   40.9 -22.0 -62.4 -86.7 -96.9 -89.6 -164.6 -176.6 -183.8 -202.5 -214.5 -233.9 -228.0 -170.9 -149.5 -148.3 -169.0 -176.9
                         8     19.0 -59.3 -120.4 -152.4 -171.3 -172.5 -162.5 -217.8 -223.5 -224.3 -232.2 -247.3 -267.3 -259.9 -199.6 -175.0 -174.9 -193.6 -207.5
                         7     -58.5 -136.3 -189.9 -216.3 -230.2 -226.8 -217.6 -258.3 -256.3 -250.1 -254.9 -268.1 -290.0 -278.5 -214.8 -190.4 -190.1 -210.4 -226.5
                         6    -108.6 -189.1 -223.0 -255.4 -261.0 -270.7 -294.4 -409.1 -414.1 -420.0 -426.0 -440.5 -439.4 -418.2 -304.0 -273.4 -266.6 -281.5 -300.4
                         5    -187.9 -276.8 -313.5 -344.1 -350.3 -358.1 -374.0 -462.6 -462.8 -463.5 -464.1 -467.6 -463.4 -440.1 -323.4 -292.8 -285.8 -301.3 -319.0
                         4    -247.1 -334.3 -375.4 -405.5 -415.5 -427.7 -439.4 -516.1 -512.5 -502.4 -495.9 -488.6 -483.6 -461.2 -348.6 -317.9 -311.8 -327.4 -345.0
                         3    -305.8 -391.7 -436.7 -466.8 -483.4 -494.6 -503.8 -563.5 -559.2 -539.3 -525.5 -515.9 -508.4 -485.8 -374.4 -344.5 -339.0 -355.2 -373.4

Notes: This figure shows the excess minus the missing number of births for varying windows around a holiday. We choose as the optimal window the one that minimizes the
absolute value of this criterion. For our case, the optimal window is the range of days from 11 days before a holiday through 16 days after a holiday.
Appendix Figure 2. Shift in the Number of Births due to a Holiday including
Christmas and New Years in California: 2000-2016




Notes: This figure shows the effect of a holiday on births. In this graph, the set of holidays considered is New
Year's Day, Presidents' Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving, and Christmas.
Plotted are regression estimates from equation (2). On the x-axis is the day relative to the holiday (-1=day
before holiday, 1=day after holiday, etc.). On the y-axis are estimates of the day relative to holiday dummy
coefficients from equation (2) along with the 95% confidence interval.
Appendix Figure 3. The Holiday Decline by Specific Holiday




Notes: This figure shows, for each holiday, the mean number of births on that holiday minus the mean of the
daily number of births for California from 2000-2016.
Appendix Figure 4. Poisson Model Estimates of the Shift in the Number of Births
due to a Holiday in California: 2000-2016




Notes: This figure shows the effect of a holiday on the daily number of births. Estimates are derived from a
Poisson model. On the x-axis is the day relative to the holiday (-1=day before holiday, 1=day after holiday, etc.).
On the y-axis are estimates of the day relative to holiday dummy coefficients from equation (2) along with the
95% confidence interval.
Appendix Figure 5. Shift in the Number of Births due to a Holiday using Holidays
that Rotate Days of the Week in California: 2000-2016




Notes: This figure shows the effect of a holiday on births. The holidays considered as those that do not occur
on the same day of the week each year - New Year's Day, Independence Day, and Christmas. Plotted are
regression estimates from equation (2). On the x-axis is the day relative to the holiday (-1=day before holiday,
1=day after holiday, etc.). On the y-axis are estimates of the day relative to holiday dummy coefficients from
equation (2) along with the 95% confidence interval.
Appendix Figure 6: Shift in the Number of Births due to a Holiday in California Varying the
Holiday Window: 2000-2016

A. Windows that are 3 Days Wider / Narrower Than                    B. "Second-best" Optimal Windows, According to
Optimal Window                                                      Grid Search




Notes: This figure shows the effect of a holiday on the daily number of births using different window sizes. Plotted are regression
estimates from equation (2) with daily births as the dependent variable. On the x-axis is the day relative to the holiday (-1=day
before holiday, 1=day after holiday, etc.). On the y-axis are estimates of the day relative to holiday dummy coefficients from
equation (2). Panel A displays both a narrower and a wider window around each holiday. The [-8,+13] interval uses the days
between 8 days before each holiday to 13 days after each holiday. The [-14,+19] interval uses the days between 14 days before
each holiday to 19 days after each holiday. The [-11,+16] interval (our "optimal" window) uses the days between 11 days before
and 16 days after. Panel B displays two windows that are "second-best" according to our grid search, as the absolute sum of the
excess and missing numbers of births, as estimated in equation (1), are second-closest to zero.
Appendix Figure 7. Shift in the Number of Births due to September 11th (2001-2016) and Friday
the 13th (2000-2016) in California
A. Births                                                               B. Cesarean Section Deliveries




C. Spontaneous Vaginal Deliveries                                       D. Induced/Stimulated Vaginal Deliveries




Notes: This figure shows the effect of September 11 (after 2001) and Friday the 13 on the number of births (Panel A), the
number of births delivered via cesarean section (Panel B), spontaneous vaginal deliveries (Panel C), and induced/stimulated
deliveries (Panel D). Plotted are regression estimates from equation (2). On the x-axis is the day relative to the day of interest, i.e.
September 11 or Friday the 13, (-1=day before day of interest, 1=day after day of interest, etc.). On the y-axis are estimates of
the day relative to day-of-interest-dummy coefficients from equation (2) along with the 95% confidence interval.
Table 1. Mean Daily Births Overall and by Delivery Mode in California: 2000-2016
                                      Obs                                                                            Induced/
                                   (Number of                              Cesarean           Spontaneous            Stimulated
Type of Days                          Days)           Total Births          Section             Vaginal                Vaginal
All                                    6210               1442                 442                   666                  293
                                                          (229)               (130)                 (109)                 (63)

      Holiday                           119               1118                 272                  582                   229
                                                          (126)                (62)                 (87)                  (53)

      Weekend                          1761               1150                 267                  606                   241
                                                          (106)                (39)                 (83)                  (49)

      Other                            4330               1570                 518                   693                  316
                                                          (128)                (67)                 (108)                 (54)

7-Holiday Analytic Sample              4599               1444                 442                   668                  293
                                                          (233)               (132)                 (110)                 (64)

      Holiday                           119               1118                 272                  582                   229
                                                          (126)                (62)                 (87)                  (53)

      Weekend                          1300               1153                 267                  608                   241
                                                          (106)                (40)                 (82)                  (49)

      Other                            3180               1575                 520                   696                  316
                                                          (131)                (68)                 (109)                 (55)

5-Holiday Analytic Sample              4256               1447                 443                   669                  294
                                                          (233)               (132)                 (110)                 (64)

      Holiday                            85               1164                 291                  598                   240
                                                          (112)                (59)                 (88)                  (51)

      Weekend                          1220               1155                 268                  608                   242
                                                          (107)                (40)                 (82)                  (49)

      Other                            2951               1576                 520                   696                  317
                                                          (139)                (72)                 (110)                 (55)
Notes: Standard deviations are in parentheses. All days uses the full set of births in California from 2000-2016. The analytic samples
include the holiday interval (11 days before until 16 days after a holiday) as well as the control group (14-25 days before a holiday,
and 22-37 days after a holiday). The 7-Holiday Analytic Sample considers New Year's, President's Day, Memorial Day,
Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving, and Christmas Day as holidays. The 5-Holiday Analytic Sample considers President's
Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, and Thanksgiving as holidays. Other days are non-holiday, non-weekend days.
Means for births classified as deivery type unknown are not shown here. The number of observations are the number of days by
day type, multiplied by years in the sample (e.g., 7 holidays times 17 years yields 119 observations).
Table 2. Aggregate Effect of the Holiday Period on Births and Delivery Types

                                                                                           Induced/
                                                         Cesarean          Spontaneous Stimulated Vaginal
                                Total Births           Section Births      Vaginal Births    Births
Panel A: Without Christmas and New Year's
Holiday Interval                   -4.07                    -2.42                1.05                -2.71***
                                   (2.99)                   (1.72)              (1.84)                (0.98)

Daily Mean Births                    1447                     443                 709                   294
Number of Observations               4256                    4256                4256                  4256
Panel B: Including Christmas and New Year's
Holiday interval                      1.23                  -1.55              4.36***                 -1.60*
                                     (2.86)                 (1.63)              (1.63)                 (0.90)

Daily Mean Births                        1444                 442                 709                   293
Number of Observations                   4599                4599                4599                  4599
Notes: Robust standard errors are in parentheses. ***p<0.01 , **p<0.05, *p<0.1. The holiday interval is the period 11
days prior to a major holiday and 16 days after a major holiday. Panel A considers the following as major holidays:
Presidents' Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day and Thanksgiving. The 4256 observations correspond
to approximately 250.3 days over 17 years, Panel B adds Christmas and New Year's Day to the holiday list. The 4599
observations correspond to approximately 270.5 days over 17 years.
Table 3. Aggregate Effect of the Holiday Period on Term Length
                                                                                        Number of Births by Term Length

                                                  Mean             Pre-Term:        Early Term:        Full Term:       Late Term:       Post-Term:
                                                Gestational        before 37        37 0/7 - 38        39 0/7- 40       41 0/7- 41       42 weeks or
                                                   Age               weeks           6/7 weeks         6/7 weeks        6/7 weeks            later
Panel A: Without Christmas and New Year's
Holiday Interval                                     0.03             1.52**           -5.62***            0.38            3.58***          -3.32***
                                                    (0.03)            (0.68)            (1.82)            (2.76)            (1.32)           (0.74)

Daily Mean of Outcome                                275                141               360               679              138               80
Number of Observations                              4256               4256              4256              4256             4256              4256
Panel B: Including Christmas and New Year's
Holiday Interval                                     0.02              0.36               1.92            -1.54              1.60            -0.37
                                                    (0.02)            (0.62)             (1.75)           (2.50)            (1.23)           (0.68)

Daily Mean of Outcome                                275                141               360               677              137               81
Number of Observations                              4599               4599              4599              4599             4599              4599
Notes: Robust standard errors are in parentheses. ***p<0.01 , **p<0.05, *p<0.1. The holiday interval is the period of time covering the period 11 days
prior to a major holiday through 16 days after a major holiday. Panel A considers the following as major holidays: Presidents' Day, Memorial Day,
Independence Day, Labor Day and Thanksgiving. The 4256 observations correspond to approximately 250.3 days over 17 years, Panel B adds Christmas
and New Year's Day to the holiday list. The 4599 observations correspond to approximately 270.5 days over 17 years.
Table 4. Effects on Number of Births Classified by the Characteristics of Moms over the Holiday Interval


                                                                                                                                              Deliveries with Deliveries with
                                                                                                                           Moms with              Private         Public
                               Low-Risk               Low-Risk          Moms over           Teenage           White       High School          Insurance        Insurance
                                 Births               First Births       Age 35              Moms             Moms        Degree or Less         Payment         Payment
Panel A: Without Christmas and New Year's
Holiday Interval                 -0.76                    -0.48           -2.10***             0.23           -3.99              1.52              -8.49***             5.22***
                                 (0.65)                   (0.54)           (0.75)             (0.28)          (2.57)            (2.30)              (1.81)               (1.67)

Daily Mean of Outcome                121                    93                205               39             1113              699                  701                 689
Number of Observations              2756                   2756              4256              4256            4256             3502                 4256                4256
Panel B: Including Christmas and New Year's
Holiday Interval                   -0.61                  -0.47            -1.44**             0.00            0.85              1.47               -2.13               4.30***
                                   (0.60)                 (0.50)            (0.70)            (0.25)          (2.43)            (2.08)              (1.69)               (1.58)

Daily Mean of Outcome                     120               93                204               39             1111              700                  699                 688
Number of Observations                   2974              2974              4599              4599            4599             3790                 4599                4599
Notes: Robust standard errors are in parentheses. ***p<0.01 , **p<0.05, *p<0.1. The holiday interval is the period of time covering the period 11 days prior to a major holiday
through 16 days after a major holiday. Panel A considers the following as major holidays: Presidents' Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day and Thanksgiving.
The 4256 observations correspond to approximately 250.3 days over 17 years, Panel B adds Christmas and New Year's Day to the holiday list. The 4599 observations
correspond to approximately 270.5 days over 17 years. Other payment categories (self-paid and other) are excluded for brevity. This category comprises less than 3 percent of
deliveries and is unchanged over the holiday period. The sample size for low-risk births, overall or of first births, is lower because these variables cannot be constructed prior to
2006, when characteristics such as intrauterine growth restrictions were not captured in the California birth data. Similarly, the sample size for moms with a high school degree
or less is smaller as the education variable is not available 2003-2005.
Table 5. Aggregate Effect of the Holiday Period on Birth Outcomes

                                                                                       Any
                                                 Mean Birth        Low Birth         Newborn            Any Labor            Low Apgar
                                                  Weight            Weight           Conditions        Complications           Score
Panel A: Without Christmas and New Year's
Holiday Interval                          -2.00***                      0.40           -0.88**               -1.56              -0.49
                                           (0.70)                      (0.29)           (0.40)               (1.02)             (0.35)

Daily Mean of Outcome                                3309              0.07              0.09                0.46                0.06
Fraction of Births Manipulated                       0.013             0.013            0.013                0.013               0.013
Implied IV Estimate                                  -159              0.032            -0.070              -0.124              -0.039
Number of Observations                               4256              4256              4256                4256                2506
Panel B: Including Christmas and New Year's
Holiday Interval                                     -0.66              0.17          -1.03***             -2.95***             -0.44
                                                     (0.63)            (0.27)          (0.36)               (0.88)              (0.31)

Daily Mean of Outcome                                3309              0.07              0.09                0.46                0.06
Fraction of Births Manipulated                       0.014             0.014            0.014                0.014               0.014
Implied IV Estimate                                   -48              0.012            -0.075              -0.215              -0.032
Number of Observations                               4599              4599              4599                4599                2700
Notes: Robust standard errors are in parentheses. ***p<0.01 , **p<0.05, *p<0.1. The holiday interval is the period of time covering the
period 11 days prior to a major holiday through 16 days after a major holiday. Panel A considers the following as major holidays:
Presidents' Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day and Thanksgiving.. The 4256 observations correspond to approximately
250.3 days over 17 years, Panel B adds Christmas and New Year's Day to the holiday list. The 4599 observations correspond to
approximately 270.5 days over 17 years. The fraction of births manipulated is calculated as the effect of the holiday on births on the day
of the holiday and the day after the holiday divided by the total number of births in the 28-day manipulation window period. The implied
IV estimate is the ratio of the holiday interval effect in the table divided by the fraction of births manipulated, 0.0126. The sample size
for the share of babies with a low Apgar score is lower, as this variable is not available prior to 2007. Estimates and standard errors are
multiplied by 1000, except for the mean birth weight outcome.
Table 6. Aggregate Effect of the Holiday Period on Births and Delivery Type among High-Risk
Pregnancies

                                                                                                              Induced/
                                                             Cesarean Section         Spontaneous             Stimulated
                                         Total Births             Births              Vaginal Births         Vaginal Births
Holiday Interval                            -1.55                 -1.28                   -0.17                  -0.10
                                           (1.27)                 (1.25)                  (0.11)                 (0.07)

Daily Mean of Outcome                          259                    248                     8                      3
Number of Observations                        4256                   4256                   4256                   4256
Notes: Robust standard errors are in parentheses. ***p<0.01 , **p<0.05, *p<0.1. The holiday interval is the period 11 days prior
to a major holiday and 16 days after a major holiday.
Table 7. Aggregate Effect of the Holiday Period on Term Length among High-Risk Pregnancies
                                                                             Number of Births by Term Length

                                      Mean              Pre-Term:         Early Term:       Full Term:        Late Term:       Post-Term:
                                    Gestational         before 37         37 0/7 - 38       39 0/7- 40        41 0/7- 41       42 weeks or
                                       Age                weeks            6/7 weeks        6/7 weeks         6/7 weeks            later
Holiday Interval                       0.06                -0.33             -1.09             -0.27            0.69**           -0.46***
                                      (0.08)              (0.34)             (0.59)            (0.90)            (0.22)           (0.16)

Daily Mean of Outcome                    269                42                 81                106               13                10
Number of Observations                  4256               4256               4256              4256              4256              4256
Notes: Robust standard errors are in parentheses. ***p<0.01 , **p<0.05, *p<0.1. The holiday interval is the period 11 days prior to a major
holiday and 16 days after a major holiday.
Table 8. Characteristics of Moms over the Holiday Interval among Women with High-Risk Pregnancies

                                                                                       Moms with                           Deliveries with
                                                                                       High School        Deliveries with      Public
                                        Moms over         Teenage         White         Degree or        Private Insurance   Insurance
                                         Age 35            Moms           Moms             Less               Payment         Payment
Holiday Interval                          -0.56             0.01           -1.26           0.58               -1.96***           0.62                   `
                                          (0.42)           (0.05)         (1.016)         (0.76)               (0.71)           (0.73)

Daily Mean of Outcome                        57               2             199              124                  127                    122
Number of Observations                      4256            4256           4256             3502                 4256                   4256
Notes: Robust standard errors are in parentheses. The holiday interval is the period of time covering the period 11 days prior to a major holiday
through 16 days after a major holiday. The sample size of moms with a high school degree or less is lower, as the education variable is not available
in the data between 2003-2005.
Table 9. Aggregate Effect of the Holiday Period on Birth Outcomes among High-Risk Pregnancies

                                                 Mean                               Any
                                                 Birth         Low Birth         Newborn             Any Labor            Low Apgar
                                                 Weight         Weight           Conditions         Complications           Score
Holiday Interval                                 -1.32           -0.05             -1.38                1.63                 0.12
                                                 (2.34)          (1.20)            (1.21)              (1.71)               (1.02)

Daily Mean of Outcome                              3187            0.14               0.15                 0.45               0.07
Fraction of Births Manipulated                    0.022            0.022             0.022                0.022               0.022
Implied IV Estimate                               -60.03          -0.002             -0.063               0.074               0.005
Number of Observations                             4256            4256               4256                4256                2506
Notes: Robust standard errors are in parentheses. The holiday interval is the period of time covering the period 11 days prior to a
major holiday through 16 days after a major holiday. The 4256 observations correspond to approximately 250.3 days over 17 years.
The sample size for the share of babies with a low Apgar score is lower, as this variable is not available prior to 2007. The fraction of
births manipulated is calculated as the effect of the holiday on births on the day of the holiday, divided by the total number of births
in the 28-day manipulation window period. The implied IV estimate is the ratio of the holiday interval effect in the table divided by
the fraction of births manipulated. Estimates and standard errors are multiplied by 1000, except for the mean birth weight outcome.
Appendix Table 1. Aggregate Effect of the Holiday Period on Birth Outcomes, Controlling for
Moms over Age 35, Private and Public Delivery Payment

                                       Mean Birth Low Birth            Any Newborn           Any Labor           Low Apgar
                                        Weight     Weight               Conditions          Complications          Score
Holiday Interval                         -1.32*      0.31                -1.06***             -2.33**              -0.52
                                         (0.69)     (0.29)                 (0.39)              (0.95)              (0.35)

Mean Dependent Variable                    3309            0.07              0.09                 0.46                0.06
Fraction of Births Manipulated             0.013           0.013             0.013               0.013                0.013
Implied IV Estimate                        -105            0.025            -0.084               -0.185              -0.041
Observations                               4256            4256              4256                 4256                2506
Notes: Robust standard errors are in parentheses. ***p<0.01 , **p<0.05, *p<0.1. The holiday interval is the period of time
covering the period 11 days prior to a major holiday through 16 days after a major holiday. The 4256 observations correspond to
approximately 250.3 days over 17 years. The sample size for the share of babies with a low Apgar score is lower, as this variable
is not available prior to 2007. The share of moms over age 35, the share of private insurance delivery payments, as well as the
share of public insurance delivery payments are included as additional controls. Estimates and standard errors are multiplied by
1000, except for the mean birth weight outcome.
Appendix Table 2.  Aggregate Effect of the Holiday Period on Other Birth Outcomes


                                                  Newborn was in
                                                    Neo-natal    Newborn had Mean Number                                         Mean Number
                                      Very Low    Intensive Care   Assisted   of Newborn                                           of Labor
                                     Birth Weight  Unit (NICU)    Ventilation  Conditions                                        Complications
Panel A: Without Christmas and New Year's
Holiday Interval                           0.08        -0.10        -0.14        -1.55**                                               -2.20
                                          (0.13)       (0.30)       (0.14)        (0.68)                                               (2.01)

Daily Mean of Outcome                        0.01                       0.05                 0.01                 0.14                 0.72
Fraction of Births Manipulated              0.013                       0.013                0.013               0.013                 0.013
Implied IV Estimate                         0.006                      -0.008               -0.011               -0.123               -0.175
Number of Observations                      4256                        4256                 4256                 4256                 4256
Panel B: Including Christmas and New Year's
Holiday Interval                             0.07                      -0.41                 -0.18             -1.73***              -5.14***
                                            (0.12)                     (0.27)                (0.13)             (0.60)                (1.73)

Daily Mean of Outcome                             0.01                  0.05                 0.01                 0.14                 0.72
Fraction of Births Manipulated                    0.014                 0.014                0.014               0.014                 0.014
Implied IV Estimate                               0.005                -0.030               -0.013               -0.126               -0.375
Number of Observations                            4599                  4599                 4599                 4599                 4599
Notes: Robust standard errors are in parentheses. ***p<0.01 , **p<0.05, *p<0.1. The holiday interval is the period of time covering the period
11 days prior to a major holiday through 16 days after a major holiday. The set of holidays in Panel A includes Presidents' Day, Memorial Day,
Independence Day, Labor Day and Thanksgiving. The 4256 observations correspond to approximately 250.3 days over 17 years, Panel B adds
Christmas and New Year's Day to the holiday list. The 4599 observations correspond to approximately 270.5 days over 17 years. The fraction of
births manipulated is calculated as the effect of the holiday on births on the day of the holiday and the day after the holiday after divided by the
total number of births in the 28-day manipulation window period. The implied IV estimate is the ratio of the holiday interval effect in the table
divided by the fraction of births manipulated. Estimates and standard errors are multiplied by 1000.
Appendix Table 3. Aggregate Effect of the Holiday Period on Birth Outcomes for High-Risk
Pregnancies, Controlling for Private Delivery Payment

                                                                                   Any
                                             Mean Birth       Low Birth         Newborn            Any Labor    Low Apgar
                                              Weight           Weight           Conditions        Complications   Score
Holiday Interval                               -1.40             0.13             -1.42               1.44         0.09
                                               (2.34)           (1.20)            (1.23)             (1.71)       (1.02)

Mean Dependent Variable                          3309             0.14              0.15                0.45               0.07
Fraction of Births Manipulated                   0.022            0.022             0.022              0.022               0.022
Implied IV Estimate                             -63.78            0.006            -0.065              0.066               0.004
Observations                                     4256             4256              4256               4256                2506
Notes: Robust standard errors are in parentheses. ***p<0.01 , **p<0.05, *p<0.1. The holiday interval is the period of time
covering the period 11 days prior to a major holiday through 16 days after a major holiday. The 4256 observations correspond to
approximately 250.3 days over 17 years. The sample size for the share of babies with a low Apgar score is lower, as this variable is
not available prior to 2007. The share of private insurance delivery payments, as well as the share of public insurance delivery
payments, are included as additional controls. Estimates and standard errors are multiplied by 1000, except for the mean birth
weight outcome.
Appendix Table 4. Poisson Model Estimates of Aggregate Effect of the Holiday Period on Births
and Delivery Types

                                                                                                               Induced/
                                                               Cesarean Section        Spontaneous             Stimulated
                                           Total Births             Births             Vaginal Births         Vaginal Births
Holiday Interval                              -0.02                 -0.04                   0.01                -0.09***
                                             (0.02)                 (0.04)                 (0.02)                 (0.03)

Daily Mean Births                              1447                    443                    709                   294
Number of Observations                         4256                   4256                   4256                  4256
Notes: Robust standard errors are in parentheses. ***p<0.01 , **p<0.05, *p<0.1. The holiday interval is the period of time
covering the period 11 days prior to a major holiday through 16 days after a major holiday.
Appendix Table 5. Aggregate Effect of the Holiday Period on Births and Delivery Types using
Only Holidays that Vary Day of the Week 
                                                                                                            Induced/
                                                           Cesarean Section         Spontaneous             Stimulated
                                       Total Births             Births              Vaginal Births         Vaginal Births
Holiday Interval                        -12.78***               -2.33                  -4.43**               -6.02***
                                          (4.00)                (2.24)                  (2.02)                 (1.18)

Daily Mean Births                          1447                    443                    710                    294
Number of Observations                     4256                   4256                   4256                   4256
Notes: Robust standard errors are in parentheses. ***p<0.01 , **p<0.05, *p<0.1. The holiday interval is the period of time
covering the period 11 days prior to a major holiday through 16 days after a major holiday. The holidays considered are
Independence Day, Christmas, and New Year's Day. The 4256 observations correspond to approximately 250.3 days over 17
years.
Appendix Table 6. Aggregate Effect of the Holiday Period on Births and Delivery Types
with Varying Window Size

                                                                                             Induced/
                                                           Cesarean          Spontaneous Stimulated Vaginal
                                  Total Births           Section Births      Vaginal Births    Births
Panel A: Optimal Window of [-11, +16]
Holiday Interval                     -4.07                    -2.42                1.05                -2.71***
                                    (2.99)                    (1.72)              (1.84)                (0.98)

Daily Mean Births                   1447                       443                 709                    294
Number of Observations              4256                      4256                4256                   4256
Panel B: Holiday Window [-8, +13]
Holiday Interval                  -9.74***                    -2.02               -3.72*               -4.00***
                                   (3.11)                     (1.75)              (2.01)                (1.03)

Daily Mean Births                    1445                      442                 711                    293
Number of Observations               3519                     3519                3519                   3519
Panel C: Holiday Window [-14, +19]
Holiday Interval                   8.54***                   3.83***             3.47***                1.24**
                                    (2.26)                    (1.24)              (1.08)                (0.63)

Daily Mean Births                   1450                       446                 710                    295
Number of Observations              4943                      4943                4943                   4943
Panel D: Holiday Window [-10, +18]
Holiday Interval                   -4.26                      -2.76                1.60                -3.11***
                                   (3.07)                     (1.74)              (1.88)                (0.99)

Daily Mean Births                   1449                       445                 709                    293
Number of Observations              4368                      4368                4368                   4368
Panel E: Holiday Window [-14, +10]
Holiday Interval                   -4.74                      -0.92               -1.21                -2.60***
                                   (2.78)                     (1.72)              (1.99)                (1.00)

Daily Mean Births                          1445                448                 711                    296
Number of Observations                     3816               3816                3816                   3816
Notes: Robust standard errors are in parentheses. ***p<0.01 , **p<0.05, *p<0.1. Panel A provides our main birth
displacement results from Table 2. Panel B shows results using a window that is reduced by 3 days on each side. Panel C
shows results using a window that is increased by 3 days on either side. Panels D and E consider the "second-best"
optimal windows, according to our grid search.
Appendix Table 7. Aggregate Effect of the Holiday Period on Maternal Characteristics with Varying Window Sizes

                                                                                                                                       Deliveries with Deliveries with
                                                                                                                         Moms with         Private         Public
                         Low-Risk                Low-Risk           Moms over            Teenage           White        High School      Insurance       Insurance
                             Births              First Births        Age 35               Moms             Moms         Degree or Less    Payment         Payment
Panel A: Optimal Window of [-11, +16]
Holiday Interval             -0.76                   -0.48            -2.10***              0.23            -3.99              1.52              -8.49***             5.22***
                             (0.65)                  (0.54)            (0.75)              (0.28)           (2.57)            (2.30)              (1.81)               (1.67)
Mean Dep Var                   121                    93                 205                39              1113               699                  701                 689
Observations                  2756                   2756               4256               4256             4256              3502                 4256                4256
Panel B: Holiday Window [-8, +13]
Holiday Interval             -1.24*                  -0.81             -1.90**             -0.45          -7.91***            -2.30              -7.24***              -2.06
                             (0.67)                  (0.57)             (0.77)             (0.30)          (2.72)             (2.50)              (1.88)               (1.77)
Mean Dep Var                  120                     93                 204                39              1112               699                  700                 689
Observations                 2280                    2280               3519               3519             3519              2901                 3519                3519
Panel C: Holiday Window [-14, +19]
Holiday Interval              0.71                    0.34              -0.77               0.11          6.92***            4.46***             3.41***              5.50***
                            (0.45)                   (0.36)             (0.53)             (0.17)          (1.87)             (1.42)              (1.29)               (1.21)
Mean Dep Var                  121                     93                 205                39              1116               700                  702                 691
Observations                 3203                    3203               4943               4943             4943              4067                 4943                4943
Panel D: Holiday Window [-10, +18]
Holiday Interval            -0.79                    -0.56            -2.26***              0.24            -3.92              3.38              -8.27***             4.67***
                            (0.66)                   (0.55)            (0.75)              (0.29)           (2.63)            (2.33)              (1.84)               (1.74)
Mean Dep Var                  121                     93                 205                39              1115               700                  702                 690
Observations                 2830                    2830               4368               4368             4368              3595                 4368                4368
Panel E: Holiday Window [-14, +10]
Holiday Interval             -0.35                   -0.27              -1.02              -0.40            -4.07             -2.10              -5.24***               1.24
                              0.64                   (0.52)             (0.74)             (0.30)           (2.63)            (2.45)              (1.85)               (1.67)
Mean Dep Var                       121                94                 206                39              1120               703                  705                 693
Observations                      2472               2472               3816               3816             3816              3144                 3816                3816
Notes: Robust standard errors are in parentheses. ***p<0.01 , **p<0.05, *p<0.1. Panel A provides our main birth displacement results from Table 3. Panel B (C) shows results
using a window that is reduced (increased) by 3 days on each side. Panels D and E consider our "second-best" optimal windows, according to our grid search. Variations in the
number of observations reflect the different window sizes. The sample size for low-risk births, overall or of first births, is lower because these variables cannot be constructed
prior to 2006. Similarly, the sample size for moms with a high school degree or less is smaller, as the education variable is not available for 2003-2005.
Appendix Table 8. Aggregate Effect of the Holiday Period on Births Outcomes with Varying
Window Sizes

                                   Mean Birth               Low Birth Any Newborn Any Labor                          Low Apgar
                                     Weight                  Weight    Conditions Complications                        Score
Panel A: Optimal Window of [-11, +16]
Holiday Interval                    -2.00***                    0.40            -0.88**              -1.56               -0.49
                                      (0.70)                   (0.29)            (0.40)              (1.02)              (0.35)
Mean Dependent Variable                      3309               0.07              0.09                0.46                0.06
Fraction of Births Manipulated               0.013             0.013             0.013                0.013              0.013
Implied IV Estimate                          -159              0.032             -0.070              -0.124              -0.039
Observations                                 4256              4256               4256                4256                2506
Panel B: Holiday Window [-8, +13]
Holiday Interval                             -1.17             0.59*             -0.40               -0.74               -0.02
                                             (0.75)            (0.32)            (0.43)              (1.11)              (0.36)
Mean Dependent Variable              3309                       0.07              0.09                0.46                0.06
Fraction of Births Manipulated       0.016                     0.016             0.016                0.016              0.016
Implied IV Estimate                 -71.07                     0.036             -0.024              -0.045              -0.001
Observations                         3519                      3519               3519                3519                2074
Panel C: Holiday Window [-14, +19]
Holiday Interval                   1.64***                    -0.41**            -0.11                0.20               -0.11
                                    (0.45)                     (0.20)            (0.23)              (0.41)              (0.23)
Mean Dependent Variable              3309                      0.07               0.09               0.46                 0.06
Fraction of Births Manipulated       0.010                    0.010              0.010               0.010               0.010
Implied IV Estimate                 168.02                    -0.042             -0.011              0.020               -0.011
Observations                         4943                      4943               4943               4943                 2911
Panel D: Holiday Window [-10, +18]
Holiday Interval                   -1.97***                     0.37            -1.07**              -1.85*              -0.50
                                    (0.71)                     (0.30)            (0.42)              (1.04)              (0.35)
Mean Dependent Variable                      3309               0.07              0.09                0.46                0.06
Fraction of Births Manipulated               0.013             0.013             0.013                0.013              0.013
Implied IV Estimate                          -155              0.029             -0.084              -0.145              -0.039
Observations                                 4368              4368               4368                4368                2572
Panel E: Holiday Window [-14, +10]
Holiday Interval                             -1.38*             0.42             -0.38               -0.43               0.078
                                             (0.72)            (0.29)            (0.43)              (1.14)              (0.36)
Mean Dependent Variable                      3310               0.07              0.09                0.46                0.06
Fraction of Births Manipulated               0.013             0.013             0.013                0.013              0.013
Implied IV Estimate                         -104.72            0.031             -0.029              -0.033              0.006
Observations                                 3816              3816               3816                3816               2248
Notes: Robust standard errors are in parentheses. ***p<0.01 , **p<0.05, *p<0.1. Panel A provides our main birth displacement
results from Table 5. Panel B (C) shows results using a window that is reduced (increased) by 3 days on each side. Panels D and E
consider our "second-best" optimal windows, according to our grid search. The fraction of births manipulated is calculated as the
effect of the holiday on births on the day of the holiday and the day after, divided by the total number of births in the 28-day
manipulation window period. The implied IV estimate is the ratio of the holiday interval effect in the table divided by the fraction
of births manipulated. Variations in the number of observations reflect the different window sizes. The sample size for the low
Apgar score outcome is lower, as this variable is not available prior to 2007. Estimates and standard errors are multiplied by 1000,
except for the mean birth weight outcome.
Appendix Table 9. Sub-group Analysis of Manipulated Births as a Percent of Total Births in the Window

                                                                                                                         Lower Bound #    Percent of
                                                                               Mean # Daily           # Births in        of Manipulated Total Births in
                     Subgroup                                     N               Births               Window                Births      the Window
Total Sample                                                     4256             1447.0                40516                 511.9           1.26
Teenage Mom                                                      4256              39.0                  1093                  7.6            0.70
Older Mom                                                        4256             204.5                  5726                 88.8            1.55
High-Risk Birth                                                  4256             258.8                  7246                 159.2           2.20
Low-Risk First Birth                                             2756              93.0                  2603                 38.7            1.49
Low-Risk Birth                                                   2756             120.5                  3374                 54.6            1.62
White Non-Hispanic Mom                                           4256             419.8                 11754                 179.1           1.52
Black Non-Hispanic Mom                                           4256              83.1                  2327                 26.1            1.12
Asian Non-Hispanic Mom                                           4256             114.7                  3212                 33.3            1.04
Hispanic Mom                                                     4256             722.5                 20230                 239.3           1.18
Mom has Some College or More Education                           3502             687.8                 19258                 253.5           1.32
Mom has High School or Less Education                            3502             698.8                 19566                 237.3           1.21
Public Insurance Delivery                                        4256             688.9                 19289                 236.6           1.23
Private Insurance Delivery                                       4256             700.8                 19622                 262.1           1.34
Self-pay Delivery                                                4256              39.3                  1101                  8.1            0.73
Kaiser                                                           4256             187.7                  5256                 34.0            0.65
Notes: Each row represents the analysis from a separate sub-group. The 4256 observations correspond to approximately 250.3 days over 17 years. The sample
size for low-risk births, overall or of first births, is lower because these variables cannot be constructed prior to 2006, when characteristics such as intrauterine
growth restrictions were not captured in the California birth data. Similarly, the sample size is smaller for education outcomes, as the education variable is not
available in the data between 2003-2005.
