                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   IMPERFECT COMPETITION AND RENTS IN LABOR AND PRODUCT MARKETS:
               THE CASE OF THE CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY

                                          Kory Kroft
                                           Yao Luo
                                        Magne Mogstad
                                        Bradley Setzler

                                      Working Paper 27325
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27325


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2020




The opinions expressed in this paper are those of the authors alone and do not reflect the views of
the Internal Revenue Service or the U.S. Treasury Department. This work is a component of a
larger project on income risk in the United States, conducted through the SOI Joint Statistical
Research Program. We thank Victor Aguirregabiria, El Hadi Caoui, Lancelot de Frahan, Sabrina
Howell, Peter Kuhn, Tom Meling, Matt Notowidigdo, Juan Carlos Suarez Serrato, John van
Reenen, Owen Zidar, and participants at the NBER Summer Institute, SITE Summer Workshops,
and SUFE IO Conference for valuable comments. We thank Tommaso Alba, Huishi Chen,
JoonHwan Cho, Cheok In Fok, Yingcheng Luo, Eric Mackay, Chester Madrazo, and Marc-
Antoine Schmidt for valuable research assistance. Kroft and Luo acknowledge funding from the
SSHRC Insight Grant. Mogstad and Setzler acknowledge funding from NSF Grant SES-1851808.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Kory Kroft, Yao Luo, Magne Mogstad, and Bradley Setzler. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Imperfect Competition and Rents in Labor and Product Markets: The Case of the Construction
Industry
Kory Kroft, Yao Luo, Magne Mogstad, and Bradley Setzler
NBER Working Paper No. 27325
June 2020, Revised August 2020
JEL No. D44,J31,J42,L11

                                         ABSTRACT

The primary goal of our paper is to quantify the importance of imperfect competition in the U.S.
construction industry by estimating the size of rents earned by American firms and workers. To
obtain a comprehensive measure of the total rents and to understand its sources, we take into
account that rents may arise both due to markdown of wages and markup of prices. Our analyses
combine the universe of U.S. business and worker tax records with newly collected records from
U.S. procurement auctions. We first examine how firms respond to a plausibly exogenous shift in
product demand through a difference-in-differences design that compares first-time procurement
auction winners to the firms that lose, both before and after the auction. Motivated and guided by
these estimates, we next develop, identify, and estimate a model where construction firms
compete with one another for projects in the product market and for workers in the labor market.
The firms may participate both in the private market and in government projects, the latter of
which are procured through first-price sealed-bid auctions. We find that American construction
firms have significant wage- and price-setting power. This imperfect competition generates a
considerable amount of rents, two-thirds of which is captured by the firms. Lastly, we use the
estimated model to perform counterfactual analyses which reveal how increases in the market
power of firms, in the product market or the labor market, would affect the outcomes and
behavior of workers and firms in the construction industry.

Kory Kroft                                      Magne Mogstad
Department of Economics                         Department of Economics
University of Toronto                           University of Chicago
150 St. George Street                           1126 East 59th Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3G7                             Chicago, IL 60637
CANADA                                          and NBER
and NBER                                        magne.mogstad@gmail.com
kory.kroft@utoronto.ca
                                                Bradley Setzler
Yao Luo                                         Department of Economics
Max Gluskin House 322                           University of Chicago
150 St. George St.                              1126 East 59th Street
Toronto                                         Chicago, IL 60637
Canada                                          bradley.setzler@gmail.com
yao.luo@utoronto.ca
1    Introduction
Researchers and policymakers are keenly interested in measuring the degree of imperfect competition
in the U.S. economy and in understanding how it affects the outcomes of workers and firms. In the
labor market, firms may exploit their market power to markdown the wages of workers below their
marginal products, with important implications for earnings inequality, employment, and the labor
share of gross domestic product. In the product market, firms may use their market power to
markup prices above costs, thereby increasing profits, potentially at the cost of consumer welfare,
investment, and innovation.
    To draw inferences about imperfect competition in these two markets, it is natural to measure the
size of rents earned by employers and workers, where rents refer to the excess return over that required
to change a decision, as in Rosen (1986). However, rents are not directly observed and recovering
them from data has proved elusive for several reasons. On the worker side, observationally equivalent
workers could be paid differentially because of unobserved skill differences, not markdown of wages.
On the firm side, profits may vary across observationally equivalent firms because of unobserved
productivity, not markup of prices.
    The primary contribution of our paper is to address these and other empirical challenges to
accurately measure, and to understand the mechanisms behind, the size and sharing of the rents
earned by firms and workers in the context of the American construction industry. To obtain a
comprehensive measure of the total rents and to understand its sources, we take into account that
rents may arise both due to markdown of wages and markup of prices. By comparison, existing
empirical work on imperfect competition typically focuses on either the labor market or the product
market in isolation, which may give a limited or misleading picture of the total rents earned by firms
and workers.
    As described in Section 2, our analyses are based on a matched employer-employee panel data
set, which is constructed by combining the universe of U.S. business and worker tax records for
the period 2001-2015. The firm data contain information on sales, profits, and intermediate inputs,
as well as industry codes. The worker data give us information about the number of (new and
incumbent) workers and their wage bill. We merge the employer-employee panel data set with a new
data set on U.S. procurement auctions that we constructed primarily by scraping bidding websites.
The resulting data set covers billions of dollars in procurement contracts awarded to thousands of
firms. Importantly, we observe the bid of each firm, not only that of the winner.
    In Sections 3 and 4, we use the panel data set to estimate the effects of winning a procurement
auction. As described in Section 3, we use a difference-in-differences (DiD) design that compares
first-time procurement auction winners to the firms that lose, both before and after the auction.
The inclusion of firm and year fixed effects helps mitigate the natural concern that firms that win
are likely to differ from those that lose, even in the absence of winning the auction. For example,
in the standard model of first-price sealed-bid auctions with private information on costs, firms
bid monotonically in costs, so low-cost firms are more likely to win. This suggests there are likely
systematic differences in the composition of auction winners and losers, which motivates the DiD
design.


                                                   1
    Although the DiD design adjusts for differences across firms in levels, one could still be concerned
that firms in the treated group may have different underlying trends as compared to firms in the
control group. For example, firms with different cost functions may experience different changes in
market conditions. We take several steps to make the firms even more comparable and, thus, more
likely to satisfy the identifying assumption of common trends. One of these is to restrict the control
group to firms that are close to winning the auction in a cardinal sense. These are firms that place
bids within a certain threshold of the winning bid in dollar value. Another is to restrict the control
group to firms that are close to winning the auction in an ordinal sense. These are firms that place
bids lower than other bidders in the auction, but still higher than the winner's bid. Though stricter
sample restrictions reduce sample size and thus lead to less precise estimates, it is reassuring to find
that our results do not materially change across these various specifications.
    Section 4 presents the estimates from the DiD design. Winning a procurement auction ­ which
corresponds to a $2.7 million procurement contract on average ­ increases sales by 17 percent,
expenditure on intermediate inputs by 15 percent, and the wage bill by 10 percent. The total
increase in sales is slightly larger than the payments recieved from the government procurement
project, pointing to a small crowd-in of production in the private market. The 10 percent increase
in the wage bill is due to an 8 percent increase in the number of employees and a 2 percent increase
in earnings per employee. This finding is consistent with the firm bidding up wages to attract more
workers, which would be the case if it faces an upward-sloping labor supply curve and, therefore,
has wage-setting power in the labor market. One potential concern with this interpretation is that
the increase in offered wages may be due to the firm hiring workers of higher quality. However, this
explanation is at odds with our empirical evidence. We find no evidence of changes in the quality of
the workers as a result of winning a procurement auction. Furthermore, the estimated increase in
earnings per worker does not change if we restrict the sample to workers that are employed by the
same firm before and after it wins the auction.
    Motivated and guided by these findings, Section 5 develops a model where construction firms
compete with one another for projects in the product market and for workers in the labor market.
Importantly, we allow (but do not impose) that firms have wage-setting power in the labor market,
or price-setting power in the product market, or both. The model serves several purposes. First,
it offers an economic interpretation of the estimated treatment effects of winning a procurement
auction. Without a model, it would be hard to gauge the size of these treatment effects and difficult
to understand the responses to the procurement-induced changes in product demand. Second, the
model makes explicit the assumptions needed to recover the parameters that govern the behavior
of firms and workers in the construction industry. This includes the firm's technology as well as
the labor supply and product demand curves it faces. Third, the model lets us quantify the size
and sharing of rents in the construction industry, with a particular focus on whether government
spending on infrastructure projects creates rents for firms, for workers, or for both. Fourth, the
model makes it possible to perform counterfactuals to explore how increases in the market power of
firms, in the product market or the labor market, affect the outcomes and behavior of workers and
firms in the construction industry.
    The labor market side of the model builds on work by Rosen (1986), Boal and Ransom (1997),


                                                   2
Bhaskar et al. (2002), Manning (2003), Card et al. (2018), and Lamadon et al. (2019). Competitive
labor market theory requires firms to be wage-takers so that labor supply facing a given firm is
perfectly elastic. The evidence that winning a procurement auction causes the firm to bid up
wages and hire more workers is at odds with this theory. To allow the firm-specific labor supply
curve to be imperfectly elastic, we let workers have heterogeneous preferences over the non-wage
job characteristics or amenities that firms offer. Since we allow these amenities to be unobserved
to the analyst, they can include a wide range of characteristics, such as distance of the firm from
the worker's home, flexibility in the work schedules, the type of tasks performed, the effort required
to perform these tasks, the social environment in the workplace, and so on (Hamermesh, 1999;
Pierce, 2001; Mas and Pallais, 2017; Wiswall and Zafar, 2017; Maestas et al., 2018). We assume
that firms do not observe the idiosyncratic taste for amenities of any given worker. This information
asymmetry implies that employers cannot price discriminate with respect to workers' reservation
wages. Instead, if a firm faces higher demand for its products and wants to hire more labor, it
needs to offer higher wages to all workers. As a result, the equilibrium allocation of workers to firms
creates rents to inframarginal workers and, moreover, some or all the gains from a firm winning a
procurement auction may fall on its workers.
    The firm side of the model consists of two types of product markets in which the construction
firms may participate: projects in the private market and government projects, the latter of which
are procured through auctions. The firm's behavior is specified as a two-stage problem, which we
solve backwards. In the first stage, firms submit a bid for a government project that is procured
through a first-price sealed-bid auction. The project specifies the amount of output that must be
produced. At the end of the first stage, firms learn the outcome of the auction. If a firm wins the
auction, it receives the winning bid amount as revenue and commences production. In the second
stage, the firm chooses inputs to maximize profit from total production, taking as given the outcome
of the procurement auction. A firm may earn rents in the private market due to price-setting power
and in the government projects because of a limited number of bidders in the auction. Production
in both private and procurement projects occur simultaneously at the end of the second stage.
    In Section 6, we take the model to the data. We prove identification of the model parame-
ters, before presenting and economically interpreting the parameter estimates. The identification
argument forges a direct link between our model in Section 5 and the treatment effects analyses in
Section 4. For example, the rents earned by workers can be measured using the elasticity of the
firm's labor supply curve. This elasticity can be recovered from the DiD estimates of the effect of
winning a procurement auction on the wage bill compared to the effect on the number of workers.
To identify the technology parameters, we use data on the firm's choice of intermediate inputs and
labor and, especially, the DiD estimates of how it changes these inputs in response to winning a
procurement auction. The identification argument for the product demand curve builds on Acker-
berg et al. (2015), who show the conditions under which one can use the intermediate input demand
function to control for unobserved productivity across firms.
    The estimates of the model parameters yield four key findings. First, firms have significant wage-
setting power with an estimated firm-specific labor supply elasticity of about 4.1. The estimate
indicates that, if an American construction firm aims to increase the number of employees by 10


                                                  3
percent, it needs to increase wages by around 2.4 percent. This implies wages are marked down
20 percent relative to the marginal revenue product of labor. Second, firms have significant price-
setting power in the private market with an estimated product market elasticity of 7.3. The estimate
suggests that, in order for a firm to increase output by 7.3 percent in the private market, it must
reduce the price of its product by 1 percent. This implies prices are marked up 14 percent relative
to the marginal cost of production. Third, workers are, on average, willing to pay 20 percent of their
wage to stay in their current firms. Comparing these worker rents to those earned by firms suggests
that two-thirds of the total rents are captured by firms. Only 13 percent of the total rents come
from government spending on procurement auctions, a quarter of which is captured by workers.
Fourth, the estimated return to scale (over capital and labor) is slightly above one, consistent with
the findings of Levinsohn and Petrin (2003). Despite increasing return to scale, the firms curtail
production in order to earn rents from their wage- and price-setting power.
    In Section 7, we use the estimated model to perform counterfactual analyses. We present two sets
of counterfactuals. The first considers the consequences of increasing a firm's wage-setting power in
the labor market by rotating the labor supply curve it faces, whereas the second explores the impact
of increasing a firm's price-setting power in the private market by rotating the firm-specific product
demand curve. Taken together, the results from these counterfactuals reveal how increases in the
market power of firms, in the product market or the labor market, would affect the outcomes and
behavior of workers and firms in the construction industry.
    Our paper is primarily related to a large literature on imperfect competition, rents, and inequality
in the labor market, reviewed by Manning (2011) and Card et al. (2018). A number of studies show
that trends in wage dispersion closely track trends in productivity dispersion across industries and
workplaces (Barth et al., 2016; Dunne et al., 2004; Faggio et al., 2010). While this correlation might
reflect that some of the productivity differences across firms spill over to wages, it could also be driven
by changes in the degree to which workers of different quality sort into different firms (Murphy and
Topel 1990; Gibbons and Katz 1992; Abowd et al. 1999; Gibbons et al. 2005). To address the sorting
issue, a growing body of work has taken advantage of panel data on workers and firms to control
for time-invariant firm and worker heterogeneity in the estimation of the pass-through of changes
in the value added of a firm to the wages of its workers (Card et al., 2018). For example, using
panel data on the universe of American workers and firms, Lamadon et al. (2019) estimate that a
10 percent increase in the value added of a firm leads to a 1.4 percent increase in the earnings of
incumbent workers. This estimate translates into a firm-specific labor supply elasticity of about 4.6,
and suggests that workers are, on average, willing to pay 14 percent of their wage to stay in their
current jobs.
    Our paper contributes to this literature in several ways. First, we recover the labor supply curve
and the worker rents from how an observable shifter of product demand affects wages as compared
to employment, not from how changes in the value added of a firm passes through to the wages
of the workers.1 In particular, our DiD design allows us to credibly identify the causal links from
   1 A few other studies have examined the pass-through of firm-specific, observable changes. For example, Van Reenen

(1996) studies how innovation affects firms' profits and workers' wages. He also investigates patents as a source of
variation, but finds them to be weakly correlated with profits. Building on this insight, Kline et al. (2019) study
the incidence of patents that are predicted to be valuable and Howell and Brown (2020) study the incidence of R&D



                                                         4
winning a procurement auction to workers' wages as well as to the firms' sales, employment, and
use of intermediate inputs.2 By comparison, the panel data estimates of pass-through rates require
assumptions about how the latent productivity of firms and workers evolve over time.
     Second, we study a particular market, the construction industry. By comparison, much of the
existing work is trying to measure pass-through rates and rents in the entire labor market, paying
little attention to the large heterogeneity in technology and market structure across industries. Our
focus on a particular industry allows us to pay closer attention to the structure and the functioning
of the relevant markets. For example, many construction firms participate simultaneously in the
private market, where output and prices are endogenously chosen by firms, and in government
projects, which are procured through auctions where firms choose how much to bid but not how
much to produce. As explained in detail later, this institutional feature is essential both for our
identification argument, for understanding and modeling the behavior of firms, and for accurately
predicting the profits the firms make if they win the auction.
     Third, we identify and estimate the model parameters, not only the pass-through rates. This
allows us to not only measure the current size and sharing of the rents earned by firms and workers,
but also to understand the underlying mechanisms and to quantify how the rents and rent-sharing
would change if market power changes. The closest study to ours is Lamadon et al. (2019), who
also identify and estimate the model parameters to draw inference about imperfect competition and
rents. Our paper complements this analysis by explicitly incorporating how rents may also arise from
price-setting power in the product market and by using an observable shifter of product demand for
identification.
     Our paper also makes several contributions to the empirical work on auctions, reviewed by Athey
and Haile (2007). Our modeling of auctions differs in that we consider incomplete information
in unobserved productivity rather than unobserved costs. By modeling bidding as a function of
productivity, we allow for a flexible relationship between the probability of winning the auction and
other firm outcomes that depend on productivity, such as employment and output (Foster et al.,
2008; Ackerberg et al., 2015). Moreover, we take the auction model to the data by estimating
productivity directly from information on inputs and output. In contrast, most existing work only
observe the auction-related activities, and therefore choose to estimate the auction model by inverting
the equilibrium mapping between costs and bids (e.g., Guerre et al. 2000). Our paper also differs
from existing work by allowing for heterogeneity in the value of the outside option, which we pin
down from data on the private market activity of firms that lose auctions. By doing so, we are able
to quantify how winning a procurement auction affects the firm's total production and whether it
grants. Our paper differs in that we study the pass-through of an exogenous change in product demand generated
outside of the firm by the government, instead of using innovation or patents as a shifter of productivity inside the
firm. A related literature on skill-biased technical change has examined the wage and productivity effects of adoption
of new technology in firms (see Akerman et al., 2015, and the references therein). Some recent studies consider the
association between labor market concentration and markdowns using empirical approaches that include production
function estimation (Hershbein et al., 2020) and exposure to aggregate shocks (Azar et al., 2020).
   2 A small number of papers have used a similar research design comparing winners and losers of procurement

auctions. They estimate how government purchases affect employment during an economic crisis (Gugler et al., 2020)
and firm dynamics and growth (Ferraz et al., 2015, Hvide and Meling, 2019). None of these studies use the procurement
auctions to draw inference about imperfect competition or rents. Nor do they use these quasi-experiments to identify
and estimate an economic model of the behaviors of firms and workers.




                                                          5
crowds-in or crowds-out activity in the private market. In comparison, existing empirical work either
normalizes the value of the outside option to be zero for all firms (Athey and Haile, 2007) or models
the outside option as (dynamic) participation in future auctions (Jofre-Bonet and Pesendorfer, 2003).
Our work also complements existing papers on auctions by taking into account that firms may have
market power both in the labor market and in the private market. Both sources of market power
affect the firm's bidding behavior in and profits from the auction.
    The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the institutional context, the
procurement auction records, and the linking of auction records to tax records. Section 3 develops
our research design based on a DiD framework. Section 4 presents the estimates of the causal
effect of being awarded a procurement auction on the outcomes of interest. Sections 5 develops and
Section 6 identifies and estimates the economic model of the behavior of firms and workers. Section
7 uses the estimated model to perform counterfactual analyses that allow us to infer how imperfect
competition affects the outcomes and behavior of workers and firms in the construction industry.
The final section concludes.


2     Data
Our empirical analyses are based on a matched employer-employee panel data set with information
on the characteristics and outcomes of U.S. workers and firms linked to procurement auction records.
The employer-employee data cover the years 2001-2015. The data set is constructed by first linking
U.S. Treasury business tax returns to worker-level tax returns, and then merging this linked data
set with procurement auction records. The tax returns cover nearly all firms and workers in the
private sector, whereas the procurement auction records cover hundreds of thousands of auctions.
Below, we briefly describe data sources, sample selection, and key variables. Additional details on
the sample and variable definitions are provided in Online Appendix B.1.
    The business tax returns include balance sheet and other information from Forms 1120 (C-
corporations), 1120S (S-corporations), and 1065 (partnerships). We then link the business tax
returns to worker-level W-2 (direct employee) tax returns and 1099 (independent contractor) tax
returns, defining the highest-paying firm in a given year as the worker's primary employer. Our
baseline set of workers consists of prime-aged W-2 employees with annual earnings from the primary
employer greater than the annualized full-time minimum wage in the year. Because firms sometimes
use part-time workers or contracted labor, we also consider a broader measure of the workforce that
includes any worker to whom the firm reports payments on a W-2 or 1099 tax record.
    The key variables that we draw on from the business tax returns are sales, intermediate input
costs, and the NAICS industry code. Sales are defined as revenues from business operations, exclud-
ing non-business-operation revenues like dividends and capital gains. We follow De Loecker et al.
(2020) in measuring intermediate input costs by the cost of goods sold, which includes variable costs
associated with intermediate goods, transportation, and storage while excluding costs associated
with overhead, durables, and labor.3 We define two measures of profits. The first measure is sales
   3 A potential concern is that firms in some industries (manufacturing and mining) include labor costs in the cost

of goods sold. However, we consider firms in the construction industry, which do not (see, e.g., IRS Publication 334).



                                                          6
minus intermediate input costs and wage bill (hereafter, "sales net of costs"). The second measure of
profits is earnings before interest, taxes, and depreciation (hereafter, "EBITD"), which we construct
following Kline et al. (2019).
    The key variables we draw from the worker tax returns are the number of employees and their
wage bill for the primary sample of workers. We also consider the number of employees and wage
bill for the broader sample that includes part-time workers and independent contractors. Using the
panel structure of the employer-employee data, we define three measures of mean earnings: mean
earnings among all workers; mean earnings among stayers, which we define as workers employed at
the bidding firm consistently from s years prior to the procurement auction until s years after; and
the past earnings of new hires at their previous firm, which we define as the mean earnings at t - 1
of workers who become primarily employed by a new firm at t.
    We obtain the new data set on procurement auctions by scraping the website of Bid Express,
a service that facilitates the bidding process online for a number of states, scraping state-specific
bidding websites, and through FOIA requests to state governments. The procurements broadly
involve the construction and landscaping of local roads, bridges, and highways. In total, we recover
the auction records from the Department of Transportation (DOT) in 28 states. Online Appendix
B.2 provides the details on how we obtained the auction records. Construction firms often bid in
auctions in other states, so our auction sample includes construction firms from nearly every state.
An observation in this data set is at the auction-firm level, with variables on firm's name and address
as well as the firm's bid and the date of the auction. Importantly, we observe the bid of each firm for
a given auction, not only the winner. The resulting data set covers billions of dollars in procurement
contracts awarded to thousands of firms through hundreds of thousands of auctions.4
    To merge the auction data to the tax records, we use a fuzzy matching approach based on the
firm's name and location. For six states, we were able not only to obtain the name and address but
also the federal Employer Identification Number (EIN) of the firm, allowing us to perform an exact
match to tax records. We trained the algorithm on these six states before applying it to the other
22 states. Online Appendix B.3 explains how we trained and validated the linking algorithm used to
merge the auction records to the tax returns. It also provides an out-of-sample validation analysis
in which we tested the performance of the matching algorithm on publicly available pension data
tax filings, finding that it performs well. Furthermore, Online Appendix Figure A.6 shows in the
bars labeled "Known EIN" that our main results do not change materially if we restrict the sample
to the six states for which we match records exactly using EINs.
    Table 1 displays the sample sizes of firms and workers that participate in auctions in 2010.
In 2010, our sample includes almost 8,000 unique firms that generate over $150 billion in annual
revenues and employ about 360,000 full-time workers. Nearly all the firms are recorded as being
in the construction industry (i.e. the firms have NAICS codes beginning with 23). As a share
of the national construction sector (as recorded in the tax records in 2010), our sample of 8,000
firms accounts for 12 percent of sales, 12 percent of employment, 10 percent of EBITD, 12 percent
   4 In the event that the firm that wins the procurement contract hires a contractor to complete the work, this will

be captured in our measure of labor that includes contractors from Form 1099. In the event that the firm that wins
the procurement contract passes the contract to a subcontractor, the completed work is effectively sold to the primary
contractor as intermediate inputs and thus captured in our intermediate inputs measure.



                                                          7
                                                                                           Share of the
                                  Sample Size                                           Construction Sector
 Number of Firms                       7,876                                                     0.9%
 Workers per Firm                       46                                                       11.7%
                                Value Per Firm                                           Share of the
                                 ($ millions)            Mean of the Log            Construction Sector (%)
 Sales                                19.927                     15.061                          12.1%
 EBITD                                9.159                      14.075                           9.6%
 Intermediate Costs                   14.661                     14.719                          12.4%
 Wage bill                             2.737                     13.549                          13.4%

                                        Table 1: Sample Characteristics
Notes: This table displays 2010 descriptive statistics for the sample of firms that place bids in that year. In the third
column, we compare aggregates for our sample to all firms in the construction sector in the tax records.


of intermediate input costs, and 13 percent of wage payments. The state-specific sample size and
share of the local economy represented by auction participants linked to tax records is displayed in
Online Appendix Table A.4. California, Michigan, and Texas are the states with the most bidding
firms, while Iowa, Kansas, and Montana are the states in which bidders employ the greatest share
of workers in the construction sector.


3     Institutional Setting and Research Design
3.1     Procurement Auctions in the US
The procurement auctions studied in this paper are administered by the Department of Transporta-
tion (DOT) in 28 states. Construction firms often bid in auctions in other states, so our auction
sample includes construction firms from nearly every state. Our data show that these 28 DOTs
allocated $383 billion through 155,768 distinct auctions involving 16,697 bidders in 2010. The pro-
curements broadly involve the construction and landscaping of local roads, bridges, and highways.
The DOTs are responsible for determining the nature of the project, including the blueprints, de-
tailed list of tasks to be performed or items to be constructed, quality guidelines and standards, and
expected or required time to completion. This information is publicly available in the solicitation
for bidders posted by each DOT.
    The awarding of a contract has two steps. The first step is qualification. In order to submit
a bid, a firm must be pre-qualified by the DOT to ensure sufficient experience, equipment, and
competence to carry out the tasks involved.5 Once approved, the firm is awarded a license to bid.
The second step is the auction. In the first-price sealed-bid auction, a qualified firm submits a bid
   5 The DOT may choose to further restrict bidder participation. For example, in California, projects labeled "business

development initiatives" can only be bid on by local small or disadvantaged contractors.




                                                           8
without observing the bidding behavior of other firms, and the contract is awarded to the firm with
the lowest bid. We observe the bids of every participant in the auction, not only the winner.


3.2     Research Design
To estimate the effects of winning a procurement auction, we use a difference-in-differences (DiD)
research design. The idea is to compare first-time winners of a procurement auction to the firms
that lose the auction, both before and after the auction.
    To be concrete, consider an auction that occurs in year c ("cohort") and let t denote the number
of years since the auction occurred. For notational convenience, we omit the firm subscript on all
variables. Denote a firm's observed outcome by Yc,t . Let Dc = 1 if the firm wins its first auction at
c, and Dc = 0 if it bids in an auction at c but loses.6 Let Yc,t (1) and Yc,t (0) represent the realization
of Yc,t that would have been experienced by the firm had its win status been exogenously set to 1
or 0, respectively. The relationship between observed and potential outcomes is given by

                                        Yc,t = Dc Yc,t (1) + (1 - Dc ) Yc,t (0)

The parameter of interest is E Yc,t (1) - Yc,t (0) Dc = 1 , which is the cohort-specific average treat-
ment effect on the treated (ATT), t years after the auction among firms winning their first auction
in cohort c. Then, we average the estimates of these cohort-specific ATTs across cohorts.
    The key identification challenge is to recover the average potential outcome among auction win-
ners if they had lost, E Yc,t (0) Dc = 1 . A natural control group for the treated firms that won
their first auction at c is the set of firms that also had never won an auction before c and placed a
bid at c but lost. Let Xc = 1 indicate firms that belong to this control group. Given this control
group, one possibility is to use a matching estimator that infers the average potential outcome of
the winners if they had lost the auction, E Yc,t (0) Dc = 1 , from the observed outcome of the con-
trol group that did lose the auction, E Yc,t (0) Dc = 0, Xc = 1 . However, matching is unlikely to
perform well in our setting. In the standard model of optimal bidding in first-price auctions with
private information on costs, firms bid monotonically in costs, so low-cost firms are more likely to
win. This implies there are likely to be differences in the composition of auction winners and losers,
even after conditioning on Xc = 1.
    To account for such differences, we consider a cohort-specific DiD estimator of the form,

                           E Yc,t - Yc,s Dj = 1 - E Yc,t - Yc,s Dj = 0, Xc = 1                                        (1)

for a given pre-period s < 0. The data must satisfy two conditions in order for the DiD to recover
the ATT. The first condition is parallel trends,

                    E Yc,t (0) - Yc,s (0) Dj = 1 = E Yc,t (0) - Yc,s (0) Dc = 0, Xc = 1
   6 To account for left-censoring, we do not define a win as a "first win" unless there are at least two observed years

of data during which the firm could have won but did not win an auction. For example, if a state provides auction
records for 2001-2015, and a firm is first observed winning in 2001 or 2002, we do not consider this firm a first-time
winner, but if the firm is first observed winning in 2003 or later, we consider it a first time winner. The results do not
materially change if we use all years of the data.


                                                            9
whereas the second condition is no anticipation,

                               E Yc,s (1) Dj = 1 = E Yc,s (0) Dj = 1

Under parallel trends and no anticipation, it is straightforward to show that the DiD estimator in
equation (1) recovers the ATT. Intuitively, compositional differences between the winners and losers
(such as differences in costs) are differenced out by comparing changes over time for the treated and
control groups.
    Although the DiD estimator adjusts for differences across firms in levels, one could still be
concerned that firms in the treated group may have different underlying trends as compared to
firms in the control group. For example, firms with different cost functions may experience different
changes in market conditions. To make the firms even more comparable and, thus, more likely to
satisfy the parallel trends condition, it may be useful to place stronger restrictions on Xc . In our
empirical analysis, we make several such restrictions. One of these is to restrict the control group
to firms that are close to winning the auction in a cardinal sense. These are firms that place bids
within a certain threshold of the winning bid in dollar value. Another is to restrict the control group
to firms that are close to winning the auction in an ordinal sense. These are firms that place bids
lower than other bidders in the auction, but still higher than the winner's bid. Though stronger
sample restrictions reduce sample size and thus lead to less precise estimates, it is reassuring to find
that the main estimates do not materially change across these various specifications.
    Another potential concern is that the winners might anticipate that they are relatively likely to
win an upcoming auction and change their behavior even prior to the outcome of the procurement
auction. To investigate this concern, we directly assess the pre-trends. If such anticipation occurs,
we can change the timing of the before and after contrast to avoid the periods in which anticipation
is likely. Our evidence indicates that winning firms may be adjusting their behavior in the year
just before the outcome of the auction. If we were to use s = -1 as the omitted relative time,
this anticipatory behavior may create bias in the DiD estimates. However, there is no evidence of
anticipatory behavior in earlier time periods. Thus, our baseline DiD specification contrasts the
outcomes in the post-treatment periods to those in the pre-treatment periods s < -1.
    A final possible concern is that firm composition may change over time due to differential firm
survival between winning and losing firms. We investigate this explicitly by defining a firm death
indicator and estimating survival probabilities for the treated and control group, finding a relatively
precisely estimated zero effect on differential survival.


3.3    Graphical Evidence
Before presenting our main results, we provide graphical evidence on the effects of winning an auction
for the first time. We consider as the treated group the firms that win their first procurement auction
in year c. The control group is the set of firms that have not won an auction before c and placed
a bid at c but lost. Letting j denote a firm and considering each relative time t = -4, ..., 4, we




                                                   10
consider the regression,

       Yj,c,t =           1 {t = t} µc,t +          1 {j = j } j       ,c   +             1 {t = t} Dj,c c,t        +     j,c,t    (2)
                   t =s                        j                                   t =s
                                                                                                                        residual
                  relative time fixed effect       firm fixed effect            treatment status by relative time


where the empirical counterpart to c,t is the DiD estimand defined in equation (1). We use the re-
gression implementation to make it easier to include additional covariates and calculate the standard
errors (which are clustered at the firm level j to account for serial correlation).7
    Online Appendix Figure A.2 presents estimates from equation (2) for two outcomes from the
procurement auctions: Subfigure (a) plots the share of firms that are first-time winners of a pro-
curement auction, and subfigure (b) plots the share of firms that win a procurement auction in the
relative year. Mechanically, both treated and control units have no wins prior to t = 0, so the effect
is zero on t < 0 for both subfigures. At t = 0, the treated group wins a contract for the first time
and the control group bids for a contract but loses, so the treatment effect is mechanically one for
both subfigures. The mean winnings for first-time winners at t = 0 are $2.7 million. On t > 0 in
subfigure (a), we see that some control units win auctions, with around 15 percent of control units
winning their first auction at t = 1 and around 5 percent at t = 4. This means the losers continue
to bid and partially catch up to the winners. However, as shown in subfigure (b), treated units are
more likely than control units to win any procurement auction on t > 0. Treated firms are around
21 percent age pointsmore likely to win at least one auction at t = 1 and 14 percentage points more
likely at t = 4.
    In Online Appendix Figure A.1, we plot pre-trends and post-trends at annual frequency from the
estimates of the treatment effect for 12 outcomes of interest. Four patterns stand out. First, in the
pre-treatment relative times -4 to -2, there is no evidence of differential trends between the winners
and losers. This is consistent with the auction winners at relative time 0 being similar before they
begin differentially winning procurement contracts. Second, at relative time -1, there is suggestive
evidence of winners changing behavior as compared to losers, though the estimates are only a small
fraction of the effects at relative times 0 and onward.8 This is reassuring given our DiD strategy. If
we were to use s = -1 as the omitted relative time, this anticipatory behavior may create bias in
the DiD estimates. However, there is no evidence of anticipatory behavior in earlier time periods.
Thus, our baseline DiD specification contrasts the outcomes in the post-treatment periods to those
in the pre-treatment periods s < -1. Third, at relative times 0 to 2, the contract has been awarded
and the outcomes of treatment firms jump in an economically and statistically significant manner
relative to control firms. At relative times 3 to 4, the differences show some evidence of fading out,
as the control group begins to catch up to the treatment group, though the difference is economically
and statistically significant.
    7 We estimate 
                   c,t for all c and t and then average across c, using the delta method to compute standard errors.
By doing so, we avoid the problem pointed out by Abraham and Sun (2018) and Borusyak and Jaravel (2018) that
cohorts can be negatively weighted in pooled cohort DiD estimators.
    8 The evidence of a partial effect at relative time -1 may be driven in part by the fact that fiscal years of firms can

differ from calendar years, and relative time is defined based on calendar years. For example, a firm may report its
activity from the second half of relative time -1 and the first half of event year 0 as relative time -1.




                                                               11
    Based on the patterns observed at annual frequency, our main estimates of the effects of winning
a procurement contract on winners relative to losers classifies relative times {-4, -3, -2} as the
pre-treatment period ("Before"), and relative times {0, 1, 2} as the post-treatment period ("After").
One sometimes sees empirical studies restrict the behavior of the control group in the post-period by
requiring that the control group remains untreated long after the event. Though such a restriction
helps to clarify the counterfactual, it risks biasing the estimate by conditioning on an endogenous
outcome. As a robustness check, we nevertheless restrict the control group to firms that do not win
an auction during the "After" interval. As evidenced by Online Appendix Figure A.6 (bars labeled
"Non-winner"), the main patterns are unchanged, though the point estimates become slightly larger.
    Furthermore, one may worry that our results depend strongly on our choice of "Before" and
"After" time intervals. As a robustness check, Online Appendix Figure A.6 (bars labeled "All Time
Periods") considers including all of the pre-periods {-4, -3, -2, -1} in the "Before" interval and all
of the post-periods {0, 1, 2, 3, 4} in the "After" interval, finding that the estimates are very similar.


4     Effects of Winning Procurement Auctions
4.1    Main Estimates
Balance Sheet Outcomes

Figures 1(a)-1(e) present the main estimates of the effects of winning an auction on five outcomes
constructed from the firm balance sheet data, where "Before" refers to relative times {-4, -3, -2}
and "After" refers to relative time {0, 1, 2}. The "Before" effects are small in magnitude and are
not statistically different from zero (all p-values above 0.10). This is consistent with the graphical
evidence presented in the previous section indicating no differential pre-trends between auction
winners and losers on the balance sheet outcomes, among firms bidding at the same time.
    The "After" effects in Figure 1 provide our main results on balance sheet outcomes. We find
the largest effect on sales, which increase by 17 percent for winners relative to losers (p-value below
0.01). Removing the procurement contract value from the measure of sales allows us to study
private market activity. A negative estimate on sales net of procurements would indicate that public
expenditure "crowds-out" revenues from the private market, but we find no evidence of crowd-out.
Instead, the effect on sales net of procurements remains positive at 6 percent (p-value below 0.10),
suggesting a small crowd-in effect. In Section 6, our economic model shows how the evidence of
crowd-in can be informative about firm technology and market power.
    Next, we estimate the effects on two distinct measures of profits that accrue to firms: sales
net of costs (on intermediate inputs and labor), and EBITD (earnings before interest, taxes, and
depreciation). Both measures show that profits increase by over 14 percent (p-values around 0.01).
In Section 6, our economic model uses this estimate to assess the economic incidence of winning a
procurement contract on firms.
    Lastly, we estimate the effect of winning a procurement contract on intermediate input costs,
finding an increase of 15 percent (p-value below 0.01). In Section 6, our economic model clarifies



                                                   12
that the ratio between the effects of winning an auction on intermediate inputs and on labor is
informative about the firm technology.

Employment and Earnings Outcomes

Figures 1(f)-1(l) present the main estimates of the effects of winning an auction on seven outcomes
constructed from the worker earnings data. The "Before" effects are small in magnitude and are
not statistically different from zero (all p-values above 0.10). This is consistent with the graphical
evidence presented in the previous section indicating no differential pre-trends between auction
winners and losers on employment and earnings outcomes, among firms bidding at the same time.
    The "After" effects in Figure 1 provide our main results on employment and earnings outcomes.
We find that winning a procurement auction leads to a 10 percent increase in the wage bill, an 8
percent increase in the number of employees, and a 2 percent increase in earnings per employee
(all p-values below 0.01). We also estimate effects on the broader measure of the firm's workforce
that includes part-time and contracted labor. Like Kline et al. (2019), we find larger effects for this
broader measure of the firm's workforce, with a 14 percent increase in wage bill, 10 percent increase
in number of workers, and 4 percent increase in mean earnings (all p-values below 0.01).
    The evidence that winning a procurement auction causes the firm to bid up wages and hire
more workers is at odds with the textbook model in which the labor supply curve facing the firm
is perfectly elastic. Instead, it suggests that firms face upward-sloping labor supply curves and,
therefore, have wage-setting power in the labor market. In Section 5, we recover the slope of the
firm-specific labor supply curve, and thus the degree of imperfect competition in the labor market,
from the employment and earnings impacts of the procurement win. The estimated 2 percent
increase in earnings per worker relative to an 8 percent increase in employment is consistent with
firms facing an imperfectly elastic labor supply curve.
    One potential concern with this interpretation of the estimated effects on labor outcomes is
that firms might engage in skill-upgrading in response to winning the auction. In other words,
the increase in earnings per worker may arise from composition changes from low-skill to high-skill
labor, not movement along the labor supply curve. To investigate this, we perform two checks.
First, we consider earnings at previous firms as a proxy for worker quality of new hires. We estimate
the DiD regression using this proxy as the outcome. As evidenced from Figure 1(l), we find that
the average previous earnings of new hires does not experience a statistically significant change in
response to winning a procurement auction (p-value about 0.5). This suggests firms do not engage in
skill-upgrading, as the new hires are not significantly different before and after winning the auction.




                                                  13
     0.2                                      0.2                                      0.2

     0.1                                      0.1                                      0.1

     0.0                                      0.0                                      0.0

    -0.1                                     -0.1                                     -0.1

              Before         After                     Before        After                        Before         After


                (a) Sales                    (b) Sales Net of Procurements                    (c) Sales Net of Costs



                                                                                       0.20
     0.2                                      0.2
                                                                                       0.15
     0.1                                      0.1                                      0.10

     0.0                                      0.0                                      0.05
                                                                                       0.00
    -0.1                                     -0.1
                                                                                      -0.05
              Before         After                     Before        After                         Before        After


              (d) EBITD                       (e) Intermediate Input Costs                       (f) Employees



     0.20                                     0.20                                     0.20
     0.15                                     0.15                                     0.15
     0.10                                     0.10                                     0.10
     0.05                                     0.05                                     0.05
     0.00                                     0.00                                     0.00
    -0.05                                    -0.05                                    -0.05
              Before         After                     Before        After                         Before        After


             (g) Wage bill                  (h) Employees, Broader Measure            (i) Wage bill, Broader Measure



     0.04                                     0.04                                     0.04

     0.02                                     0.02                                     0.02

     0.00                                     0.00                                     0.00

    -0.02                                    -0.02                                    -0.02

    -0.04                                    -0.04                                    -0.04
              Before         After                     Before        After                         Before        After


   (j) Mean earnings, all employees            (k) Mean earnings, stayers            (l) Mean past earnings, new hires

                              Figure 1: Effects of Winning Procurement Auctions
Notes: This figure presents average treatment effect on the treated estimates using the difference-in-differences spec-
ification defined in the text. All outcomes are in log units. All results include firm fixed effects. "Before" refers to
relative times {-4,-3,-2} and "After" refers to relative times {0,1,2}. Control firms are restricted to those that place a
bid in a procurement auction in the same year that the reference treatment cohort wins. The omitted relative time
is -2. 90 percent confidence intervals are displayed, clustering on firm.



                                                           14
    The second way we check whether or not the observed increase in earnings per worker is due
to skill-upgrading is to condition on the sample of workers that do not change firms. Mechanically,
conditioning on stayers ensures we look at earnings for the same set of workers before and after the
auction. In the baseline stayers estimates, we consider workers employed by the same firm during
relative times (-2,...,2). This point estimate is virtually identical to the result for the full sample,
finding in Figure 1(k) that earnings per incumbent worker increases by just over 2 percent. In Online
Appendix Figure A.3(a), we vary the definition of a stayer by expanding and contracting the stayer
window, always finding an increase of around 2 percent across definitions. In the analysis of the
stayers sample, one may be concerned with conditioning on the potentially endogenous outcome of
staying in the same firm after the auction outcome. This motivates the exercise in Online Appendix
Figure A.3(b), where we condition on workers who have been employed at the firm for a certain
number of years prior to the auction ("tenure"), but do not condition on the workers remaining in
the firm after the auction. Thus, if the worker moves to a new firm, we use the earnings at the new
firm as their outcome. We find a consistent 2 percent increase in earnings per worker, regardless of
tenure.


4.2     Robustness Checks
As discussed in the previous section, the key concern with comparing outcomes of those who win
and lose is that control firms may differ from treated firms in time-invariant characteristics. Our
baseline specification addresses this concern by including firm fixed effects to capture time-invariant
differences, and by verifying that there are no differential pre-trends in event years -4 to -2 (see the
results in the "Before" bars). We do not use relative time -1 in the before and after contrast to
ensure it cannot create bias in the DiD estimates. For completeness, in Online Appendix Figure
A.6 (bars labeled "All Time Periods"), we nevertheless examine results when including -1 and later
time periods, finding that the estimates are very similar. In Online Appendix Figure A.6 (bars
labeled "Non-winners"), we consider restricting the control group to firms that do not win any
auctions throughout the "After" time interval, again finding the same patterns with slightly stronger
effects. In Online Appendix Figure A.6 (bars labeled "Known EIN"), we provide main estimates
when restricting to the subsample of firms from the six states that provided the EIN. For this
subsample of firms, we link auction records to tax records exactly instead of relying on a fuzzy
matching algorithm. The results are nearly identical, suggesting that the fuzzy matching algorithm
recovers the same main estimates as exact matching.
    To make the firms even more comparable and thus more likely to satisfy common trends, it may
be useful to place stronger restrictions on the control group. In Online Appendix Figure A.4, we
restrict to firms that are close to winning the auction in a cardinal sense. These are firms that place
bids within a certain threshold of the winning bid in dollar value. In Online Appendix Figure A.5,
we restrict to firms that are close to winning the auction in an ordinal sense.9 These are firms that
place bids lower than other bidders in the auction, but still higher than the winner's bid. Though
    9 Ideally, we would compare the winners to the runner ups. While the point estimates do not materially change

if we restrict the control groups to only include the runner ups, the standard errors increase significantly. Thus, we
include both second and third place firms in the control group in this robustness check.



                                                         15
stronger sample restrictions weaken the precision of the estimator by reducing sample size, it is
reassuring to find that the estimates are materially unchanged across these various alternatives.
    Our main specification controls for differences in the composition of treated and control firms
through firm fixed effects. This removes any time-invariant characteristics of firms, subsuming the
identity of the auctions in which they participate at time c. However, these fixed effects are included
in an additive fashion. As a robustness check, we re-estimate the DiD estimator separately for
each auction, then average the treatment effect estimates across auctions. This specification fully
addresses any concerns about the treatment and control units belonging to different markets by
only comparing treatment and control firms who bid in the same auction and are thus subject to
the same local trends.10 Results are displayed in Online Appendix Figure A.6 (bars labeled "Within
Auction").11 It is reassuring to find that the estimates do not depend on whether we include additive
fixed effects or estimate the model separately for each auction.


5     Model
In this section, we develop a model where construction firms compete with one another for projects
in the product market and for workers in the labor market. Workers have heterogeneous preferences
over non-wage job characteristics or amenities. This heterogeneity gives rise to imperfect competition
in the labor market. There are two product markets in which the construction firms may choose
to participate: private market projects and government projects, the latter of which are procured
through auctions. Firms are allowed to have market power in both the product and the labor market.
    At the outset, it is useful to make clear the purposes of the model. First, it offers an economic
interpretion of the treatment effects of winning a procurement auction that we presented in Section 4.
Second, the model makes explicit the assumptions needed to recover the parameters that govern the
behavior of firms and workers in the construction industry. Third, the model lets us quantify the size
and sharing of rents in the construction industry, with a particular focus on whether government
spending on infrastructure projects creates rents for firms, for workers, or for both. Fourth, the
model makes it possible to perform counterfactuals to explore how increases in the market power of
firms, in either the product market or the labor market, affect the outcomes and behavior of workers
and firms in the construction industry.


5.1     Preferences and Labor Supply
Worker i has the following preferences over being employed at a given firm j ,

                                           ui (j, Wj ) = log Wj + gj + ij                                             (3)
  10 Examples of local trends include changes in aggregate spending by the local government (e.g., more procurement

projects), changes in local amenities (e.g., improvements to local roads or public parks), changes in the aggregate
supply of labor (e.g., the arrival of illegal immigrants), and changes in institutional features of the local labor market
(e.g., the local minimum wage or rate of unionization).
  11 Standard errors are calculated using the block bootstrap, where a block is taken to be an auction.




                                                           16
where Wj represents earnings, gj represents the average value of firm-specific amenities, and ij
captures worker i's idiosyncratic tastes for the amenities of firm j . Since we allow amenities to be
unobserved to the analyst, they can include a wide range of characteristics, such as distance of the
firm from the worker's home, flexibility in the work schedules, the type of tasks performed, the effort
required to perform these tasks, the social environment in the workplace, and so on.
    Our specification of preferences allows for the possibility that workers view firms as imperfect
substitutes. The term gj gives rise to vertical employer differentiation: some employers offer good
amenities while other employers offer bad amenities. The term ij gives rise to horizontal employer
differentiation: workers are heterogeneous in their preferences over the same firm. The importance
of horizontal differentiation is governed by the variability across workers in the idiosyncratic taste
for a given firm. We parameterize the distribution of ij as i.i.d. Type-1 Extreme Value (T1EV)
with dispersion . When  is larger, horizontal employer differentiation becomes relatively more
important, as ij has greater variability.
    We consider an environment where labor is hired in a spot market and assume that firms are
endowed with a fixed set of amenities gj (or, more precisely, we restrict amenities to be fixed over
the estimation window). It is important to note that this restriction neither imposes nor precludes
that employers initially choose amenities to maximize profits. Indeed, it is straightforward to show
that permitting firms to initially choose amenities would not affect any of our estimates.
    We consider two additional assumptions on the supply of labor. First, firms do not observe the
idiosyncratic taste for amenities of any given worker ij . This information asymmetry implies that
employers cannot price discriminate with respect to workers' reservation wages. Instead, if a firm
wants to hire more labor, it needs to offer higher wages to both marginal and inframarginal workers.
Second, since we find no evidence of changes in worker quality in response to winning a procurement
auction, we assume homogenous labor. It is straightforward to extend the model and the empirical
analysis to allow for differences in worker quality, provided that the firm's output depends on the
total efficiency units of labor (see Lamadon et al., 2019).
    Given these assumptions, the number of workers who accept a job at firm j for a posted wage
                                       1/ -1/           -1/      ¯ captures the vertical differentiation
offer Wj can be expressed as Lj = Wj µj         where µj      gj 
                                               ¯
gj and the aggregate labor supply parameter . Equivalently, we can write the inverse labor supply
                                                 12

curve as,
                                              Wj = L  j µj                                           (4)

The labor supply elasticity facing the firm, 1/, and thereby the wages it needs to pay to hire
more workers, is decreasing in , which is the variability of idiosyncratic tastes. Thus, labor supply
becomes more inelastic when idiosyncratic tastes are more dispersed. In what follows, we assume
                                                  µ
firms are "strategically small" in the sense that Wjj  0.13

  12 Formally, ¯  L/¯ W ¯ , where L
                                  ¯ is the total number of workers in the construction industry and W  ¯            1/
                                                                                                               j Wj    gj
is the price index of labor.
   13 See Berger et al. (2019), Chan et al. (2019), Jarosch et al. (2019), and Setzler and Tintelnot (2020) for models

of the labor market in which this assumption is relaxed. Our "Within Auction" research design (see Section 4) only
compares firms in the same labor market and should thus pick up any cross-firm interactions. Since the "Baseline"
and "Within Auction" specifications yield the same results, this suggests that strategic interactions in the local market
are not important in our empirical context.



                                                           17
5.2     Technology, Product Market, and Firm Behavior
We model firm behavior as a two-stage problem which we solve backwards. In the first stage, firms
submit a bid for a government project that is procured through a first-price sealed-bid auction.14
The project specifies the amount of output that must be produced within a given time frame. At the
end of the first stage, the firm learns the auction outcome. If the firm wins the auction, it receives as
revenue the winning bid amount and commences production. In the second stage, the firm chooses
inputs to maximize profit from total production, taking as given the outcome of the procurement
auction. Production in both private and procurement projects occur simultaneously at the end of
the second stage.
   We begin by specifying the technology and the structure of the product market, before describing
the firm's problem through the two stages.

Technology

Following Ackerberg et al. (2015), the production function (in physical units) is,

                                  Qj = min{j L   K
                                              j Kj , M Mj } × exp(ej )
                                               L
                                                                                                                  (5)

where j denotes total factor productivity (TFP), Kj denotes capital, Mj denotes intermediate in-
puts (in physical units), and ej represents measurement error. Our Leontief functional form imposes
strong complementarity between labor and materials, while allowing for substitutability between
labor and capital. This assumption may be especially accurate for the construction industry, where
greater capital expenditure (i.e., renting more efficient equipment and machinery) may substitute
for labor, but no amount of labor can take the place of concrete, asphalt, wood, and other materials
required to construct a bridge or road. Indeed, the assumed functional form appears broadly con-
sistent with the standard construction cost estimation handbook (RSMeans, 2008). This handbook
provides task-specific construction cost estimates for the typical crew (labor and equipment needed)
per unit of material. While crew choices may vary depending on the contractor, material input
requirements are fixed for each task.
    We assume that capital markets are perfect, so firms can rent capital at constant rate pK . While
the assumption of a rental market for capital is standard in the literature, it may be especially
accurate for the construction industry, which heavily utilizes rental equipment and machinery. The
first-order condition for capital implies a composite production function,

                                      Qj = min{j Lj , M Mj } × exp(ej )                                           (6)

                       (1+ )µ
where j  j [     L
                  K
                     pK
                        j K
                          ]   and   (1 + )K + L . We refer to Online Appendix D for the
derivation of the composite production function in equation (6). Since the production function is
  14 For simplicity, we assume exogenous participation. Indeed, it is straightforward to extend the model to allow for

a common, fixed cost of entry. The entry cost becomes sunk upon entry, and thus irrelevant for the firm's subsequent
choices. As a result, the size of this fixed cost would not affect any of our estimates.




                                                         18
Leontief in the intermediate input, it follows that the firm's choice of Mj is given by the function,

                                                 Mj = j Lj /M                                                     (7)

This expression will prove useful for our identification argument because it gives an invertible rela-
tionship between labor and intermediate inputs.

Product Market

We assume there are two product markets in which firms may choose to participate. First, they may
participate in the market for private projects, which we denote H . Quantity produced by firm j in
the private market is denoted by QH     j , which is endogenously chosen by the firm. Private projects
                      H -                                          1-
are priced at p Qj          which implies revenues Rj  H
                                                          = p QH j    . The parameter 1/ is the price
elasticity of demand in the private market.15 When > 0, the demand curve facing the firm is
downward-sloping and firms have price-setting power in the private market. Our derivations in the
text focus on > 0. We refer to Online Appendix E for derivations with perfect competition, = 0.
As we discuss below, = 0 is at odds with our empirical results.
     Second, firms may participate in the market for government projects, denoted by G. Government
projects are allocated through procurement auctions, and the government sets the size of a project,
Q¯ G . If firm j loses the auction (Dj = 0), it does not produce in the government market (QG = 0). If
                                                                                             j
                                                               ¯
firm j wins the auction (Dj = 1), it must produce exactly Q in the goverment market (QG          ¯G
                                                                                             j = Q ).
                                                                 G

The quantity produced by firm j in the government market can then be expressed Qj = Q      G    ¯ Dj .
                                                                                                 G

                                              ¯
Revenues from winning a project of size Q are determined by equilibrium auction bidding, which
                                                G

is discussed below.
     At the end of the second stage, firm j produces total output Qj = QH      j + Qj simultaneously
                                                                                     G

across both markets using the production function in equation (6).

Second stage: Optimal firm choice in private market, given government project

We first solve for the optimal private market behavior of firm j if it wins an auction and if it loses
an auction. Denote profits before auction revenues by 1H
                                                        ,j if Dj = 1 and 0,j if Dj = 0. Denote the
                                                                            H

bid by bj . Total profits are then 1,j = bj + 1,j for winners and 0,j = 0
                                               H                             H
                                                                              ,j for losers. Observed
                                                ¯
profits are j = 1,j Dj + 0,j (1 - Dj ). Given Q and Dj , the firm's second stage problem is to
                                                  G

choose inputs Ld,j and Md,j to maximize private market profits,

                                                         1-
                               H
                               d,j            ¯Gd
                                   = p Qd,j - Q               - Wj Ld,j - pM Md,j                                 (8)

for d = 0, 1, subject to the labor supply curve (equation 4), the production function (equation 6), the
choice of intermediate inputs (equation 7), the price of intermediate inputs, pM , and that sufficient
output is produced to complete the government project, Q1,j  Q      ¯G.
  15 For brevity, we do not write out the micro-foundations of the constant elasticity product demand curve. It is a

simple case of the Dixit and Stiglitz (1977) model of consumer preferences in which each firm's output is treated as a
variety and consumers have diminishing marginal utility over each variety.




                                                         19
    We define the opportunity cost of winning the auction as the difference in private market profits
between losing and winning,  (j ) = 0     H
                                           ,j - 1,j , which emphasizes that firm productivity j is the
                                                 H

only source of heterogeneity in the opportunity cost. Due to the upward-sloping labor supply curve,
the firm faces increasing marginal cost.16 Since the winning firm must allocate sufficient resources
to the government project to produce Q   ¯ G , increasing marginal cost implies that the marginal cost
of projects in the private market is greater for winners. As a result, the opportunity cost of winning
a contract is strictly positive,  (j ) > 0. Note that the profit function for auction winners depends
on Q¯ G , so the opportunity cost also depends on Q   ¯ G . For notational convenience, we suppress this
dependence.
    In Online Appendix C, we characterize the profit-maximizing choices of winners and losers. Here
we emphasize several properties of the optimal solution. First, both winners and losers always
produce strictly positive output in the private market. This follows from the fact that firms have
market power which implies that the marginal revenue in the private market is strictly greater than
marginal cost as private market output approaches zero. For the same reason, total production is
strictly greater if the firm wins the auction than if it loses.
    Second, we note that the government project crowds-out private projects if 1 +  > , and
conversely, crowds-in private projects if 1 +  < . To see why this is the case, note that winning
a government project increases the total output level. This requires more employment to achieve
a greater level of production. Due to the upward-sloping labor supply curve, greater employment
leads to higher costs of labor, determined by 1 + . On the other hand, greater scale induces private
production under economies of scale,  > 1. Thus, the magnitude of 1 +  relative to  determines
how winning a procurement auction affects the firm's production in the private market.

First stage: Auction model and optimal bidding for government project

In the first stage, bidders observe common information about the size of the project, Q ¯ G , the number
of bidders, I , and the distribution of TFP, which we now describe. Each bidder begins by receiving
an i.i.d. random draw of TFP j  F      ~ (·), where F
                                                    ~ (·) is the TFP distribution. The TFP distribution
and second stage solution imply a distribution of the opportunity cost, i.e., (j )  F (·), where the
distribution function F (·) is known by all firms. The benefit of winning the auction is the winning
bid amount, bj . Thus, the difference between the benefit and the opportunity cost of winning the
auction with bid bj is bj -  (j ).
    Given the realized draw of j , firm j chooses the optimal bid bj that solves the problem,

                                   max (bj -  (j )) ×        Pr (Dj = 1|bj )
                                    bj
                                             payoff        probability of winning

The first term is the payoff to winning an auction, which is increasing in bj , while the second term
is the probability of winning an auction, which is decreasing in bj . Thus, the firm faces the usual
  16 Whether the marginal costs are increasing is an empirical question and depends on the slope of the labor supply

curve compared to the returns to scale. On the one hand, we estimate an increasing return to scale over capital and
labor. One the other hand, we find that firms have significant wage-setting power. Furthermore, part of the marginal
cost is intermediate inputs, which has a constant return to scale.



                                                        20
trade-off between profits if one wins and the chances of winning. The profit-maximizing bid is,

                                                 ¯
                                                 
                                                 (j )
                                                      [1   - F (u)]I -1 du
                                bj =  (j ) +                        I -1
                                                                                                    (9)
                                                 [1 - F ( (j ))]
where I is the number of bidders.
    This bidding strategy defines the unique symmetric equilibrium. To understand why, note that
the existence of the private market provides a "walkaway" value for the bidder, to produce only in
the private market. This gives an implicit participation constraint: the firm's optimal bid must yield
an expected payoff at least as high as the profit when losing, 0 H
                                                                  ,j , net of the private market profits
received when winning, 1,j (the total payoff upon winning must be at least as great as the total
                           H

payoff upon losing). Therefore, the bid must satisfy bj > 0 H
                                                             ,j - 1,j , which is the opportunity cost,
                                                                     H

 (j ). Since bj >  (j ) and the bidding strategy is strictly increasing in  (j ), it defines the
unique symmetric equilibrium (Milgrom and Weber, 1982; Maskin and Riley, 1984).
    One potential concern with our model of bids is that firms may collude to achieve bid revenues
greater than those predicted by first-price bidding. Chassang et al. (2019) provide a visual test for
collusion which uses that there should be a discontinuity in the bid histogram around the point
where winners and losers have the same bid if the winners and losers collude in a first-price auction.
They find such a pattern in numerous empirical contexts outside of the US. In Appendix Figure
A.8, we construct their plot for each of the 28 states in our data separately, finding no evidence of
discontinuities in the histogram of bids and thus no evidence of collusion.


5.3    Worker and Firm Rents
Given the specification of the labor and product markets above, we can now define the surplus or
rents that firms and their workers accrue. We focus both on the total rents from production in the
private market (in the absence of procurement projects) and the additional rents generated from
winning a procurement auction or, equivalently, the incidence of procurement auctions.

Rents for Workers

In our model, the employer may face an upward-sloping labor supply curve, implying that the wage a
firm pays can be an increasing function of its size. Since employers do not observe the idiosyncratic
taste for amenities of any given worker, they cannot price discriminate with respect to workers'
reservation values. Instead, if a firm becomes more productive and thus wants to increase its size,
the employer must offer higher wages to all workers. As a result, the equilibrium allocation of workers
to firms creates surpluses or rents for inframarginal workers, defined as the excess return over that
required to change a decision, as in Rosen (1986).
    To define the additional rents to worker i from an exogenous wage increase at firm j from Wj
to Wj , we consider an equivalent variation (EV) representation. Denote worker i's preferred firm




                                                  21
excluding j as j  . The EV of worker i for the wage increase at firm j , Vij , is defined by the equation,

                        log Wj + gj + ij ,                            log (Wj + Vij ) + gj + ij ,
              max                                       = max
                       log Wj  + gj  + ij                            log (Wj  + Vij ) + gj  + ij 
               utility with wage increase at firm j       equivalent utility at the initial choice of firm


The EV is the amount of compensation required at the initial choice of firm (right-hand side) to
provide the same utility that the worker receives after the wage increase at firm j (left-hand side).
There are two cases. If j is the initial choice of firm, then Vij = Wj - Wj . This is because the worker
is an incumbent at firm j , so the wage gain at j is the amount of compensation required to achieve
the same utility. If j  is the initial choice of firm, Vij is more complicated, as it must account for
the differences in both wages and amenities at firms j and j  .
    Letting Vj  i Vij denote the total EV at firm j , Theorem 2 of Bhattacharya (2015) implies,

                                                         Wj
                                               Vj =           lj (W )dW                                      (10)
                                                         Wj


where lj (·) is firm j 's labor supply curve, which depends only on the wage at firm j under the
assumption that each firm is strategically small. From our labor supply curve in equation (4), the
solution to this integral is,
                                         Wj Lj - Wj Lj   Bj - Bj
                                    Vj =               =                                      (11)
                                            1 + 1/       1 + 1/

where Lj = lj (Wj ) is the initial labor, Lj = lj Wj            is labor after the wage increase, Bj = Wj Lj is
the initial wage bill, and Bj = Wj Lj is the wage bill after the wage increase. See Online Appendix
C.2 for derivations.
    It is useful to observe that the definition of total EV sheds light on two notions of rents. The
first is the additional rents captured by workers due to working at a firm that wins a procurement
                                                                 B ,j -B0,j
auction. We define these additional worker rents as V,j  11+1          / , where subscripts 1 and 0
denote counterfactually winning or losing the procurement auction, as in Section 3. This can be
computed from equation (11) by setting Wj = W0,j (the wage at firm j if it loses the auction) and
Wj = W1,j (the wage at firm j if it wins the auction). The second is the total rents that workers
earn from working at a firm j if it loses the procurement auction and, thus, only produces output
                                                            B0,j
in the private market. We define this quantity as V0,j  1+1    / . It can be computed from equation
(11) by setting Wj = 0 (the wage at which firm j shuts down production) and Wj = W0,j (the wage
at firm j if it loses the auction). For completeness, we also define the total rents to workers if the
firm wins the auction, which we denote V1,j , so that worker rents can be decomposed as,

                                                                           B0,j   B1,j - B0,j
                        V1,j       =       V0,j         + V,j        =          +                            (12)
                                                                         1 + 1/    1 + 1/
                     Total rents       Baseline rents    Incidence
                                                                         Baseline     Incidence


These notions of rents coincide with the ones used in Lamadon et al. (2019). Intuitively, they can



                                                           22
be interpreted as the willingness-to-pay to stay at the current firm, which is greater when horizontal
employer differentiation is more important (i.e., when  is greater).17
    When using equation V,j to analyze the incidence of procurements, it is useful to decompose it
into the additional rents captured by incumbent workers and additional rents captured by new hires
drawn into firm j by the wage increase.18 Expanding equation (10), we can write,

                                                                  1                              1/
                 V,j = L0,j (W1,j - W0,j ) + W1,j                     L1,j - L0,j          +          B0,j          (13)
                                                               1 + 1/                          1 + 1/
                           gain for incumbents
                                                                       gain for new hires


This expression allows us to directly evaluate the share of additional rents from procurements cap-
tured by incumbent workers relative to new hires.

Rents for Firms

As our measure of firm rents, we use profits. There are three relevant measures of profits. First, 0,j
is the profits that the firm captures from production in the private market if it loses the auction.
Second, 1,j is the profits that the firm captures from joint production in the government and private
markets if it wins the auction. Third, ,j  1,j - 0,j is the additional rents earned by the firm
due to winning a procurement contract. We will make use of the decomposition,

                                   1,j           =          0,j            +         ,j                             (14)
                              Total firm rents       Baseline firm rents       Incidence on firms


    It is important to observe that profits do not necessarily represent ex-ante rents for the employer.
Suppose, for example, that each employer initially chooses the amenities offered to the workers by
deciding on the firm's location, the working conditions, or both. Next, the employers compete
with one another for the workers who have heterogeneous preferences over the chosen amenities.
These heterogeneous preferences give rise to wage-setting power which employers can use to extract
additional profits or rents. Of course, the existence of such ex-post rents could simply be returns
to costly ex-ante choices of amenities. On top of this, profits from the procurement auctions may,
in part, reflect a fixed cost of entry to the auction. For example, in order to bid on procurement
contracts, firms must hold licenses which are costly. While the presence of a fixed entry cost will
affect the interpretation of profits, it will not affect identification of model parameters.
   17 Note that B is a function of 1/ , so these expressions do not imply that rents increase for workers as labor supply
                   j
becomes more inelastic. In our counterfactual exercises below, we will show that worker rents decrease when labor
supply becomes more inelastic due to a sharp decrease in the wage bill.
   18 To clarify, an "incumbent" is a worker whose preferred firm is j even if j does not win a procurement contract

(i.e., a worker who accepts offered wage W0,j by firm j ). A "new hire" is a worker whose preferred firm is j  = j
if j does not win the procurement contract and whose preferred firm is j if j wins the procurement contract (i.e., a
worker who accepts offered wage W1,j but rejects offered wage W0,j by firm j ).




                                                              23
6     Identification of Model and Parameter Estimates
The purpose of this section is to identify, estimate and economically interpret the model param-
eters of interest , , , L , K , ,      ¯ p, M /pM , F (·), E [V0,j ] , E [0,j ] , E [V,j ] , E [,j ] given the data
(Lj , Wj , j , Rj , pM Mj , Dj , bj ). We provide a formal identification argument in the text while sum-
marizing, in Table 2, the moments used to identify each parameter of interest. The identification
argument forges a direct link between our model in Section 5 and the procurement effects analysis
in Section 4. For notational simplicity and without loss of generality, the formal argument keeps
the conditioning on X = 1 and the fixed effects implicit, or, equivalently, Dj is treated as randomly
assigned.
    At the outset, we emphasize three assumptions that are key for our identification results:

Assumption 1: Workers' idiosyncratic taste over non-wage attributes is distributed T1EV.
This specification of preferences is standard in the empirical literature on imperfect competition in
the labor market. It is useful for identification because it gives a parsimonious measure of wage-
setting power through a constant elasticity of labor supply.

Assumption 2: The production function is Leontief in intermediate inputs.
This common specification of technology implies that intermediate inputs are proportional to output,
which rationalizes a value added production function. It makes it possible to derive an invertible
relationship between intermediate inputs and labor, which can be used to control for unobserved
productivity differences across firms.

Assumption 3: Demand elasticity in the private product market is constant and finite.
A constant elasticity offers tractability, while a finite elasticity (i.e., > 0) ensures that firms that
win auctions also participate in the private market (as we observe in the data).

As our identification argument makes clear, many of the parameters of interest do not require all
three assumptions. Thus, some of our findings may be considered more reliable than others.


6.1     Labor Supply Elasticity, Rents and Rent-Sharing
We begin by identifying and estimating the labor supply elasticity, 1/, and the rents of workers
and firms defined in Subsection 5.3.

Identification and Estimate of the Labor Supply Elasticity

Under Assumption 1, the log wage bill Bj can be expressed log Bj = (1+ ) log Lj +log µj . The term
log µj captures the firm-specific amenity, which is unobserved and affects the number of employees
in the firm, Lj . To address this endogeneity problem, we make use of the (conditional) random
assignment of winning a procurement auction. In particular, it is possible to recover  from the
expression,
                                    E[log Bj |Dj = 1] - E[log Bj |Dj = 0]
                            1+ =                                                               (15)
                                    E[log Lj |Dj = 1] - E[log Lj |Dj = 0]




                                                        24
Intuitively,  determines the cost of hiring additional workers, which can be identified from the
change in labor expenses compared to the change in labor due to winning the procurement auction.
    The main estimate of  is displayed in Panel A of Table 2. The point estimate of the firm-specific
labor supply elasticity is 4.1.19 This indicates that, if an American construction firm aims to increase
the number of employees by 10 percent, it needs to increase wages by around 2.4 percent. This implies
wages are marked down 20 percent relative to the marginal revenue product of labor. Lamadon et al.
(2019) estimate a labor supply elasticity of 4.6 using firm-level variation and Suárez Serrato and Zidar
(2016) estimate a labor supply elasticity of 4.2 using state-level variation, while Card et al. (2018)
pick 4.0 as the preferred value in their calibration exercise. A related literature using experimentally
manipulated piece-rates for small tasks typically finds labor supply elasticities ranging from 3.0 to
5.0 (Caldwell and Oehlsen, 2018; Dube et al., 2020; Sokolova and Sorensen, 2018).
    Figure 2(a) provides the labor supply elasticity estimates, 1/, corresponding to each of the
robustness exercises discussed in Section 4. The robustness checks include restricting to those firms
that made bids close to the winning bid, in a cardinal sense ("Close Bidders Cardinal") and in an
ordinal sense ("Close Bidders Ordinal"), including all time periods in the estimation ("All Time
Periods"), restricting the control group to those that did not win subsequent auctions in the near
future ("Non-winners"), separately estimating the effect within each auction and then averaging
("Within Auction"), and estimating the labor supply elasticity as the log change in employees divided
by the log change in mean earnings of stayers ("Stayers") rather than relying on the log change in
wage bill. Across all the robustness checks, the labor supply elasticity estimates range from 3.5 to
5.1, which are close to the baseline estimate and align with the range of estimates in the literature.
    As shown above, our identification of  relies on the argument that winning an auction shifts the
firm's demand for labor along the labor supply curve. One potential reason this argument may fail is
skill-upgrading: If the wage bill increases for the winning firm both because more workers are hired
and because the new workers are more efficient, then the estimator will include a bias term related
to the change in worker composition. In Section 4, we provided evidence that the composition of
new hires does not appear to change in response to winning an auction. When conditioning on the
incumbent workers in the firm so that composition mechanically does not affect the wage change, we
estimate approximately the same labor supply elasticity (see the "stayers" bar in Figure 2). Thus, we
argue our empirical evidence is at odds with significant changes in the skill composition of workers.
    Another possible threat to our identification of the labor supply curve is adjustment costs: If
labor enters the firm slowly over time rather than immediately when the new wage is posted, the
short-run relation between wages and quantity of labor may understate the longer-run elasticity of
labor supply. The evidence in Section 3 is at odds with such adjustment costs. Both wages and labor
appear to respond relatively quickly to winning the auction (see Online Appendix Figure A.1f,g).
Indeed, the implied labor supply elasticity estimate varies relatively little over time.
    Another potential concern is that the Davis-Bacon and Related Acts could require firms winning
procurement contracts to raise wages to the average wage among similar construction workers in
  19 The estimate of  is 0.24. Using 50 block bootstrap random draws with replacement from our sample, where a

block is taken to be a firm, the empirical 95 percent confidence interval for  is (0.10, 0.41). Thus, we reject the null
hypothesis of perfectly elastic firm-specific labor supply ( = 0) at the 0.05 level of significance.




                                                          25
the local area (the "prevailing wage" requirement). However, this requirement would only affect
wages under an unusual set of circumstances. First, the firm must have initial wages below the
prevailing wage, while we document that procurement contracts are disproportionately won by
high-productivity and high-wage firms, consistent with our model of optimal bidding. Second, even
if initial wages were below the prevailing wage, it must be that the firm would not have bid up
wages to at least the prevailing wage when expanding to complete the procurement contract. Third,
the procurement contract must be funded by the federal government or another entity covered by
Davis-Bacon, which only applies in a small share of our contracts. Even if a prevailing wage law
applies, Duncan and Ormiston (2019) find in their survey of the empirical literature that prevailing
wage laws have no impact on average on construction firms who win procurement contracts.

Identification and Estimates of Worker and Firm Rents

We now show how to quantify the rents earned by workers and firms. Given that Dj is (conditionally)
randomly assigned, it follows from equations (12) and (14) that we can obtain the total rents earned
if the firm wins the auction. For workers, total rents are given by,

                                                    1
                                   E [V1,j ] =          E[Bj |Dj = 1]
                                                 1 + 1/

For firms, total rents are given by,

                                       E [1,j ] = E[j |Dj = 1]

   Our estimates of these total rents are displayed by the inner pie of Figure 3. In the typical firm,
we estimate that total worker rents are about $9,200 per worker. This implies that workers are, on
average, willing to pay about 20 percent of their wages to stay in their current firms. We estimate
that total firm rents are about $20,100 per worker. Comparing these worker rents to those earned
by firms suggests that about two-thirds of the total rents go to the employers.
   In the outer pie of Figure 3, we decompose the total rents into the baseline rents that would be
earned if the firm lost the auction and the additional rents due to winning the auction. Given that
Dj is (conditionally) randomly assigned, the additional rents for workers are,

                                           E[Bj |Dj = 1] - E[Bj |Dj = 0]
                              E [V,j ] =                                                         (16)
                                                     1 + 1/

By comparison, the additional rents for firms are,

                               E [,j ] = E[j |Dj = 1] - E[j |Dj = 0]                             (17)




                                                    26
                                                 Panel A. Labor Supply and Rents
                                                                                   Moments used in Identification
                                                           Definition                                                         Estimate
 Estimand for winning an auction:
    Estimand log wage bill                                 b  E[log Bj |Dj = 1] - E[log Bj |Dj = 0]                               0.104
    Estimand log employment                                l  E[log Lj |Dj = 1] - E[log Lj |Dj = 0]                               0.083
    Estimand log profits                                     E[log j |Dj = 1] - E[log j |Dj = 0]                                  0.143
                                                                                 Labor Supply and Rent Parameters
                                                           Identifying Equation                                               Estimate
 Labor supply elasticity                                   1/ = l /(b - l )                                                       4.084
                                                           V1   B1   1
 Total Rents to Workers ($1,000/employee)                  L1 = L1 1+1/                                                           9.266
                                                           1
 Total Rents to Firms ($1,000/employee)                    L1                                                                    20.103
                                                             V1
 Workers' Share of Total Rents                             V1 +1                                                                  0.316
                                                           V     B1 b
 Incidence of Procurements on Workers ($1,000/employee)    L1 = L1 1+1/                                                           0.959
                                                                 1
 Incidence of Procurements on Firms ($1,000/employee)      L1  = L1                                                               2.873
                                                              V
 Workers' Share of Incidence of Procurements               V +                                                                    0.250

                              Panel B. Firm's Problem, Technology, and Private Market Structure
                                                                                   Moments used in Identification
                                                           Definition                                                         Estimate
 Estimand for winning an auction:
                                                                  E[log p
                                                                      M   j M |D =1]-E[log p
                                                                              j            M   j   jM |D =0]
    Estimand log inputs relative to labor                  m/l     E[log Lj |Dj =1]-E[log Lj |Dj =0]                              1.600
    Estimand log private revenues                          R-b  E[log(Rj - bj )|Dj = 1] - E[log Rj |Dj = 0]                       0.069
 Auction loser log covariances:
                                                           2
    Var. of log inputs                                     m |0  V ar [log(pM Mj )|Dj = 0]                                        3.062
    Cov. of log inputs and log revenues                    m,r|0  Cov [log(pM Mj ), log(Rj )|Dj = 0]                              2.559
                                                                                        System of Equations
                                                           Identifying Equation                                              Evaluated
                                                                                                                       Right-hand Side
 Optimal intermediate inputs to employees (eq 18)           = m/l                                                                 1.600
                                                                      (1+ )B
 Optimal labor to value added ratio (eq 19)                L = E (1- )Rj -jMj Dj = 0                                              0.587
                                                                          2
 Diminishing returns to private output (eq 20)             1 - = m,r|0 /m   |0                                                    0.836
                                                               R-b       E log    1+
                                                                                  L Bj +pM Mj   -log((1- )Rj ) Dj =1
 First-order condition with crowd-in (eq 21)               =   l     +                          l                                 1.401
                                                                                            GMM Results
                                                           Parameters                                                         Estimate
 Private demand elasticity                                 1/                                                                     7.343
 Returns to labor                                          L                                                                      0.597
 Composite scale parameter                                                                                                        1.419

                                    Panel C. Remaining Parameters for Price, Scale, and TFP
                                                                                   Moments used in Identification
                                                           Definition                                                         Estimate
 Mean   log   wage bill                                    E[log(Bj )]                                                           13.682
 Mean   log   employment                                   E[log(Lj )]                                                            2.914
 Mean   log   intermediate expenditure                     E[log(pM Mj )]                                                        14.958
 Mean   log   revenues                                     E[log(Rj )]                                                           15.291
                                                                                       Remaining Parameters
                                                           Identifying Equation                                               Estimate
 Scale of optimal log wage                                 E[log(µj )] = E[log(Bj )] - (1 + )E[log(Lj )]                         10.055
 Scale term for intermediates                              log pM = E[log(Lj )] - E[log(pM Mj )]
                                                                M
                                                                                                                                -10.824
 Scale of log output price                                 log p = E[log(Rj )] - (1 - )(log pM + E[log(pM Mj )])
                                                                                             M
                                                                                                                                 11.719
 Interquartile range of log TFP                            IQR(log j ) = IQR(log pM Mj -  log Lj )                                0.973


                               Table 2: Model Identification and Parameter Estimates
Notes: This table summarizes results on identification and estimation of the model. In Panel A, it provides the
parameters needed to estimate the incidence of procurements on firms and workers. Incidence is evaluated at the
median firm in our sample. In Panels B and C, it provides the parameters needed to simulate counterfactual results
from the model.




                                                                27
   8
                                                                                                             50


   6
                                                                                                             40


                                                                                                             30
   4

                                                                                                             20

   2
                                                                                                             10


   0
                                                                                                             0




                                                                                                                  Baseline


                                                                                                                                 Close Bidders
                                                                                                                                      Cardinal

                                                                                                                                                 Close Bidders
                                                                                                                                                       Ordinal

                                                                                                                                                                 All Time
                                                                                                                                                                 Periods

                                                                                                                                                                            Non-winners


                                                                                                                                                                                          Within Auction


                                                                                                                                                                                                           Stayers
         Baseline



                    Close Bidders
                         Cardinal


                                    Close Bidders
                                          Ordinal


                                                    All Time
                                                    Periods


                                                               Non-winners



                                                                             Within Auction



                                                                                              Stayers
                     (a) Labor Supply Elasticity                                                                             (b) Worker Share of Incidence (%)

                               Figure 2: Labor Supply Elasticity and Incidence Share Estimates

Notes: This figure presents the baseline estimate and robustness checks for the labor supply elasticity, 1/, and the
worker share of incidence for the typical auction winner. Specification details on the robustness checks and alternative
sample definitions are provided in Section 4 and Online Appendix B.1.


    In the typical firm, we estimate that the additional rents for workers are almost $1,000 per worker
while the additional rents for firms are about $2,900 per worker. Comparing these additional rents
to the total rents, we conclude that only 13 percent of total rents come from government spending
on procurement auctions and that about 25 percent of the additional rents go to the workers. By
applying the decomposition in equation (13), we find that 92 percent of the additional workers rents
is captured by incumbent workers and only 8 percent goes to the new hires.
    Figure 2(b) provides the estimated worker share of additional rents corresponding to each of the
robustness exercises discussed in Section 4. Across all the robustness checks, the range of estimates
is 17 percent to 27 percent, which are relatively close to the baseline estimate. By comparison,
Suárez Serrato and Zidar (2016) find that the incidence of corporate tax changes on workers in the
U.S. is 28 percent.


6.2     Firm Technology and Product Market
The previous subsection demonstrated identification of the labor supply elasticity and the rents under
Assumption 1. In this subsection, we provide identification results for the three main parameters
that govern the product market and firm technology. These parameters are the product demand
elasticity in the private market, 1/ , the returns to labor in production, L , and the composite
production parameter, . Identification of these parameters requires Assumptions 1-3, as well as the
estimate of 1/ from the previous subsection.




                                                                                                        28
                                                                      Additional
                                                                      Rents from
                                                                      Procurements
                                                                      $2,873
                                                                      (14.3%)




                                         Baseline
                                          $8,307
                                         (89.7%)
                                                    Workers
                                                     $9,266
                                                    (31.6%)

                                                              Rents
                                                                       Firms
                                                                      $20,102
                            Additional
                            Rents from                                (68.4%)
                         Procurements
                                  $959
                                                                          Baseline
                              (10.3%)
                                                                          $17,229
                                                                          (85.7%)




                                               Figure 3: Aggregate Rents
Notes: This figure presents the total rents for the typical auction winner in the economy. It divides the rents into
those captured by firms (red) and those captured by workers (blue). It further decomposes rents into those earned if
the firm loses the auction ("Baseline") and the additional rents due to winning the procurement auction ("Additional
Rents from Procurements").


Identification of Parameters Governing Firm Technology and Product Market

Consider first how to recover  from the condition for the optimal choice of intermediate inputs.
Under Assumption 2, equation (7) can be written as

                                         log Mj = log j +  log Lj - log M

where log j captures firm-specific productivity, which is unobservable and affects the log number
of employees in the firm, log Lj .
    We make use of the (conditional) random assignment of winning a procurement auction to identify
 in the presence of this endogeneity. In particular, since Dj is (conditionally) independent of log j ,
we can write  in terms of changes induced by winning a procurement auction as,

                                   E [log (pM Mj ) |Dj = 1] - E [log (pM Mj ) |Dj = 0]
                           =                                                                                   (18)
                                          E [log Lj |Dj = 1] - E [log Lj |Dj = 0]

Identification relies on the optimal proportionality between labor and intermediate inputs as the firm
increases output. Intuitively, if  is high, this means that for a given change in labor, intermediate
inputs must adjust by more to maintain proportionality.
    Next, consider how to identify the returns to labor, L . Under Assumptions 1-3, the first-order
condition with respect to labor for firms that only operate in the private market (Dj = 0) provides



                                                               29
a relationship between the returns to labor, L , and the ratio between labor expenses and revenues.
Using that   (1 + )K + L and taking the expectation across losing firms, the choice of labor if
the firm loses the auction (maximizing profits from equation 8) implies,

                                            (1 + )Bj
                               L = E                     Dj = 0                                 (19)
                                        (1 - )Rj - pM Mj

We focus on auction losers since their labor choices do not depend on features of the auction. The
firm equates the marginal cost of labor Wj (1 + ) with the marginal benefit
Lj ((1 - )Rj L - pM Mj L ). This expression for the marginal benefit of labor includes an adjust-
  1

ment for intermediate inputs. The reason is that Assumption 2 implies the firm needs to increase
both labor and intermediate inputs if it wants to produce more. In the limiting case as   0 and
     0, L is equal to the labor share (wage bill divided by value added). The terms related to
 and account for the fact that both the labor market and the product market are imperfectly
competitive. If labor is very productive at the margin, the firm will optimally choose a higher wage
bill. Conversely, the extent to which the wage bill is high relative to value added reveals that the
marginal product of labor must also be high.
    The next problem is to identify the private market demand elasticity, 1/ , which is the percent
change in revenues resulting from a one percent change in the output quantity. There are two
challenges. First, we do not observe the output quantity, and must instead use inputs to infer
output. Second, because productivity determines both labor and the elasticity of output with
respect to labor, we face an endogeneity problem when inferring output from labor. Intuitively,
variation in the relationship between labor and revenues is due both to the downward-sloping private
market demand curve and variation across firms in TFP. Following Ackerberg et al. (2015), we use
intermediate inputs instead of labor to infer output (see also the discussion by Gandhi et al. 2020).
Under Assumption 2, TFP does not appear in the relationship between private market revenues and
intermediate inputs, but is instead subsumed by intermediate inputs. Using Assumptions 2 and 3,
private market revenues are log-additive in intermediate input costs and the measurement error ej
(see Online Appendix C.3). Since Mj is determined before the firm observes ej (Ackerberg et al.,
2015), it follows that Cov [ej , log(pM Mj )] = 0, which implies,

                                     Cov[log(Rj ), log(pM Mj )|Dj = 0]
                             1- =                                                               (20)
                                         Var[log(pM Mj )|Dj = 0]

   Lastly, it is useful to observe that  is over-identified. Maximizing profits from equation (8) and




                                                 30
using Assumptions 1-3, we arrive at a moment condition involving , L , and 1/ ,

 1
       E log (Rj - bj ) Dj = 1 - E log Rj Dj = 0           =  E log Lj Dj = 1 - E log Lj Dj = 0
1-
                    Private market crowd -in                                Total output response

                                                                                                           (21)
                                                         1+                                 H
                                               - E log      Bj + pM Mj         - log (1 - )R1,j         Dj = 1
                                                          L
                                                         Adjustment for output sold to the government


See Online Appendix C.3 for the derivation. This moment condition is useful for two reasons.
Combining it with the moment conditions reported in equations 18-20 may improve the estimates of
(1/ , , L ). Additionally, equation 21 makes precise the empirical conditions under which winning
a procurement auction crowds-in or crowds-out production in the private market.
    It is important to note that identification of both  and 1/ above relies on the argument that
intermediate inputs adjust simultaneously with labor (to identify ) as well as with output and
revenues (to identify 1/ ). One potential reason this argument may fail is adjustment costs which
lead revenues, labor, and intermediate inputs to adjust at different speeds (see the discussion by
Gandhi et al. 2020). The evidence in Section 3 is at odds with large adjustment costs. Revenues,
labor, and intermediate inputs appear to respond relatively quickly to winning an auction (see Online
Appendix Figure A.1a,e,f).

Estimates of Parameters Governing Firm Technology and Product Market

We use the general method of moments (GMM) to jointly estimate (1/ , , L ) based on equations
18-21. To simplify the search space in the numerical solver, we impose the natural constraints  0,
  0, L  [0, 1], and (1 - ) < (1 + ), where the latter constraint ensures that firms do not
optimally choose to be infinitely large. However, none of the constraints bind at the numerical
solution.
    The results are presented in Panel B of Table 2. We estimate 1/ to be 7.3. This implies that, in
order for a firm to increase output by 7.3 percent, it must reduce its price by 1 percent. This implies
prices are marked up 14 percent relative to the marginal cost of production. Though we do not
find directly comparable estimates of the price elasticity of demand from the construction industry,
some estimates from the literature suggest our estimate is within a reasonable range. Goldberg and
Knetter (1999) estimate residual demand elasticities for German beer of 2.3-15.4. Goldberg and
Verboven (2001) estimate average price elasticities of demand for foreign cars of 4.5-6.5.
    We estimate L to be 0.60 and  to be 1.4. The value of L implies that a 100 percent increase
in a firm's employment results in 60 percent more output, all else equal. This 60 percent share is
broadly similar to the aggregate labor share of income in the U.S. over the same time period. The
value of  implies that, if a firm has 100 percent more labor than another firm, we expect it to
produce 140 percent more output, not holding all else equal. The larger firm will optimally have
greater utilization of capital from the rental market and intermediate inputs from the intermediate



                                                    31
market. From the definition of , we can back out the implied returns to scale (over labor and
                                 -L
capital) as L + K = L + 1+           , which equals about 1.2. Reassuringly, our returns to scale
estimate is comparable to the range of estimates from 1.0 to 1.2 by Levinsohn and Petrin (2003).
Note that imperfect competition in the product and labor markets attenuates incentives for firms
to grow infinitely large even with increasing returns to scale.

Model Fit

Because of the tight link between the data and the parameters of interest, our model fits many
moments perfectly. However, some moments could potentially fit poorly. For example, it is possible
for the model to imply a private market crowd-in of procurements that does not match our estimate
from the data. It is reassuring to find that the crowd-in rate implied by the estimated model is
0.07 (see Panel B of Table 2), which is nearly identical to our estimate in Section 4. Similarly, the
returns to scale and diminishing returns to private output equations are closely fit by the estimated
parameters.


6.3    Identification and Estimation of the Remaining Parameters
For the few remaining model parameters, the identifying equations and estimates are provided in
Panel C of Table 2. These include the scale of the labor market, µ   ¯  E [µj ], the relative price
in the private market, p, the relative intermediate inputs returns versus cost, M /pM , and the
interquartile range of distribution of estimated TFP, to characterize F (·). Identification requires
Assumptions 1-3 as well as the estimates of 1/, , and 1/ from the previous subsections. Although
the magnitudes of these parameters are perhaps not of interest on their own, they are needed to
perform counterfactual simulations in the next section. Online Appendix C.3 provides derivations
of the identifying equations.


6.4    Heterogeneity in Firm Outcomes and Behavior
So far, we have reported results for the median firm in the TFP distribution. However, the behavior
of the firm depends on productivity, as evident from Figure 4. The x-axis displays the firm's
percentile in the TFP distribution. In Subfigure 4(a), the y-axis presents the firm's labor, wage,
wage bill, output, and profits, where each is normalized relative to the firm with median TFP. When
a firm is more productive, it chooses to produce more output, which requires hiring more workers.
Since the labor supply curve is upward-sloping, it must bid up wages to increase employment,
which also increases the wage bill. Despite each firm facing a downward-sloping product demand
curve (decreasing marginal revenues) and an upward-sloping labor supply curve (increasing marginal
costs), higher TFP firms are able to produce more output and achieve substantially greater profits.
Empirically, we find relative to the median firm that a firm at the 75th percentile of the TFP
distribution employs 5 percent more labor, pays 1 percent higher wages and a 7 percent greater
wage bill, produces 25 percent more output, and earns 27 percent more profits. By contrast, a firm
at the 25th percentile of the TFP distribution employs 9 percent less labor, pays 2 percent lower



                                                 32
                                                                                                                 Median TFP Firm (%)
 Median TFP Firm (%)




                                                                                                                  Outcome relative to
                         40
  Outcome relative to

                                                                                                                                         50                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                         20                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                          q   q     q   q                                                                                      q
                                                                             q   q   q                                                                                                   q
                          0                                            q
                                                    q   q    q     q                                                                      0                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                           q   q                                                                                                                            q
                                       q                                                                                                                               q
                                  q                                                                                                                                q
                              q                                                                                                                                q
                        -20                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                        -50   q
                        -40

                                                                                                                                                      20                    40               60                80
                                      20                40                 60                 80
                                                                                                                                                      Percentile in TFP Distribution of Firms
                                      Percentile in TFP Distribution of Firms

                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                              Total Rents        Total Rents       Total Rents
                                  q   Labor        Wage          Wage bill       Output           Profits                                                     Firms              Workers           Workers Share


                                               (a) Outcomes                                                                                                        (b) Total Rents

                                                                                 Figure 4: Firm Heterogeneity

Notes: This figure presents the counterfactual values of labor, wages, the wage bill, output, and profits (subfigure a)
as well as total rents (subfigure b). It expresses these values as percentage differences from the typical firm, defined
as the firm with median TFP.


wages and a 11 percent lesser wage bill, produces 27 percent less output, and earns 29 percent lower
profits.
    In 4(b), we compare the rents earned by firms and workers across the TFP distribution. Total
rents earned by workers are proportional to the wage bill, and total rents earned by firms are equal
to profits, so these estimates mirror the results for wage bill and profits in Subfigure 4(a). Since firm
rents increase much more than worker rents as TFP increases, the share of rents captured by workers
is decreasing in TFP. This result complements the recent literature on product market competition
which has found that more productive firms have higher markups and lower labor shares (Autor
et al., 2020; De Loecker et al., 2020). We account for both labor and product market imperfect
competition and find that more productive firms offer a lower rent-share to labor.


7                       Imperfect Competition and Incidence
In this section, we use the model to understand how imperfect competition in the labor and prod-
uct markets affects the outcomes and behavior of workers and firms in the American construction
industry.
    Before presenting the results from this analysis, it is important to observe that simulating coun-
terfactuals is computationally challenging. In particular, since 1/ and 1/ both appear in the firm's
opportunity cost (j ) (recall the definition associated with equation 8), it follows that changing
these parameters also changes the optimal bid b j (equation 9). In turn, the bid affects the additional
rents captured by firms from winning a procurement contract. To perform the counterfactuals, we
first solve the second stage problem for each j to find the counterfactual distribution of opportu-
nity costs. Next, we solve the first stage problem to obtain the distribution of optimal bids given
the counterfactual opportunity costs. Finally, we combine the optimal bid distribution from the
first stage with the optimal private market profits from the second stage. From this, we recover


                                                                                                            33
the counterfactual outcomes, such as profits. To ease the computational burden in solving for these
distributions in the two-stage problem, we implement the quantile representation method of Luo
(2020). We focus on counterfactual results for the typical firm (as defined by the firm with the
median value of j ), which further reduces the computational burden. Computational details are
provided in Online Appendix F.


7.1     The Importance of Imperfect Competition in the Labor Market
Defining and Interpreting the Counterfactual

To study the importance of imperfect competition in the labor market, we adapt the "compensated
rotation" approach from the literature on industrial organization (Bresnahan, 1982).20 Holding all
other firms fixed, we rotate the labor supply curve of a given firm so that the labor supply elasticity,
1/, decreases, and compensate the firm so that the initial equilibrium labor and wage choices remain
feasible. In practice, this means that we first solve for the initial monopsonistic equilibrium (ME) in
the labor market, (Lj , Wj ), shift 1/ to 1/ , then compensate firm j for this increase in the average
cost of labor by shifting the firm-specific labor supply curve intercept µj to µj so that (Lj , Wj ) is
still on the labor supply curve.21
     Figure 5 provides an illustration of rotating the labor supply curve. It considers a fictional firm
j , with labor on the x-axis and the wage on the y-axis. The initial equilibrium is in black, while the
equilibrium after rotating the labor supply curve is in red. The initial average cost of labor curve
(ACL, solid line) and its associated marginal cost of labor curve (MCL, dashed line) are in black.
The marginal revenue product of labor curve (MRPL) is also in black. To determine the equilibrium
(ME), the monopsonistic firm chooses labor to equate MCL and MRPL, then marks down the wage
by choosing the lowest feasible wage at this quantity of labor, which is on the ACL curve directly
below the intersection of MCL and MRPL.
     The red lines in Figure 5(a) demonstrate how the equilibrium adjusts when the labor supply
curve is made "steeper" by lowering 1/ to 1/'. Lowering 1/ raises the average cost of labor, so we
compensate the firm by decreasing the intercept of each firm's labor supply curve until the initial
ME is on the new labor supply curve (that is, we ensure ME is on ACL'). The new marginal cost
of labor curve (MCL') is higher, so the point at which MRPL intersects MC' is at a lower level of
labor (that is, L' is less than L on the x-axis). Since ACL' is lower than ACL, it follows that ME'
must also have a lower wage than ME (W' is less than W on the y-axis). Furthermore, since ME is
a feasible choice of the firm, and the firm chooses a different point ME' to maximize profits, it must
  20 As a strategy to decompose the share of total rents that are due to imperfect competition in a market, one may

consider imposing perfect competition in either the product market or the labor market. However, such an exercise is
not well-defined in our context, as product market competition and labor market competition interact in an important
way. To illustrate, consider counterfactually imposing perfect competition in the product market, which corresponds
to  0. Increasing returns to scale implies firms optimally choose infinite output in this counterfactual, which also
implies worker rents approach infinity. Thus, shutting down imperfect competition in one market does not provide
the share of rents due to imperfect competition in the other market.
  21 Note that this is a general equilibrium counterfactual in the sense that prices and allocations adjust, not a partial

equilibrium counterfactual. We only counterfactually change the preferences of workers (by shifting  and µ       ¯), then
solve for the new equilibrium which has different distributions of employment and wages in the labor market, prices
and output in the private market, and bids and winners in the government market.




                                                           34
                                         MCL'                                    MRPL'              MCL'

             MRPL                                                         MRPL

                                         MCL                                                        MCL
 Wage




                                                              Wage
                                                ACL'                                                       ACL'

        W                       q
                                                ACL                  W                     q
                                                                                                           ACL
                                    ME                               W'             q          ME
        W'          q

                     ME'                                                             ME'




                    L'         L                                                    L'     L
                               Labor                                                       Labor

                    (a) Without MRPL Shift                                       (b) With MRPL Shift

                           Figure 5: Illustration: Rotation of the Labor Supply Curve
Notes: This diagram visualizes the counterfactual exercise of making the labor market less competitive through
compensated rotation. ACL denotes the average cost of labor, MCL denotes the marginal cost of labor, ME denotes
the monopsonistic equilibrium, and MRPL denotes the marginal revenue product of labor. Black colors denote the
initial economy, and red colors denote the new economy after rotating the labor supply curve through a compensated
decrease in the labor supply elasticity, 1/. In subfigure (a), MRPL is not allowed to adjust when 1/ decreases, while
in subfigure (b), the MRPL is allowed to adjust when 1/ decreases.


have higher profits with the counterfactual labor supply curve. Thus, the counterfactual exercise in
Figure 5(a) always results in firm j employing fewer workers, paying a lower wage to each employee,
producing less private market output, becoming more capital-intensive, and earning higher profits.
    Figure 5(b) presents the same exercise, but allowing the MRPL to also shift in response to the
decrease in 1/. The reason decreasing 1/ results in higher MRPL is because firms produce using
capital, which is rented in a perfect capital market. When the marginal cost of labor is higher, firms
will choose to use more capital per worker. Thus, a one worker increase in labor corresponds to a
greater marginal increase in capital if 1/ is lower, which implies that MRPL increases when 1/
decreases. As a result, the point at which MC' intersects MRPL' is to the right of the point at which
MC' intersects MRPL, which implies that L' is greater when MRPL shifts than when MRPL does
not shift. Thus, the counterfactual exercise in Figure 5(b) results in a less extreme decrease in labor
and wages than the exercise in Figure 5(a).

Characteristics of the Actual and Counterfactual Labor Markets

In Figure 6, we present the empirical results from the counterfactual analysis where we increase
the degree of imperfect competition in the labor market by rotating the labor supply curve. We
find that, as the firm gains more market power, it employs fewer workers and pays a lower wage
to each employee. By taking advantage of its market power to increasingly markdown wages below
marginal products, the firm earns higher profits. These results are consistent with the predictions
from the diagram in Figure 5. Because of the monotonic relationships across values of the labor


                                                         35
                  5

                  0                                                                                                                 q       q
                                                                                                                          q   q
                                                                                                                      q
   Change (%)

                                                                                                              q   q
                                                                                                   q     q
                                                                                           q   q
                -5                                                                 q   q
                                                                         q     q
                                                                q    q
                                                        q   q
                -10                           q     q
                                     q   q
                            q    q
                        q
                -15

                -20
                      2.0                         2.5                        3.0                        3.5                        4.0
                                                        Counterfactual Labor Supply Elasticity

                            q   Labor        Wage        Wage bill       Capital       Output-Private         Output-Total        Profits


                                Figure 6: Counterfactual Rotation of the Labor Supply Curve
Notes: This figure presents the counterfactual median values of labor, wages, the wage bill, capital, private market
output, total output, and profits when the labor market becomes less competitive. It expresses these values as
percentage changes relative to the actual economy for the typical firm.


supply elasticity, we focus on comparing the actual value (1/ = 4.08) and half of this amount
(1/ = 2.04).
    In the counterfactual economy where the labor supply elasticity of a given firm is reduced by
half, the firm employs 15 percent fewer workers and decreases wages by 7 percent. Capital only falls
by 4 percent, indicating a shift toward capital-intensive production as the marginal cost of labor
rises. While total output is reduced by 12 percent, the profit of the firm is 3 percent higher because
it takes advantage of its additional market power in the labor market to increasingly markdown
wages. Taken together, these results highlight the scope for increased labor market power to affect
the wages that firms pay and the profits they accrue.

Winning the Procurement Auction in the Actual and Counterfactual Labor Markets

In Table 3, we quantify the impact of winning an auction by estimating the percentage change in
various outcomes of interest if the firm wins the auction versus if it loses the auction. It compares
these percentage changes induced by auctions in the actual economy (1/ = 4.08, first column) and
the counterfactual economy in which firms have greater labor market power (1/ = 2.04, second
column).
    In both economies, winning the auction induces the firm to increase total output, both to complete
the procurement project and to produce additional private market output (due to crowd-in). The
key difference in the economies is that the marginal cost of increasing output is greater when the
labor supply curve is steeper. The firm chooses to increase employment by less and thus increase
output less in the private market. When the labor supply curve is steeper, the firm must bid up
wages more to achieve the increase in employment. Given that the firm hires less additional labor
but at a greater wage, the wage bill may in theory be higher or lower when the labor supply curve
is steeper. Empirically, we find that when the labor supply curve is steeper, total output increases


                                                                          36
                        Changes Induced by Winning an Auction
 Labor Supply Elasticity                                                   Actual        Counterfactual
    (1/)                                                                    (4.08)                (2.04)
 Employment                                                                  10.5%                        9.2%
 Wage                                                                         2.6%                        4.5%
 Wage bill                                                                   13.0%                       13.8%
 Output - Private Market                                                      3.5%                        1.7%
 Output - Total                                                              14.8%                       14.6%
 Firm Rents (Profits)                                                         7.6%                        7.6%
 Worker Rents                                                                15.0%                       16.0%

  Table 3: Changes Induced by Winning an Auction: Actual and Counterfactual Labor Markets
Notes: This table presents the percentage change in each outcome for the typical firm if it wins the auction versus
if it loses. It shows these percentage changes both in the actual economy (first column) and in the counterfactual
economy in which the labor supply elasticity is half as great (second column).


by 14.6 percent (versus 14.8 percent in the actual economy), private market output increases by 1.7
percent (versus 3.5 percent in the actual economy), employment increases by 9.2 percent (versus
10.5 percent in the actual economy), the wage rate increases by 4.5 percent (versus 2.6 percent in
the actual economy), and the wage bill increases by 13.8 percent (versus 13.0 percent in the actual
economy).
    We now examine the additional rents captured by workers if the firm it belongs to wins versus
loses the procurement auction. Our expressions in Section 5.3 make clear that marginal rents
for workers depend on the change in the wage bill relative to the labor supply elasticity. Since
the wage bill increases and the elasticity decreases in the counterfactual economy, this serves to
increase the marginal rents for workers which is reflected in the table. In particular, workers earn
16 percent additional rents in the counterfactual economy, which is slightly greater than the 15
percent additional rents in the actual economy. This is consistent with standard intuition from
public economics that as the elasticity of workers decreases (holding constant the labor demand
elasticity), this increases the incidence on workers.
    We also examine the additional rents captured by the firm if it wins versus loses the procurement
auction, which is equal to the gain in profits (equation 17). Our findings indicate that the change in
profits is nearly identical in the actual and counterfactual economies, with the firm increasing profits
by about 8 percent if it wins the auction versus if it loses the auction. If it wins, the firm wishes to
increase output. To do so, it hires additional labor. The marginal cost of labor is greater when the
labor supply curve is steeper, which tends to decrease marginal profits. However, the firm also has
greater market power and suppresses the number of new hires in order to markdown wages, which
tends to increase marginal profits. Accounting for these opposing forces in the model, we find that
the change in profits is nearly identical in the actual and counterfactual economies, with the firm
increasing profits by about 8 percent if it wins the auction versus if it loses the auction.



                                                        37
                                                                               PE'
                                                                        P'     q




          P'
                             PE'
                             q



                                     PE                                 P
                                                                                               PE
                                                                                               q
          P                          q
                                              ARP                                                       ARP
  Price




                                                                Price
                                          ARP'                                                         ARP'

                                                                             MCP
               MCP                             MRP                                                        MRP

                                               MRP'                                                      MRP'

                            Q'       Q                                         Q'              Q
                                   Quantity                                                        Quantity

                     (a) Decreasing Returns to Scale                               (b) Increasing Returns to Scale

                             Figure 7: Illustration: Rotation of the Private Demand Curve
Notes: This diagram visualizes the counterfactual exercise of making the private product market less competitive
through compensated rotation. MCP denotes the marginal cost of production, MRP denotes marginal revenue product,
ARP denotes average revenue product, and PE denotes the monopolistic product market equilibrium. Black colors
denote the initial economy, and red colors denote the new economy after rotating the private demand curve through a
compensated decrease in the demand elasticity, 1/ . In subfigure (a), we represent decreasing returns to scale with an
upward-sloping MCP, while in subfigure (b), we represent increasing returns to scale with a downward-sloping MCP.



7.2            The Importance of Imperfect Competition in the Product Market
Defining and Interpreting the Counterfactual

To study market power in the private product market, we again adapt the "compensated rotation"
approach from the literature on industrial organization (Bresnahan, 1982). We consider a compen-
sated rotation of the private product market demand curve (hereafter, demand curve) so that the
demand elasticity, 1/ , decreases while the initial equilibrium output and price combination remains
feasible. In practice, this means that we first solve for the initial monopolistic product market equi-
librium (PE), (QH  j , Rj ), shift 1/ to 1/ , then compensate firm j for this decrease in the average
                        H

revenue per unit of output by shifting the demand curve scale term p to p so that (QH     j , Rj ) is still
                                                                                               H

on the demand curve.22
     Figure 7 provides an illustration of rotating the demand curve. It considers a fictional firm
j , with private market output quantity on the x-axis and private market price on the y-axis. The
initial equilibrium is in black, while the equilibrium after rotating the private demand curve is in red.
The initial average revenue product (ARP, solid line) and its associated marginal revenue product
(MRP, dashed line) are in black. The marginal cost of production curve (MCP) is also in black.
To determine the equilibrium (PE), the monopolistic firm optimally chooses output to equate MCP
  22 Note that this is a general equilibrium counterfactual in the sense that prices and allocations adjust, not a partial

equilibrium counterfactual. We only counterfactually change the preferences of consumers (by shifting and p), then
solve for the new equilibrium which has different distributions of employment and wages in the labor market, prices
and output in the private market, and bids and winners in the government market.




                                                           38
               40

               20
 Change (%)



                0                                                                                                              q       q
                                                                                                                     q   q
                                                                                                             q   q
                                                                                                     q   q
                                                                                        q   q   q
                                                                                q   q
              -20                                            q   q   q      q
                                          q     q   q    q
                        q    q   q   q
                    q
              -40

              -60
                             4                               5                              6                            7
                                                        Counterfactual Demand Elasticity

                        q   Labor        Wage       Wage bill        Capital        Output-Private       Output-Total        Profits


                            Figure 8: Counterfactual Rotation of the Private Demand Curve
Notes: This figure presents the counterfactual median values of labor, wages, the wage bill, capital, private market
output, total output, and profits when the private product market becomes less competitive. It expresses these values
as percentage changes relative to the actual economy for the typical firm.


and MRP, then marks up the price by choosing the highest feasible price at this quantity of output,
which is on the ARP curve directly above the intersection of MCP and MRP.
    The red lines in Figure 7(a) demonstrate how the equilibrium adjusts when the private demand
curve is made "steeper" by lowering 1/ to 1/ '. Lowering 1/ lowers the average revenue product,
so we compensate the firm by increasing the multiplicate term p until the initial PE is on the new
demand curve (that is, we ensure PE is on ARP'). The new marginal revenue product curve (MRP')
is lower, so the point at which MCP intersects MRP' is at a lower level of output (that is, Q' is
less than Q on the x-axis). Since ARP' is above ARP at Q', it follows that PE' must also have a
higher price than PE (P' is greater than P on the y-axis). Since the firm wishes to produce less, it
needs to decrease inputs. To decrease labor, the firm lowers the wages it pays each employee, which
also results in a lower wage bill. The relative price of labor to capital decreases, so the substitution
effect results in capital decreasing more than labor. Furthermore, since PE is a feasible choice of the
firm, and the firm chooses a different point PE' to maximize profits, it must have higher profits with
the counterfactual demand curve. Thus, the counterfactual exercise in Figure 7(a) always results in
firm j producing less private market output, employing fewer workers, paying a lower wage to each
employee, using less capital, and earning higher profits. Note that increasing returns to scale may
partially reverse some of these effects, and we account for these returns to scale in the empirical
application.
    Figure 7(b) presents the same exercise, but accounting for a downward-sloping MCP curve.
The downward-sloping MCP is due to increasing returns to scale (over labor and capital), which
effectively makes the marginal cost decreasing in the output quantity. When the MCP is downward-
sloping, a rotation of the private demand curve results in MCP intersecting MRP' at a lower output
quantity Q'. Thus, the counterfactual exercise in Figure 7(b) results in a more extreme decrease in
output and and more extreme markup of prices than the exercise in Figure 7(a).


                                                                       39
                         Changes Induced by Winning an Auction
 Private Demand Elasticity                                                  Actual        Counterfactual
     (1/ )                                                                   (7.34)                (3.67)
 Employment                                                                   10.5%                      17.1%
 Wage                                                                          2.6%                       4.2%
 Wage bill                                                                    13.0%                      21.2%
 Output - Private Market                                                       3.5%                       3.0%
 Output - Total                                                               14.8%                      24.2%
 Firm Rents (Profits)                                                          7.6%                       5.6%
 Worker Rents                                                                 15.0%                      27.0%

Table 4: Changes Induced by Winning an Auction: Actual and Counterfactual Private Product
Demand
Notes: This table presents the percentage change in each outcome for the typical firm if it wins the auction versus
if it loses. It shows these percentage changes both in the actual economy (first column) and in the counterfactual
economy in which the private demand elasticity is half as great (second column).


Characteristics of the Actual and Counterfactual Private Product Markets

In Figure 8, we present the counterfactual analysis where we increase the degree of imperfect com-
petition by rotating the demand curve. We find that, as the firm gains more market power, it cuts
production in the private market and marks up the price. This allows it to increase profits. To
reduce output, it employs fewer workers and pays a lower wage to each employee. These results are
consistent with the predictions from the diagram in Figure 7. Because of the monotonic relationships
across values of the demand elasticity, we focus on comparing the actual value (1/ = 7.34) and half
of this amount (1/ = 3.67).
    The empirical estimates from our counterfactuals show that, when the demand elasticity is re-
duced by half, the firm produces 50 percent less output in the private market and 45 percent less
total output. To do so, it employs 30 percent fewer workers. Wages decrease by 10 percent and the
wage bill decreases by nearly 40 percent. Capital also decreases by 40 percent. Despite the large
reduction in output, profits increase by nearly 40 percent in the counterfactual, as firms increasingly
markup prices. Taken together, these results highlight the scope for increased product market power
to affect the wages that firms pay and the profits they accrue.

Winning the Procurement Auction in the Actual and Counterfactual Product Markets

In Table 4, we quantify the impact of auctions by estimating the percentage change in various
outcomes of interest if the firm wins the auction versus if it loses the auction. It compares these
percentage changes induced by auctions in the actual economy (1/ = 7.34, first column) and the
counterfactual economy in which firms have greater private product market power (1/ = 3.67,
second column). When the private market demand curve is steeper, the firm chooses to produce
less in total so that it can markup prices. Thus, a smaller share of output is produced in the


                                                        40
private market when the demand curve is steeper. Due to increasing returns to scale, winning the
auction makes the firm wish to increase private market activity, both in the actual and counterfactual
economies. But when the firm has more market power, this increase is mitigated by the firm choosing
to keep output low so that it can markup prices. Because government output accounts for a greater
share of total output when the demand curve in the private market is steeper, winning the contract
gives a greater percent change in total output but a smaller percent change in private market output.
    We now examine the additional rents captured by workers and firms if the firm wins versus loses
the procurement auction. Because the firm increases total output by a greater percent if it wins
the auction in the counterfactual economy, it must also increase employment by a greater percent.
To increase employment by a greater percent, it must bid up wages by a greater percent in the
counterfactual economy. The greater percent increase in both wages and employment translates into
a greater percent increase in rents captured by workers in the counterfactual economy. However,
in the counterfactual economy, marginal revenue in the private market is lower, making it less
profitable to increase private market output, which decreases the additional rents captured by firms
in the counterfactual economy. Empirically, we find that if the firm wins the auction, workers earn
27 percent additional rents and firms earn 6 percent additional rents in the counterfactual economy,
which is substantially greater than the 15 percent additional rents in the actual economy for workers
but less than the 8 percent gain in rents for firms in the actual economy.


8    Conclusion
The primary goal of our paper was to quantify the importance of imperfect competition in the
U.S. construction industry by estimating the size of rents earned by American firms and workers.
To obtain a comprehensive measure of the total rents and to understand its sources, we take into
account that rents may arise both due to markdown of wages and markup of prices.
    Our analyses combined the universe of U.S. business and worker tax records with newly collected
records from U.S. procurement auctions. We first examined how firms respond to a plausibly ex-
ogenous shift in product demand through a difference-in-differences design that compares first-time
procurement auction winners to the firms that lose, both before and after the auction. Motivated
and guided by these estimates, we next developed, identified, and estimated a model where con-
struction firms compete with one another for projects in the product market and for workers in the
labor market. The firms may participate both in the private market and in government projects,
the latter of which are procured through first-price sealed-bid auctions.
    We found that American construction firms have significant wage- and price-setting power. Wages
are marked down 20 percent relative to the marginal revenue product of labor and prices are marked
up 14 percent relative to the marginal cost of production. This imperfect competition generates
a considerable amount of rents, two-thirds of which is captured by the firms. We concluded our
empirical analyses by using the estimated model to perform counterfactual analyses which reveal
how increases in the market power of firms, in the product market or the labor market, would affect
the outcomes and behavior of workers and firms in the construction industry.



                                                 41
References
Abowd, J. M., F. Kramarz, and D. N. Margolis (1999): "High wage workers and high wage
 firms," Econometrica, 67, 251­333.

Abraham, S. and L. Sun (2018): "Estimating dynamic treatment effects in event studies with
 heterogeneous treatment effects," Available at SSRN 3158747.

Ackerberg, D. A., K. Caves, and G. Frazer (2015): "Identification properties of recent pro-
 duction function estimators," Econometrica, 83, 2411­2451.

Akerman, A., I. Gaarder, and M. Mogstad (2015): "The skill complementarity of broadband
 internet," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130, 1781­1824.

Athey, S. and P. A. Haile (2007): "Nonparametric approaches to auctions," Handbook of econo-
 metrics, 6, 3847­3965.

Autor, D., D. Dorn, L. F. Katz, C. Patterson, and J. Van Reenen (2020): "The fall of the
 labor share and the rise of superstar firms," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 135, 645­709.

Azar, J., I. Marinescu, and M. Steinbaum (2020): "Labor market concentration," Journal of
 Human Resources, 1218­9914R1.

Barth, E., A. Bryson, J. C. Davis, and R. Freeman (2016): "It's where you work: Increases in
 earnings dispersion across establishments and individuals in the US," Journal of Labor Economics,
 34, S67­S97.

Berger, D. W., K. F. Herkenhoff, and S. Mongey (2019): "Labor Market Power," Tech.
 rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bhaskar, V., A. Manning, and T. To (2002): "Oligopsony and Monopsonistic Competition in
 Labor Markets," The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 16, 155­174.

Bhattacharya, D. (2015): "Nonparametric Welfare Analysis for Discrete Choice," Econometrica,
 83, 617­649.

Boal, W. M. and M. R. Ransom (1997): "Monopsony in the labor market," Journal of Economic
 Literature, 35, 86­112.

Borusyak, K. and X. Jaravel (2018): "Revisiting event study designs," Available at SSRN
 2826228.

Bresnahan, T. F. (1982): "The oligopoly solution concept is identified," Economics Letters, 10,
 87­92.

Caldwell, S. and E. Oehlsen (2018): "Monopsony and the Gender Wage Gap: Experimental
 Evidence from the Gig Economy," Massachusetts Institute of Technology Working Paper.



                                               42
Card, D., A. R. Cardoso, J. Heining, and P. Kline (2018): "Firms and labor market inequal-
 ity: Evidence and some theory," Journal of Labor Economics, 36, S13­S70.

CBO (2007): "The Impact of Unauthorized Immigrants on the Budgets of State and Local Govern-
 ments," Tech. rep., Congressional Budget Office.

Chan, M., K. Kroft, and I. Mourifié (2019): "An Empirical Framework for Matching with
 Imperfect Competition," Unpublished manuscript.

Chassang, S., K. Kawai, J. Nakabayashi, and J. M. Ortner (2019): "Data driven regulation:
 Theory and application to missing bids," Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

De Loecker, J., J. Eeckhout, and G. Unger (2020): "The rise of market power and the
 macroeconomic implications," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 135, 561­644.

Dixit, A. K. and J. E. Stiglitz (1977): "Monopolistic competition and optimum product diver-
  sity," The American economic review, 67, 297­308.

Dube, A., A. Manning, and S. Naidu (2020): "Monopsony and employer mis-optimization
 explain why wages bunch at round numbers," Unpublished manuscript.

Duncan, K. and R. Ormiston (2019): "What does the research tell us about prevailing wage
 laws?" Labor studies journal, 44, 139­160.

Dunne, T., L. Foster, J. Haltiwanger, and K. R. Troske (2004): "Wage and productivity
 dispersion in United States manufacturing: The role of computer investment," Journal of Labor
 Economics, 22, 397­429.

Faggio, G., K. G. Salvanes, and J. Van Reenen (2010): "The evolution of inequality in
  productivity and wages: panel data evidence," Industrial and Corporate Change, 19, 1919­1951.

Ferraz, C., F. Finan, and D. Szerman (2015): "Procuring firm growth: the effects of government
  purchases on firm dynamics," Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

Foster, L., J. Haltiwanger, and C. Syverson (2008): "Reallocation, firm turnover, and effi-
 ciency: selection on productivity or profitability?" American Economic Review, 98, 394­425.

Gandhi, A., S. Navarro, and D. Rivers (2020): "On the Identification of Gross Output Pro-
 duction Functions," Journal of Political Economy.

Gibbons, R. and L. Katz (1992): "Does unmeasured ability explain inter-industry wage differen-
 tials?" The Review of Economic Studies, 59, 515­535.

Gibbons, R., L. F. Katz, T. Lemieux, and D. Parent (2005): "Comparative advantage, learn-
 ing, and sectoral wage determination," Journal of Labor Economics, 23, 681­724.

Goldberg, P. K. and M. M. Knetter (1999): "Measuring the intensity of competition in export
 markets," Journal of International Economics, 47, 27­60.


                                              43
Goldberg, P. K. and F. Verboven (2001): "The evolution of price dispersion in the European
 car market," The Review of Economic Studies, 68, 811­848.

Guerre, E., I. Perrigne, and Q. Vuong (2000): "Optimal nonparametric estimation of first-
 price auctions," Econometrica, 68, 525­574.

Gugler, K., M. Weichselbaumer, and C. Zulehner (2020): "Employment behavior and the
 economic crisis: Evidence from winners and runners-up in procurement auctions," Journal of
 Public Economics, 182, 104112.

Hamermesh, D. S. (1999): "Changing inequality in markets for workplace amenities," The Quar-
 terly Journal of Economics, 114, 1085­1123.

Hershbein, B., C. Macaluso, and C. Yeh (2020): "Monopsony in the U.S. Labor Market,"
 Tech. rep., Working paper.

Howell, S. T. and J. D. Brown (2020): "Do Cash Windfalls Affect Wages? Evidence from
 R&D Grants to Small Firms," Working Papers 20-06, Center for Economic Studies, U.S. Census
 Bureau.

Hvide, H. K. and T. Meling (2019): "Do Temporary Demand Shocks Have Long-Term Effects
 for Startups?" SSRN 3437270.

Jarosch, G., J. S. Nimczik, and I. Sorkin (2019): "Granular search, market structure, and
  wages," Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

Jofre-Bonet, M. and M. Pesendorfer (2003): "Estimation of a dynamic auction game," Econo-
  metrica, 71, 1443­1489.

Kline, P., N. Petkova, H. Williams, and O. Zidar (2019): "Who profits from patents? rent-
 sharing at innovative firms," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 134, 1343­1404.

Lamadon, T., M. Mogstad, and B. Setzler (2019): "Imperfect Competition, Compensating
  Differentials and Rent Sharing in the US Labor Market," Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic
  Research.

Levinsohn, J. and A. Petrin (2003): "Estimating production functions using inputs to control
  for unobservables," The Review of Economic Studies, 70, 317­341.

Luo, Y. (2020): "Unobserved heterogeneity in auctions under restricted stochastic dominance,"
  Journal of Econometrics, 216, 354­374.

Maestas, N., K. J. Mullen, D. Powell, T. Von Wachter, and J. B. Wenger (2018): "The
 Value of Working Conditions in the United States and Implications for the Structure of Wages,"
 Working Paper 25204, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Manning, A. (2003): Monopsony in motion: Imperfect competition in labor markets, Princeton
 University Press.

                                               44
------ (2011): "Imperfect competition in the labor market," Handbook of Labor Economics, 4, 973­
  1041.

Mas, A. and A. Pallais (2017): "Valuing alternative work arrangements," American Economic
 Review, 107, 3722­59.

Maskin, E. and J. Riley (1984): "Optimal auctions with risk averse buyers," Econometrica,
 1473­1518.

Milgrom, P. R. and R. J. Weber (1982): "A theory of auctions and competitive bidding,"
 Econometrica, 1089­1122.

Murphy, K. M. and R. H. Topel (1990): "Efficiency wages reconsidered: Theory and evidence,"
 in Advances in the Theory and Measurement of Unemployment, Springer, 204­240.

Pierce, B. (2001): "Compensation Inequality," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116, 1493­
  1525.

Rosen, S. (1986): "The theory of equalizing differences," Handbook of labor economics, 1, 641­692.

RSMeans (2008): Building Construction Cost Data, 66 ed.

Setzler, B. and F. Tintelnot (2020): "The Effects of Foreign Multinationals on Workers and
  Firms in the United States," Working Paper w26149, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Sokolova, A. and T. Sorensen (2018): "Monopsony in labor markets: A meta-analysis," IZA
  Discussion Paper.

Suárez Serrato, J. C. and O. Zidar (2016): "Who benefits from state corporate tax cuts? A
  local labor markets approach with heterogeneous firms," American Economic Review, 106, 2582­
  2624.

Van Reenen, J. (1996): "The creation and capture of rents: wages and innovation in a panel of
 UK companies," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111, 195­226.

Wiswall, M. and B. Zafar (2017): "Preference for the workplace, investment in human capital,
 and gender," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133, 457­507.




                                               45
For Online Publication
A           Additional Tables and Figures


     0.3
                                                                 0.2                                                            0.2
                                                        q                                                                                                          q
     0.2                                        q   q
                                                                                                                      q                                                     q

                                                                                                                  q
                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                            q    0.1                                                      q
                                                                                                                                0.1                                     q

     0.1                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                  q           q
                                                                                                          q
                                       q                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                0.0                    q
                                                                 0.0                      q
     0.0                      q
                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                       q

                     q                                                    q
             q

                                                                                                                               -0.1
    -0.1                                                        -0.1
             -4               -2           0        2       4             -4              -2              0       2       4            -4              -2          0        2       4
                                       Event Time                                                 Event Time                                                   Event Time

                               (a) Sales                          (b) Sales Net of Procurements                                        (c) Sales Net of Costs


     0.4
                                                                 0.20
     0.3                                                                                                      q                 0.10                                    q   q
                                                                 0.15                                             q
                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                          q           q
                                                            q                                                                                                                   q
     0.2                                                                                                                                                            q               q
                                                    q            0.10
                                           q
                                                        q                                                                       0.05
                                                q
     0.1
                                                                 0.05                             q                                                            q

                                       q
     0.0     q                q
                                                                 0.00                         q                                 0.00               q
                                                                                                                                                           q

                                                                                      q
                                                                              q                                                            q
    -0.1             q
                                                                -0.05
                                                                                                                               -0.05
    -0.2                                                        -0.10
             -4               -2           0        2       4             -4              -2              0       2       4            -4              -2          0        2       4
                                       Event Time                                                 Event Time                                                   Event Time

                             (d) EBITD                                 (e) Intermediate Input Costs                                                (f) Employees


                                                                                                                                0.25
     0.15                                                        0.15
                                                                                                                                0.20
                                                    q                                                             q
                                                q                                                             q                                                             q
                                                                                                                      q                                                         q   q
     0.10                                               q        0.10                                                     q
                                                                                                                                0.15                                    q
                                                            q
                                            q                                                             q

                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                0.10
     0.05                                                        0.05
                                       q

                                                                                                  q                             0.05                           q

                                                                                      q
     0.00                q
                                  q                              0.00                         q                                                    q

                 q                                                            q
                                                                                                                                0.00       q
                                                                                                                                                           q




    -0.05                                                       -0.05                                                          -0.05

             -4                -2          0        2       4             -4              -2              0       2       4            -4              -2          0        2       4
                                       Event Time                                                 Event Time                                                   Event Time

                             (g) Wage bill                      (h) Employees, Broader Measure                                  (i) Wage bill, Broader Measure


     0.04
                                                                 0.04                                                           0.04
     0.03
                                                    q            0.03                                                 q
                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                0.02
                                                        q                                                         q
                                                q                                                             q                                                         q
     0.02                                                   q                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                            q
                                                                 0.02                                                                      q                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                       q
                                                                                                          q                     0.00                       q
     0.01
                 q                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                 0.01         q                   q

     0.00                         q                                                                                            -0.02
                         q
                                                                 0.00                 q
                                                                                              q


    -0.01                                                                                                                      -0.04
                                                                -0.01
             -4                -2          0        2       4             -4              -2              0       2       4            -4              -2          0        2       4
                                       Event Time                                                 Event Time                                                   Event Time

     (j) Mean Earnings, All Workers                                     (k) Mean Earnings, Stayers                            (l) Mean Previous Earnings, New
                                                                                                                              Hires

                                      Figure A.1: Difference-in-differences Estimates at Annual Frequency
Notes: This figure presents average treatment effect on the treated estimates using the difference-in-differences speci-
fication defined in the text. All outcomes are in log units. All results include firm fixed effects. The control units are
those firms that place a bid in a procurement auction in the same year that the reference treatment cohort wins. The
omitted relative time is -2. 90 percent confidence intervals are displayed, clustering on firm. See Online Appendix
B.1 for additional details on sample definitions.



                                                                                                      1
            1.0                           q                                          1.0                                        q




            0.8                                                                      0.8

            0.6
                                                                                     0.6
            0.4
                                                                                     0.4
            0.2
                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                     0.2                                                q
                                                                                                                                            q
            0.0      q    q     q     q
                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                q
                                                              q
                                                          q
                                                     q
           -0.2                                                                      0.0            q     q   q    q


                     -4        -2         0               2        4                             -4           -2            0           2       4
                                      Event Time                                                                   Event Time

                  (a) Indicator for First-time Winning                                                  (b) Indicator for Any Wins

                     Figure A.2: Visualizing the Difference-in-differences Research Design
Notes: This figure presents average treatment effect on the treated estimates using the difference-in-differences speci-
fication defined in the text. All results include firm fixed effects. The control units are those firms that place a bid in
a procurement auction in the same year that the reference treatment cohort wins. The omitted relative time is -2.
90 percent confidence intervals are displayed, clustering on firm. See Online Appendix B.1 for additional details on
sample definitions and outcomes.




                               0.03


                               0.02


                               0.01


                               0.00


                              -0.01
                                              (-1)                (-1,...,1)                 (-2,...,2)            (-3,...,3)
                                                                    Stayer Spell (Event Times)

                                                                  Event Time        Before      After



                                                          (a) Robustness by Stayer Spell



                              0.03


                              0.02


                              0.01


                              0.00


                                              1                        2                        3                      4
                                                                       Years of Tenure (Count)

                                                                  Event Time       Before      After



                                                         (b) Robustness by Tenure Length

                   Figure A.3: Robustness: Mean Earnings of Stayer and Tenure Samples
Notes: This figure presents average treatment effect on the treated estimates using the difference-in-differences spec-
ification defined in the text. All outcomes are in log units. All results include firm fixed effects. "Before" refers to
relative times {-4,-3,-2} and "After" refers to relative times {0,1,2}. The Baseline sample restricts the control units
to those that place a bid in a procurement auction in the same year that the reference treatment cohort wins. The
omitted relative time is -2. 90 percent confidence intervals are displayed, clustering on firm. Subfigure (a) varies the
window in which the worker must have been employed by the bidding firm, where "(-2,...,2)" is treated as the baseline
definition of stayers. Subfigure (b) varies the window over which the worker must have been employed prior to the
auction bid, e.g., tenure of 4 means that the worker was employed from relative time -4 until at least relative time 0.
See Online Appendix B.1 for additional details on sample definitions and outcomes.



                                                                               2
                            Before                                 After                                    Before                                After                                              Before                                                       After
                                                                                    0.15
    0.2                                                                                                                                                               0.2
                                                           q
                                                               q   q   q   q
                                                                               q    0.10                                                                                                                                                          q       q       q       q       q
                                                                                                                                          q                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                              q               q
                                                                                    0.05
                                                                                                                                                  q   q   q           0.1
    0.1
                                                                                    0.00                                                                              0.0                    q           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q       q
                                                                                                q
    0.0     q                                                                                           q        q       q       q   q
                                                                                                                                                                                 q

                    q        q       q       q       q                             -0.05
                                                                                                                                                                     -0.1
   -0.1                                                                            -0.10
           0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 1                          0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 1             0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 1                        0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 1               0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 1                                               0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 1
                                     Max. Loss Margin                                                                Max. Loss Margin                                                                            Max. Loss Margin

                                     (a) Sales                                      (b) Sales Net of Procurements                                                                (c) Sales Net of Costs



                            Before                                 After                                    Before                                After                                                  Before                                                   After
    0.3                                                                             0.2                                                                               0.10
    0.2                                                    q   q
                                                                                                                                          q   q   q   q   q   q                                                                                               q       q   q   q   q

                                                                               q                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                   q   q   q

    0.1                                                                             0.1                                                                               0.05

    0.0
                    q                q       q       q
                                                                                    0.0                                                                               0.00
            q                q                                                                                                                                                                                           q           q       q
                                                                                            q                                                                                        q                       q
   -0.1                                                                                             q        q       q       q       q                                                           q


                                                                                                                                                                     -0.05
   -0.2                                                                            -0.1
           0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 1                          0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 1            0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 1                         0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 1                   0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 1                                            0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 1
                                     Max. Loss Margin                                                                Max. Loss Margin                                                                            Max. Loss Margin

                                 (d) EBITD                                           (e) Intermediate Input Costs                                                                                    (f) Employees



                            Before                                 After                                    Before                                After                                          Before                                                           After
                                                                                    0.15                                                                             0.2
                                                                               q
    0.10                                                       q   q   q   q
                                                                                    0.10                                                  q
                                                                                                                                              q   q   q   q   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q       q       q   q   q
                                                           q

                                                                                                                                                                     0.1
    0.05                                                                            0.05
    0.00
                q       q
                                 q       q       q   q                              0.00        q       q        q       q       q   q                               0.0     q           q           q           q           q           q



   -0.05
                                                                                   -0.05
            0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 1                         0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 1             0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 1                        0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 1              0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 1                                                0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 1
                                     Max. Loss Margin                                                                Max. Loss Margin                                                                            Max. Loss Margin

                            (g) Wage bill                                          (h) Employees, Broader Measure                                                     (i) Wage bill, Broader Measure



                            Before                                 After                                    Before                                After                                                  Before                                                   After

    0.03                                                                            0.03                                                                              0.04
                                                                                                                                                  q   q       q
                                                                   q   q                                                                      q           q
    0.02                                                   q
                                                               q           q   q
                                                                                    0.02                                                  q                           0.02                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
    0.01                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q   q   q   q
                                                                                    0.01                                                                              0.00                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                             q           q           q       q
                        q        q       q           q
    0.00        q
                                                 q
                                                                                                q
                                                                                                        q        q       q       q
                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                    0.00                                                                             -0.02
   -0.01
                                                                                   -0.01                                                                             -0.04
            0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 1                         0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 1             0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 1                        0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 1                   0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 1                                            0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 1
                                     Max. Loss Margin                                                                Max. Loss Margin                                                                            Max. Loss Margin

   (j) Mean Earnings, All Workers                                                     (k) Mean Earnings, Stayers                                                  (l) Mean Previous Earnings, New Hires

                                                         Figure A.4: Restricting the Control Group's Bid Loss Margin
Notes: This figure presents average treatment effect on the treated estimates using the difference-in-differences spec-
ification defined in the text. All outcomes are in log units. All results include firm fixed effects. "Before" refers to
relative times {-4,-3,-2} and "After" refers to relative times {0,1,2}. The Baseline sample restricts the control units
to those that place a bid in a procurement auction in the same year that the reference treatment cohort wins. We
then restrict the control group to firms whose bid loss margin was lower than the number displayed on the x-axis. See
Online Appendix B.1 for additional details on sample definitions and outcomes.




                                                                                                                             3
                           Before                                                  After                                           Before                                          After                                  Before                           After

   0.2                                                                                              0.10                                                                                               0.2
                                                                   q       q         q     q   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q     q   q
                                                                                                    0.05                                                               q       q     q     q   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q   q


   0.1                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.1
                                                                                                    0.00
                                                                                                                               q
   0.0                                                                                                             q                       q           q       q                                       0.0    q       q        q       q       q
                       q
           q                       q           q           q                                       -0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                      -0.1
           3           4           5           6           7       3       4        5      6   7                   3           4       5           6           7       3   4         5     6   7              3       4        5       6       7   3   4    5      6   7
                                               Max. Bid Rank                                                                                   Max. Bid Rank                                                                           Max. Bid Rank

                                           (a) Sales                                                (b) Sales Net of Procurements                                                                             (c) Sales Net of Costs



                               Before                                              After                                   Before                                                  After                                      Before                       After
                                                                                                   0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.10
    0.2                                                            q                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                     q     q   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q     q     q   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                           q         q     q   q
                                                                                                   0.1
    0.1                                                                                                                                                                                                0.05

    0.0                                                                                            0.0                                                                                                 0.00
               q           q           q           q       q
                                                                                                                       q                       q           q                                                      q       q        q       q
                                                                                                           q                       q                                                                                                           q

   -0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                      -0.05
               3           4        5           6          7       3       4         5     6   7           3           4           5           6           7       3       4        5      6   7                  3       4     5       6      7   3   4     5     6   7
                                               Max. Bid Rank                                                                                   Max. Bid Rank                                                                           Max. Bid Rank

                                    (d) EBITD                                                        (e) Intermediate Input Costs                                                                                         (f) Employees



                                   Before                                          After                                       Before                                              After                                  Before                           After

    0.10                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.15
                                                                       q
                                                                               q           q   q
                                                                                                   0.10                                                            q       q         q     q   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q   q     q     q   q


                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.10
    0.05                                                                                           0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.05
    0.00                                                                                                       q           q                                                                                          q
                   q           q           q           q       q                                   0.00                                q           q       q                                          0.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                              q                q       q       q




   -0.05
                   3           4       5           6           7       3   4         5     6   7               3           4        5           6          7       3       4         5     6   7              3       4        5       6       7   3   4    5      6   7
                                               Max. Bid Rank                                                                                   Max. Bid Rank                                                                           Max. Bid Rank

                                   (g) Wage bill                                                   (h) Employees, Broader Measure                                                                      (i) Wage bill, Broader Measure



                                   Before                                          After                                       Before                                              After                                      Before                       After
    0.03                                                                                           0.03
                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.02
    0.02                                                                                       q   0.02                                                                                        q
                                                                       q             q     q                                                                                         q     q
                                                                               q                                                                                                                                                                             q     q   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
    0.01                                                                                                                                                           q       q                           0.00               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q


                                                                                                   0.01                                                                                                           q


    0.00           q
                               q           q           q       q
                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                       q           q
                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                      -0.02
                                                                                                   0.00
   -0.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                      -0.04
                   3           4       5           6           7       3   4         5     6   7               3           4        5           6          7       3       4         5     6   7                  3       4     5       6      7   3   4     5     6   7
                                               Max. Bid Rank                                                                                   Max. Bid Rank                                                                           Max. Bid Rank

    (j) Mean Earnings, All Workers                                                                       (k) Mean Earnings, Stayers                                                                (l) Mean Previous Earnings, New Hires

                                                                       Figure A.5: Restricting the Control Group's Bid Ranks
Notes: This figure presents average treatment effect on the treated estimates using the difference-in-differences spec-
ification defined in the text. All outcomes are in log units. All results include firm fixed effects. "Before" refers to
relative times {-4,-3,-2} and "After" refers to relative times {0,1,2}. The Baseline sample restricts the control units to
those that place a bid in a procurement auction in the same year that the reference treatment cohort wins. We then
restrict the control group to firms whose bid rank was less than or equal to the number displayed on the x-axis. See
Online Appendix B.1 for additional details on sample definitions and outcomes.




                                                                                                                                                       4
     0.3                                                              0.2                                                           0.3
     0.2                                                                                                                            0.2
                                                                      0.1                                                           0.1
     0.1                                                                                                                            0.0
     0.0                                                              0.0                                                          -0.1
    -0.1                                                             -0.1                                                          -0.2
                                                                                                                                   -0.3
             Baseline


                               Non-
                              winner

                                        Known
                                          EIN

                                                All Time
                                                Periods

                                                            Within
                                                           Auction




                                                                             Baseline


                                                                                             Non-
                                                                                            winner

                                                                                                      Known
                                                                                                        EIN

                                                                                                              All Time
                                                                                                              Periods

                                                                                                                          Within
                                                                                                                         Auction




                                                                                                                                                   Baseline


                                                                                                                                                                      Non-
                                                                                                                                                                     winner

                                                                                                                                                                               Known
                                                                                                                                                                                 EIN

                                                                                                                                                                                        All Time
                                                                                                                                                                                        Periods

                                                                                                                                                                                                     Within
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Auction
                            (a) Sales                                 (b) Sales Net of Procurements                                         (c) Sales Net of Costs



     0.4                                                              0.4                                                           0.15
                                                                      0.3                                                           0.10
     0.2                                                              0.2                                                           0.05
     0.0                                                              0.1                                                           0.00
                                                                      0.0
    -0.2                                                             -0.1                                                          -0.05
                                                                                                                                   -0.10
             Baseline


                               Non-
                              winner

                                        Known
                                          EIN

                                                All Time
                                                Periods

                                                            Within
                                                           Auction




                                                                             Baseline


                                                                                             Non-
                                                                                            winner

                                                                                                      Known
                                                                                                        EIN

                                                                                                              All Time
                                                                                                              Periods

                                                                                                                          Within
                                                                                                                         Auction




                                                                                                                                                         Baseline


                                                                                                                                                                       Non-
                                                                                                                                                                      winner
                                                                                                                                                                                Known
                                                                                                                                                                                  EIN
                                                                                                                                                                                         All Time
                                                                                                                                                                                         Periods
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Within
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Auction
                        (d) EBITD                                     (e) Intermediate Input Costs                                                       (f) Employees



                                                                      0.20
     0.15                                                             0.15                                                         0.2
     0.10                                                             0.10
     0.05                                                                                                                          0.1
     0.00                                                             0.05
    -0.05                                                             0.00                                                         0.0
    -0.10                                                            -0.05
                 Baseline


                                Non-
                               winner
                                        Known
                                          EIN
                                                All Time
                                                Periods
                                                            Within
                                                           Auction




                                                                                 Baseline


                                                                                              Non-
                                                                                             winner
                                                                                                      Known
                                                                                                        EIN
                                                                                                              All Time
                                                                                                              Periods
                                                                                                                          Within
                                                                                                                         Auction




                                                                                                                                              Baseline


                                                                                                                                                                     Non-
                                                                                                                                                                    winner

                                                                                                                                                                               Known
                                                                                                                                                                                 EIN

                                                                                                                                                                                        All Time
                                                                                                                                                                                        Periods

                                                                                                                                                                                                     Within
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Auction
                  (g) Wage bill                                      (h) Employees, Broader Measure                                 (i) Wage bill, Broader Measure



     0.04                                                             0.04
     0.03                                                             0.03                                                           0.05
     0.02                                                             0.02
     0.01                                                             0.01                                                           0.00
     0.00                                                             0.00
    -0.01                                                            -0.01                                                         -0.05
    -0.02                                                            -0.02
                 Baseline


                                Non-
                               winner
                                        Known
                                          EIN
                                                All Time
                                                Periods
                                                            Within
                                                           Auction




                                                                                 Baseline


                                                                                              Non-
                                                                                             winner
                                                                                                      Known
                                                                                                        EIN
                                                                                                              All Time
                                                                                                              Periods
                                                                                                                          Within
                                                                                                                         Auction




                                                                                                                                                         Baseline


                                                                                                                                                                       Non-
                                                                                                                                                                      winner
                                                                                                                                                                                Known
                                                                                                                                                                                  EIN
                                                                                                                                                                                         All Time
                                                                                                                                                                                         Periods
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Within
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Auction




    (j) Mean earnings, all employees                                   (k) Mean earnings, stayers                                  (l) Mean past earnings, new hires

                                                 Figure A.6: Robustness and Specification Checks
Notes: This figure presents average treatment effect on the treated estimates using the difference-in-differences spec-
ification defined in the text. All outcomes are in log units. All results include firm fixed effects. "Before" refers to
relative times {-4,-3,-2} and "After" refers to relative times {0,1,2}. "Baseline" restricts the control firms to those
that place a bid in a procurement auction in the same year that the reference treatment cohort wins. "Non-winner"
further restricts the control firms to those that do not win an auction until at least relative time 4. In "All Time
Periods", "Before" refers to relative times {-4,-3,-2,-1} and "After" refers to relative time {0,1,2,3,4}. "Within Auction"
further restricts the control firms to those that place bids within the same auction as the winner, then estimates the
difference-in-differences specification separately by auction and averages the estimates across auctions. The omitted
relative time is -2. 90 percent confidence intervals are displayed, clustering on firm. See Online Appendix B.1 for
additional details on sample definitions and outcomes.
                                                                                            5
B     Online Appendix: Data Sources
B.1     Tax Data
All firm-level variables are constructed from annual business tax returns over the years 2001-2015:
C-Corporations (Form 1120), S-Corporations (Form 1120-S), and Partnerships (Form 1065). Worker-
level variables are constructed from annual tax returns over the years 2001-2015: Direct employees
(Form W-2) and independent contractors (Form 1099).
    Tax Return Variable Definitions:

    · Earnings: Reported on W-2 box 1 for each Taxpayer Identification Number (TIN). Each TIN
      is de-identified in our data.

    · Employer: The Employer Identification Number (EIN) reported on W-2 for a given TIN.
      Each EIN is de-identified in our data.

    · Employees: Number of workers matched to an EIN in year t from Form W-2 with annual
      earnings above the annualized full-time minimum wage and where the EIN is this worker's
      highest-paying employer.

    · Wage bill: Total earnings among employees in year t.

    · Contracted worker: Number of 1099-MISC individuals matched to an EIN in year t.

    · Employees, Broader Measure: Total number of W-2 workers plus 1099 contracted workers
      matched to an EIN in year t.

    · Wage bill, Broader Measure: Sum of earnings for the broader sample of employees matched
      to an EIN in year t.

    · NAICS Code: The NAICS code is reported on line 21 on Schedule K of Form 1120 for C-
      corporations, line 2a Schedule B of Form 1120S for S-corporations, and Box A of form 1065 for
      partnerships. We consider the first three digits to be the industry. We code invalid industries
      as missing.

    · Sales: Line 1 of Form 1120 for C-Corporations, Form 1120S for S-Corporations, and Form
      1065 for partnerships. Also referred to as gross revenues.

    · Intermediate Input Costs: Line 2 of Form 1120 for C-Corporations, Form 1120S for S-
      Corporations, and Form 1065 for partnerships. Also referred to as cost of goods sold.

    · EBITD: We follow Kline et al. (2019) in defining Earnings Before Interest, Taxes, and De-
      preciation (EBITD) as the difference between total income and total deductions other than
      interest and depreciation. Total income is reported on Line 11 on Form 1120 for C-corporations,
      Line 1c on Form 1120S for S-corporations, and Line 1c on Form 1065 for Partnerships. To-
      tal deductions other than interest and depreciation are computed as Line 27 minus Lines 18
      and 20 on Form 1120 for C-corporations, Line 20 minus Lines 13 and 14 on Firm 1120S for
      S-corporations, and Line 21 minus Lines 15 and 16c on Form 1065 for partnerships.

                                                  6
  · Sales Net of Costs: This is sales minus intermediate input costs minus wage bill.

Procurement Auction Variable Definitions:

  · Bid: The dollar value submitted by the firm as a price at which it would be willing to complete
    the procurement project.

  · Auction winner: A firm is an auction winner if it placed the lowest bid in a procurement
    auction.

  · Amount of winnings: Bid placed by the winner in each auction.

  · Year of first win: First year in which the firm is an auction winner. To account for left-
    censoring, we do not define a win as a "first win" unless there were at least two observed years
    of data during which the firm could have won and did not win an auction. For example, if a
    state provided auction records for 2001-2015, and a firm is first observed winning in 2001 or
    2002, we do not consider this firm a first-time winner, but if the firm is first observed winning
    in 2003 or later, we consider it a first time winner.

Firm sample definitions:

  · Baseline sample: A firm that files tax form 1120, 1120-S, or 1065 is considered part of the
    baseline sample centered around auction cohort c if it is observed bidding in an auction in year
    c.

  · Sample of close bidders (cardinal): A firm in the baseline sample at c is also in the sample
    of close bidders (cardinal) if, in at least one auction in year c, its bid was less than T × 100
    percent greater than the bid of the winner, where T is referred to as the loss margin. For
    example, if T = 0.10, the firm must have placed a bid within 10 percent of the winner's bid in
    at least one auction at c.

  · Sample of close bidders (ordinal): A firm in the baseline sample at c is also in the sample
    of close bidders (ordinal) if, in at least one auction in year c, it had at least the R lowest bid
    in the auction, where R is referred to as the bid rank. For example, if R = 3, the firm must
    have been among the 3 lowest bidders (inclusive of the winner) in at least one auction at c.

  · Sample of non-winners: A firm in the baseline sample at c that does not win an auction
    before or during c is called a non-winner if it continues to not win any auctions until at least
    relative time t  4. For example, if c = 2005, then a non-winner must not win its first auction
    until at least 2009.

  · Known EIN sample: Firms from the six states in which the auction records included the
    EIN, thus allowing us to link records exactly rather than using a fuzzy matching algorithm.

Worker sample definitions:

  · Main sample: A worker is considered part of the main sample at c if the worker's highest-
    paying firm at c on Form W-2 is in the baseline sample of firms and the W-2 wage payments
    from that firm are greater than $15,000 in 2015 USD. We also restrict to workers aged 25-60.

                                                 7
   · Broader sample: A worker is considered part of the broader sample at c if the worker receives
     a W-2 or 1099 form associated with a firm in the baseline sample of firms at c.

   · Stayers: A worker is a stayer for 2k +1 years at firm j in the baseline sample of firms at c if the
     worker's highest-paying W-2 firm is the same firm during each time period in (c - k, ..., c + k )
     and the W-2 wage payments from that firm in each year are greater than $15,000 in 2015 USD.

   · Tenure: A worker has k years of tenure at firm j in the baseline sample of firms at c if the
     worker's highest-paying W-2 firm is the same firm during each time period in (c - k, ..., c) and
     the W-2 wage payments from that firm in each year are greater than $15,000 in 2015 USD.

   · New Hires: A worker is a new hire at firm j in year t if the worker's highest-paying W-2
     employer in year t was firm j and highest-paying W-2 employer in year t - 1 was firm j = j ,
     where the worker recieved W-2 wage payments greater than $15,000 in 2015 USD from j in
     t - 1 as well as from j in t.

A potential drawback of tax data is limited coverage of illegal immigrants. As a result, we primarily
interpret our paper as providing an analysis of the legal labor market. However, there is substantial
coverage of illegal immigrants in our W-2 returns. Since 1996, the IRS has assigned a tax identifi-
cation number, called the ITIN, to illegal immigrants in order to facilitate filing. By law, the IRS
cannot share illegal immigrant status with other agencies for purposes of immigration enforcement,
so filing does not pose deportation risks. The IRS imposes penalties on employers for failing to file
W-2 tax forms on behalf of illegal employees, while tax refunds (e.g., child tax credits) and other
benefits (e.g., evidence of consistently filing taxes can be used in support of citizenship applications)
provide substantial incentives for illegal immigrants to file. For example, the CBO (2007) estimated
that up to 75 percent of all illegal immigrants filed during the earlier part of our sample, and this
rate may have risen due to DACA and other reforms instituted during the latter part of our sample.


B.2     Acquisition and Preparation of Auction Data
This appendix describes our data sources for auction bids and how we build the data set for our
main application. Online Appendix Table A.4 provides a summary of the sources of DOT records
by state.

Bid Express Auction Records

The Bid Express website collects information on bids and bidders for procurement auctions held
by Departments of Transportation of many US states. It can be freely accessed at www.bidx.com,
although the access to information on the bidders requires a paid account registration. We scraped
17 states' DOT auction records from Bid Express. We performed the scraping using the Python
library Selenium to automate browser actions. We registered a BidX.com account, which is required
to access bidder information.
    We collect the auction information for a given state using the following procedure:



                                                   8
1. We go to the web page of that state on BidX.com and select the latest letting.
   Browser actions: visit www.bidx.com, select the desired agency from "Select a U.S. Agency"
   drop down menu and click the button "go". An illustration is provided in Online Appendix
   Figure A.7a. Then click the "Letting" tab on the top left corner of the new refreshed web page
   and click the first letting date hyperlink in "List of Letting" table. An illustration is provided
   in Online Appendix Figure A.7b.

2. There are two different sources of information - "Apparent Bids" and "Bid Summary" - on a let-
   ting page. More specifically, "Apparent Bids" and "Bid Summary" contain auction information
   but in different formats, and both of them have links to additional bidder information, which
   requires a paid account to access. Starting from the latest letting page, our scraper clicks the
   hyperlink "Apparent Bids" (Online Appendix Figure A.7c) then downloads a csv file for every
   bidder by clicking on the bidder hyperlink (Online Appendix Figure A.7d) and "Export(csv)"
   on the refreshed page.




                  (a) Front Page                           (b) Letting Page




              (c) Apparent Bids Page                          (d) Bid Summary Page

                            Figure A.7: Web Pages from BidX.com


   If there is no information on the refreshed page, it moves to a new letting by clicking the arrow
   with html class "prev_arrow". The procedure is iterated until the arrow is not clickable. We
   repeat the same procedure for the "Bid Summary" hyperlink.
   Through this procedure, we obtain three tables for each letting:

     a. auction information from "Apparent Bids", which contains: bidder names, bidder ID,
        bidder ranks, bid amounts, bidder call orders, project description, counties, letting ID and
        letting date. We do note that a few states record two extra variables: DBE Percentage
        and DBE Manual.

                                                9
        b. auction information from "Bid Summary", which contains: bidder names, bidder ID,
           bidder ranks, bid amounts, bidder call orders, counties, proposal ID and letting date.
        c. additional bidder information from bidder links, which contains: company name, company
           address, company phone number, company fax number.

      We then merge the table c into a and b. Therefore, two files are created for every letting, one
      for "Apparent Bids" and one for "Bid Summary" with both auction and firm level information.

The information at the letting level is then further aggregated for each state as follow:

  1. For a state X , we merge its "Apparent Bids" files into one single file X_apparentbid and "Bid
     Summary" files into one single file X_bidsummary. Then we add a new variable State, which
     is the two-letter abbreviation of states, in X_apparentbid and X_bidsummary.

  2. Then we find lettings that are in X_bidsummary but not in X_apparentbid, and augment
     them so that they have the same variables as lettings in X_apparentbid.1 The variables added
     are filled with "N/A". Then we merged these lettings with X_apparentbid into one file X_all

  3. We merge all *_all files into one final file.

As a result, we obtain a comprehensive file that has the following variables: Date of the auction,
unique auction identifier, name of the bidding firm, address of the bidding firm, unique firm identifier,
total bid amount, and state in which the auction occurred.

State-specific Auction Records

We obtained auction records on 12 other states from two types of sources: scraping state-specific
bidding websites (7 states) and submitting Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests to state
governments (5 states). Each data set included different variables and were organized in different
formats. For example, the data from Texas included 121 variables while the data from West Virginia
included only 11 variables. We harmonized these data sets focusing on the core set of variables: Date
of the auction, unique auction identifier, name of the bidding firm, address of the bidding firm, unique
firm identifier, total bid amount, and state in which the auction occurred. Note that one state, West
Virginia, transitioned from its own website to Bid Express in 2011, so we use combined records from
both sources. Once harmonized, we combined the various state-specific DOT auction records with
the records obtained from Bid Express.

EIN Availability

We were able to obtain the EINs for firms that bid in DOT auctions in six states:

   · Florida, Indiana, and West Virginia: These states' DOT auction records were scraped from
     state-specific websites. The EINs were available from these websites.
  1 Proposal   in X_bidsummary is treated as Letting ID.




                                                       10
   · Colorado and Kansas: These states' DOT auction records were obtained through FOIA re-
     quests. The requested data included EINs.

   · Texas: This state's DOT auction records were obtained through a FOIA request. Although
     this request did not include EINs, we were able to look up EINs by firm name and address
     through a Texas state government website: https://mycpa.cpa.state.tx.us/coa/.


B.3     Matching Auction Data to Tax Records
This appendix describes the procedure adopted to match the bidders in our auction sample to the tax
data. For a subset of bidders the Employer Identification Number (EIN) is available in the auction
data, providing a unique identifier for the matching. For those observations an exact matching can
be performed. We refer to this subset of perfect matches as the training data. In any other case, we
rely on the fuzzy matching algorithm described below.
    The procedure takes advantage of some regularities in the denomination of firms and common
abbreviations to improve the quality of matching. Furthermore, in order to properly distinguish
different branches of the same company, additional information on value added or state will be used.

Overview of denominations

Generally, a business name consists of three parts: a distinctive part, a descriptive part, and a legal
part.2 The distinctive part is named by the business owner and is usually required by governments
to be " substantially different " from any other existing name. The descriptive part describes what
the business does, or its sector.3 Finally, the legal part refers to the business structure of a corpo-
ration. For example, for the name "Rogers Communications Inc.", "Rogers" is the distinctive part,
"Communication" is the descriptive part, and "Inc." is the legal part. Most of the discrepancies of
company names between different sources arise from the descriptive and the legal parts, since they
are more subject to be abbreviations or common synonyms.
    The legal part of corporation names takes a fairly small number of denominations, therefore can
be identified using a properly constructed dictionary and treated separately. Conversely, disentan-
gling the distinctive and the descriptive parts is not as straightforward. However, conventionally, the
descriptive part follows the distinctive one within the string. This observation motivates a procedure
that gives more weight to the first words within a company name, since they are more likely to be
part of the distinctive part.

Legal-Parts Dictionary

In order to construct a uniform abbreviation in the legal part, we constructed a many-to-one dic-
tionary using a subsample of our training data. We manually select abbreviations (including for
misspelled words) by comparing mismatched names for the same firm in multiple databases. For
   2 Although there are no specific regulations on this naming structure, it is in alignment with naming convention

and government guidelines. https://www.ic.gc.ca/eic/site/cd-dgc.nsf/eng/cs01070.html
   3 An example would be California Code of Regulations for business entities.             https://www.sos.ca.gov/
administration/regulations/current-regulations/business/business-entity-names/#section-21000



                                                        11
Algorithm 1 Matching Algorithm Pseudocode




example, "Incorporated" appears as "Inc." "INC", "Incorp" and so on in our data. Therefore, these
abbreviations, when found, are mapped into "Incorporated" as described below. Our dictionary and
matching algorithm are available upon request for replicability.

Matching Algorithm

We now describe the database matching algorithm (written in Python). A pseudocode representation
of this procedure is provided in Online Appendix Algorithm 1. For each company name in the auction
database, the algorithm searches the best match in the tax database. Although the algorithm is
meant for the comparison of corporate names, it can be augmented with additional information if
available. In our main application, the auction data contains information about the name and the
state of origin of the bidding firms. The latter can be used to improve the quality of the matching
by using a "blocking" procedure that prioritizes firms from the same origin state, as explained below.
Let a be the firm, S a be the firm's string name and Statea be the firm's state of origin. The state
of origin is only used if the state option is enabled in the code provided. The algorithm proceeds as
follow.

  1. Name Normalization
     All non-alphanumeric characters with the exception of spaces are removed from S a and all
     letter characters are capitalized. Consecutive white spaces are replaced with one white space.
     Any sub-string separated by one space is considered a "word". Every word in the legal-parts
     dictionary is removed. For example, "Amnio Brothers Inc." is composed by the three words
     "Amnio" "Brothers" and "Inc.". After the first step, it would be normalized to "AMNIO BROS",


                                                 12
     since the word "Brothers" is recognized in our dictionary as a synonym for "BROS" and "Inc." is
     recognized in our dictionary as a legal part and therefore removed. We refer to the normalized
     string as Snorm
                 a
                      . The same normalization is applied to every company name in the tax database.
     If the normalized name is not unique in the tax database, we restrict to the ones that ever
     filed at least one of the three firm tax returns (1120,1120-S or 1065). If the same firm name
     filed multiple firm tax returns, we select the one with highest value added, as the firm with
     greater value added is participating in more economic activity and therefore more likely to be
     the firm that participated in the auction.

  2. Shortlisting
     Let Snorm
           a
                 be composed by n  2 words. Starting from the first word, we search in the list
     of normalized tax data company names the subset of names that contains that word. If the
     subset is empty, no matching occurs and the matching for A ends. If the subset is a singleton,
     A is paired with the unique element of the set and the shortlisting step ends for A. If the
     subset has more than one element, we proceed with the second word in Snorm    a
                                                                                         and consider
     only the candidate matches that also contain the second word. If the set still contains more
     than one element, we proceed with the third word and so on, until all the n words are used or
     we obtain either a singleton or an empty set. If this iteration leads to a singleton, A is paired
     with the unique element of the set. If it leads to an empty set, then A is paired with the
     smallest non-empty subset from the previous iterations. In short, this step selects a shortlist
     of candidate matches that share, after normalization, the highest number of initial words with
     A. If the state option is enabled, only firms that match exactly the Statea are considered for
     shortlisting.

  3. Scoring
     This step employs the Levenshtein ratio (LR), a widespread measure of distance between
     strings, to select the best match from the shortlist. For each element of the set paired to A
     we compute its LR with respect to S a . The company whose name has the highest score is
     selected as the match. If multiple companies tie for the top score, the one with the highest
     value added is selected. If the option strict is enabled, all the company names that do not
     reach a minimum threshold T  (0, 1) in their LR are dropped. If all candidate matches are
     dropped, then A is considered unmatched. Hence the higher the T , the more stringent is the
     matching process. In our application, we considered T = 0.6.

Online Appendix Table A.1 illustrates how the algorithm works with an example search, using
"Hannaford Bros. Distribution Co." as the search query. In our example, strict and state are
disabled.



In-Sample Algorithm Validation

In order to validate the algorithm, we apply it to the subset of firms for which we were provided
the EIN by the state DOT, thus allowing us to link records exactly rather than using the algorithm


                                                 13
                      Steps                                        Output

              String Normalization        Normalized Name: HANNAFORD BROS DISTRIBUTION


                                     The names(in bracket) and normalized names in the shortlist are shown
                                               below. The shared word is in bold.

                   Shortlisting      KELLY HANNAFORD BROS DISTRIBUTION (Kelly Hannaford
                                              Brothers Distribution Company)
                                     HANNAFORD BROS DISTRIBUTION(Hannaford Brothers Distri.
                                                       C.)
                                       HASTING HANNAFORD BROS DISTRIBUTION (Hasting
                                             Hannaford Bros. Distribution Inc.)


                                          Normalized names in the shortlist are shown below.
                                           The scores are shown on the right of the names.

                     Scoring           KELLY HANNAFORD BROS DISTRIBUTION (LR = 0.9)
                                         HANNAFORD BROS DISTRIBUTION (LR =1)
                                      HASTING HANNAFORD BROS DISTRIBUTION (LR =0.87)


                  Unique match       HANNAFORD BROS DISTRIBUTION(Hannaford Brothers Distri. C.)


                                       Table A.1: Example Search


(the "Known EIN" sample). The results are displayed in Online Appendix Table A.2. In Column
(1), we provide results from using a simple string matching algorithm, in which a firm in the auction
database is only matched to a firm in the tax database if they have identical names. In Columns
(2-5), we apply our approach presented in Online Appendix Algorithm 1. Overall, the algorithm
outperforms string matching in both accuracy and number of matches achieved. In our preferred
specification in column (5), the algorithm correctly matches 84.5 percent of the bidders whose EIN
are known and could be found in tax database. The use of the State option proves effective in
increasing the number of true matches, while the Strict option with T = 0.6 improves accuracy by
reducing the false matches.

Out-of-Sample Algorithm Validation

In order to assess the external validity of the algorithm outside our specific application, we con-
structed two test data sets using data from the Employee Benefits Security Administration (ESBA).
Our test data sets, PensionData and PensionTest, are constructed using Form 5500 data sets that are
published by the Employee Benefits Security Administration (ESBA)4 . Form 5500 data sets contain
information, including company names and EINs, about the operations, funding and investments of
approximately 800,000 business entities. We consider both retirement and Health and Welfare data
sets, drop every variable except the Company Name and EIN, then remove duplicate observations.
For every unique EIN, we find all names that are associated with it, then we discard any duplicate
names. Most of the EINs are associated with multiple company names, which reproduces a challenge
in the tax database. For each EIN, if multiple names are associated with it, we select the first name
and put in into the PensionData data set and all the others into the PensionTest data set. If there
is only one name associated with the EIN, we still add that name into PensionData. This gives us
  4 https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ebsa/researchers/data




                                                        14
                                                                        Simple Search          Fuzzy Match
                                                                             (1)         (2)     (3)    (4)     (5)
     % Bidders Matched to Any Tax Record                                    80.2        99.9    97.6   99.9     95.8
     % Bidders Matched to the True Tax Record                               65.3        63.0    62.5   71.0     70.3
     % Potential Matches Correctly Matched to Tax Records                   78.6        75.8    75.1   85.4     84.5
     Algorithm Parameters:
        Match must be perfect (string score = 1.0)                                                               
        Match must be high-quality (string score  0.6)                                                   
        Prefer matches in same state as auction                                                  

                                 Table A.2: In-Sample Algorithm Validation

Notes: This table provides summary statistics on the in-sample performance of the matching algorithm when applied
to the six states that provided EINs. For these six states, we observe the true match between auction and tax records.
Since some contractors are individuals rather than firms or are otherwise not required to file one of the three firm tax
forms, not all contractors in auction data have a true match in firm tax records. First row provides share of contractors
in the auction data that the algorithm matches to a firm tax record. Second row provides share of contractors in
the auction data that the algorithm matches to a firm tax record and the match is true. Third row provides share
of contractors in the auction data that the algorithm matches to a firm tax record and the match is true, among
contractors in the auction data for which the true match exists in the firm tax data.


709,850 companies in PensionTest and 1,270,079 companies in PensionData. We then proceeded to
test our program using PensionData as a main data set and PensionTest as a query set.

    T                0            0.2            0.4              0.6           0.8            0.9             1
  Matches         99.05%        99.04%         98.46%           91.68 %       74.52%         64.44%         49.01%

  Correct         70.36%        70.37%         70.57%           73.39 %       80.69%         84.12%         82.58%
  Matches

                                          (a) Performance for Values of T

  Quantile          1%            10%            30%             50 %            70%           90%            99%
  Length             1             1              1                1              2             37            2733
                                         (b) Quantiles of Shortlist Lengths

                  Table A.3: Out-of-Sample Algorithm Validation using Pension Data

    We tested the program by searching in PensionData all the 709, 850 PensionTest firms. Since
we have the EIN for all the names in the two data sets, we can evaluate the matching performance.
The program achieved an average speed of 152 queries per second and an average accuracy of 73.39
percent among matched queries for a T = 0.6 using the strict option. Online Appendix Table
A.3a presents the percentage of correctly matched firms and false matches for different values of
T . We note that the percentage of correct matches is not monotone in T when T is close to 1. In
fact, requiring extreme level of string similarity leads to a loss of correct matches that outweighs
the gains in precision. Therefore, we do not recommend setting T above 0.9. In Online Appendix
Table A.3b, instead, we provide a closer look at the effectiveness of the shortlisting step. Looking
at the distribution of the shortlists' length, we see that over 50% of the sample is matched at the
shortlisting step and 70 percent of the candidate matches requires the scoring of at most 2 candidates.


                                                           15
Furthermore, the 99th percentile of the longest shortlist amounts to 2, 733 candidates. This is only
0.2 percent of the potential matches that a standard matching algorithm would have to consider for
each query and, therefore, much more efficient.

                           DOT Auction Records                    Final Sample: Matched Auction-Tax Data
         State           Data Source          Includes EIN   Bidders in 2010   Share of 2010 Construction Sector:
                                                             (Num. Firms)      Value Added      FTE Workers
         AL              State Website                             196            15.7%             17.4%
         AR              State Website                             149             7.9%             12.8%
         AZ                   No                                    *                *                 *
         CA              State Website                            1,041           8.3%              11.2%
         CO             FOIA Request                               241            12.6%             14.7%
         CT             FOIA Request                               126             9.4%             15.5%
         FL              State Website                             344            30.7%             10.6%
         GA              BidX Website                              137             4.3%              7.0%
         IA              BidX Website                              256            15.4%             20.7%
         ID              BidX Website                              112            17.2%             13.6%
         IL                   No                                    *                *                 *
         IN              State Website                             213            10.6%             16.6%
         KS              BidX Website                              130            13.7%             21.6%
         KY                   No                                    *                *                 *
         LA              BidX Website                              167            11.5%             10.8%
         MA                   No                                    *                *                 *
         MD                   No                                    *                *                 *
         ME              BidX Website                              141            13.7%             16.9%
         MI              BidX Website                              391             9.5%             16.3%
         MN              BidX Website                              262            13.5%             19.8%
         MO              BidX Website                              179            14.9%             13.3%
         MS                   No                                    *                *                 *
         MT             FOIA Request                               122            15.0%             23.6%
         NC              BidX Website                              135             5.2%              9.8%
         ND             FOIA Request                                *                *                 *
         NE                   No                                    *                *                 *
         NH                   No                                    *                *                 *
         NJ                   No                                    *                *                 *
         NM              BidX Website                               *                *                 *
         NV                   No                                    *                *                 *
         NY                   No                                    *                *                 *
         OH              BidX Website                              320            43.7%             17.5%
         OK                   No                                    *                *                 *
         OR                   No                                    *                *                 *
         PA                   No                                    *                *                 *
         SC                   No                                    *                *                 *
         SD                   No                                    *                *                 *
         TN              BidX Website                              140             5.3%             11.5%
         TX             FOIA Request                               551             4.9%              9.6%
         UT                   No                                    *                *                 *
         VA              BidX Website                              241            14.2%             12.0%
         VT              BidX Website                               *                *                 *
         WA              BidX Website                              200             7.5%             14.0%
         WI              BidX Website                              194            12.1%             14.6%
         WV         BidX and State Websites                        103            13.7%             19.0%
         National                                                 6,792           10.7%              9.9%


                                Table A.4: Summary of Auction Data by State
Notes: The first two columns provide information on in-state DOT data sources by state, where "state" refers to
the state in which the auction occurred. The first column indicates the source from which we obtained data on that
state's DOT auctions, and the second column indicates whether or not EINs were included in the auction records. The
final three columns provide information on the final sample of firms in the matched auction-tax data, where "state"
refers to the state in which the firm filed taxes. Among firms in the construction sector in 2010, the last two columns
consider the share of value added and FTE workers due to the firms that participated in auctions in our sample. We
drop from these calculations firms that have missing values on the variables displayed, so the total sample size must
be smaller than in Table 1 in the main text. An asterisk (*) denotes that number of bidders is non-zero but below
the disclosure threshold.




                                                             16
                       Figure A.8: Chassang et al. (2019) Visual Test for Collusion
Notes: This figure displays the histogram of bid competition for each of the 28 states in our sample. Negative values
indicate the difference between the winner's bid and the bid of the runner-up. Positive values indicate the difference
between each loser's bid and the winner's bid. Differences are scaled by the winner's bid in each case. Chassang et al.
(2019) demonstrate that these differences should display discontinuities in the histogram near zero under collusion.




                                                          17
C      Online Appendix: Model Derivations
C.1     Second stage: optimal input choices
This subsection solves the second stage assuming a monopolistic competitive product market ( > 0)
and increasing returns ( > 1), consistent with the empirical evidence.
   If the firm loses the auction, its profit maximization problem is,

                                               1-
                               max p j L0,j          - µj L1+          
                                                           0,j - pM j L0,j /M
                               L0,j


where we substituted equations (4) and (6) into equation (8) for the case with d = 0. The first-order
condition is,

            0,j      -        (1-)             -(1-)-                          pM    -(1-)
                  p1
                   j   (1 - )L0,j                          - µj (1 + )L0,j -      j L0,j   =0
            L0,j                                                               M

                             0,j               -
Multiplying both sides of    L0,j     = 0 by L1
                                              0,j and rearranging, we have,

                                                                            pM
                            p1
                             j
                               -
                                 (1 - )L-                 +1-
                                        0,j - µj (1 +  )L0,j  =                j                           (22)
                                                                            M

The left-hand side converges to infinity when L0,j approaches zero, while the right-hand side is a
constant. Thus, it is never optimal to choose L0,j = 0, so L0,j > 0.
   Similarly, if the firm wins, its profit maximization problem is,

                                                           1-
                           max
                             
                                        p j L      ¯G
                                             1,j - Q            - µj L1+          
                                                                      1,j - pM j L1,j /M
                                   ¯G
                     L1,j : j L1,j Q


The first-order condition is,

      1,j                                      -    -(1-)                          pM    -(1-)
            pj (1 - ) j L      ¯G
                         1,j - Q                   L1,j        - µj (1 + )L1,j -      j L1,j   =0          (23)
      L1,j                                                                         M

As j L                    ¯G             ¯ G - approaches infinity while all other terms involving L1,j
         1,j approaches Q , j L1,j - Q
approach constants. Thus, j L            ¯G
                                   1,j > Q is necessary to satisfy the equation. Since Q1,j = j L1,j ,
                                                                                                             

it follows that QH                ¯G
                    1,j = Q1,j - Q > 0, so the winning firm always produces in the private market.
                                         ,j
Furthermore, it is always true that L1    1,j
                                              |L1,j =L0,j > 0. Thus, total production will be larger if the
firm wins the auction than if it loses.
    Lastly, it is interesting to consider if winning a procurement project will lead a firm to produce
more in the private market (crowd in) or less (crowd out). To determine this, we evaluate the
marginal profits of the winner when the total output is Q           ^ 1,j  Q ¯ G + QH , that is, Q  ^ 1,j is the
                                                                                     0,j
hypothetical output of the firm if it wins such that there is neither crowd in nor crowd out. The
winner would prefer to produce more than Q       ^ 1,j if the marginal profit is positive, and less otherwise.
Let the corresponding labor choice be L   ^ 1,j such that j L  ^ - Q    ¯ G = QH = j L . Note that, since
                                                                1,j             0,j        0,j
                            ¯ G
 > 1 and L   ^  = L + Q , then L      ^  > L0,j . Evaluating equation (23) at L     ^ 1,j , marginal profits for
             1,j     0,j   j             1,j




                                                          18
                                                     ^ 1,j are,
the firm if it wins and produces hypothetical output Q

              1,j                            H - ^ -1               ^      pM   ^ -1
                   |L1,j =L
                          ^ 1,j = pj (1 - )(Q0,j ) L1,j - µj (1 +  )L1,j -    j L 1,j
              L1,j                                                         M

                  -
Multiplying by L1                              
                1,j and substituting Q0,j = j L0,j , we have,
                                      H



                   -        1,j                                            ^ +1- - pM j 
                 L1
                  1,j            |L1,j =L        1-
                                        ^ 1,j = pj  (1 - )L- 
                                                           0,j - µj (1 +  )L1,j
                            L1,j                                                   M

Finally, substituting equation (22), this simplifies to,

                                       -    1,j                           +1-  ^ +1- )
                                     L1
                                      1,j       |      ^    = µj (1 + )(L0,j  -L 1,j
                                            L1,j L1,j =L1,j

      ^ 1,j > L0,j , we have that 1,j |                                                           
Since L                                     ^ 1,j < 0 if  + 1 -  > 0, and Lj |Lj =L1,j > 0 otherwise.
                                 L1,j L1,j =L
                                                                          1,j


Therefore, winning a government project crowds out private projects when 1 +  >  and crowds in
otherwise.


C.2       Proof of Worker Rents Expression
We prove that equation (10) implies the results in equations (11) and (13). Defining u = l, dv = dW ,
we calculate Vj for a wage change from Wj = Wj0 using integration by parts:

               1                                          1                                             1
              Wj                                         Wj                                            Wj
                                                 W1            dl                                                            dl
Vj    =            l(W )dW = [l(W )W ]Wj0 -                       W dW = l(Wj0 )W +                         Wj1 - W             dW
             0
            Wj                                       j    0
                                                         Wj   dW                                       0
                                                                                                      Wj                    dW
                                                                                    incumbents
                                                                                                                new hires


where W  Wj1 - Wj0 . Following Lamadon et al. (2019), define                                     W
                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                 Wj
                                                                                                      so that   d
                                                                                                                dW    =    1
                                                                                                                          Wj 1.   Next,
                     1 1/
                   (
                  j Wj    gj )                  1/                                                                          1/
l(j Wj1 ) =              1/                 = j l(Wj1 ). Thus,          dl
                                                                       dW    dW =    d d .
                                                                                     dl
                                                                                               Moreover,    dl
                                                                                                            d     =   
                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                                 l(Wj1 ).
                 j j Wj(     gj  )
Then,
                                                         1
                                                                             dl
                       Vj    = l(Wj0 )W + Wj1            W0
                                                              (1 -  )           d
                                                          j                  d
                                                         W1
                                                          j
                                                                  1
                                                                                     1/
                             = l(Wj0 )W + Wj1 l(Wj1 )             W0
                                                                       (1 -  )          d
                                                                   j                
                                                                  W1
                                                                   j
                                                                                                            
                                                                                      1          1
                             = l(Wj0 )W + Wj1 l(Wj1 )  (1 -  )  1/                    W0
                                                                                       j
                                                                                           +     W0
                                                                                                       1/ d 
                                                                                                  j
                                                                                      W1         W1
                                                                                       j          j

                                     Wj1 l(Wj1 ) Wj0 l(Wj0 )
                             =                  -
                                     1 + 1/       1 + 1/




                                                               19
C.3      Additional Identification Derivations
                                                                                  1-
If the firm loses the auction, its revenues are R0,j = p QH 0,j  . From equation 6, the re-
lationship between private market revenues and intermediate inputs if the firm loses is R0,j =
                  1-
p (M M0,j exp ej ) . Then, dividing and multiplying M0,j by pM and taking logs, we have,

                 log R0,j = log p + (1 - ) log(M /pM ) + (1 - ) log(pM M0,j ) + (1 - ) ej

from which equation (20) follows.
   From equation (8) and Assumptions 1-3, we can write output in the private market as,

                                                            1+
          log QH
               d,j = [log j +  log Ld,j ] - d log              B1,j + pM M1,j                        H
                                                                                        - log (1 - )R1 ,j
                                                             L

for cases d = 0, 1, from which equation (21) follows using log Rd,j
                                                                H
                                                                                          d,j .
                                                                    = log p + (1 - ) log QH
                                             ¯
    We identify the size of the labor market  by taking the expectation of equation (4) in logs,

                                             ¯ = E[log Bj - (1 + ) log Lj ]
                                         log µ

Given , we identify M /pM from the Leontief first-order condition, j Lj = M Mj , which implies,


                                    log(M /pM ) = E[ log Lj - log(pM Mj )]

where we have normalized log j to have zero mean. Given log(M /pM ) and , we can recover TFP
for every firm in our data as,

                                 log j = log(M /pM ) + log(pM Mj ) -  log Lj

Moreover, since we obtained log p + (1 - ) log(M /pM ) above, we identify log p as,

                           log p = E[log Rj ] - (1 - )(log M /pM + E[log(pM Mj )])


D      Online Appendix: Accounting for Capital
We consider the problem of including capital in the production function of firms. We build on the
approach of Lamadon et al. (2019) by allowing firms to rent capital in a competitive market with
constant rental rate. We write revenues and costs as functions of Qj so as to separate the joint
maximization in two steps: first find the optimal combination (Kj , Lj ) for each Qj , then find the
optimal Qj .5
   5 By contrast, Lamadon et al. (2019) consider profit maximization that accounts for revenue and cost jointly, but

do so sequentially: first, they find the optimal Kj for each Lj to maximize conditional profits; second, they find the
optimal Lj . This paper considers optimal inputs for each Qj because Qj may be set externally by the auction. In
practice, the difference is that Lamadon et al. (2019) substract the capital costs from revenues (accounting for capital
on the revenue-side), while this paper adds the capital costs to the labor costs (accounting for capital on the cost-side).
This difference results in different definitions of the total return to labor, .



                                                            20
   Formally, suppose that firms can rent capital at price pK and hire labor at price Wj = µj Lj.
Consider a Cobb­Douglas production function (in physical units)

                                                      K L
                                              Qj = j Kj Lj

Given any production level Qj , the firm can find the most cost efficient combination (Kj , Lj ) by
solving the cost-minimization problem,

                                            min               pK Kj + µj L1+
                                                                          j
                                                                             
                                                        
                                  (Kj ,Lj ):Qj =j Kj K Lj L


where pK Kj + µj L1+
                  j
                    
                     represents the total cost. This leads to the Lagrangian,

                                                              K L
                              Lj  pK Kj + µj L1+
                                              j
                                                
                                                 + j (Qj - j Kj Lj )

where j is the Lagrange multiplier. The first-order condition for capital is,

                                          pK = j j K K K -1 LL

while the first-order condition for labor is,

                                                           K L -1
                                      (1 + )µj Lj = j j L Kj Lj


which leads to the optimal choice of capital as a function of labor

                                                  K (1 + )µj 1+
                                          Kj =              Lj
                                                  L    pK

                                    K (1+ )
or simply Kj = j L1+
                  j
                    
                     , where j =    L pK µj .
                                1+ K L
   Substituting Qj = j       j Lj   Lj , the optimal               labor choice is

                                                                   1
                                                              (1+ )K +L
                                                    Qj
                                         Lj =
                                                  j j
                                                      K




Thus, the cost function can be written,
                                                                          1+
                                                                      (1+ )K +L
                                                              Qj
 Cj (Qj ) =   pK j L1+
                    j
                      
                         +   µj L1+
                                 j
                                   
                                      = (pK j + µj )                                 = Lj (pK j + µj ) = µj L
                                                                                                             1+
                                                          j j
                                                              K




                                           K
where   (1 + )K + L and µj                 L (1   + ) + 1 µj , and output simplifies as,


                                         Qj = L  K
                                               j j                 = Lj j




                                                         21
                                            K
                              K (1+ )
where j  j j
             K
                j             L pK µj           . The new (gross) revenue is j Lj for any labor choice.
The new cost inclusive of capital and labor expenses is µj L1+
                                                            j
                                                              
                                                               for any labor choice.


E      Online Appendix: Product Market with Perfect Competi-
       tion
This section solves the second stage assuming a perfectly competitive product market ( = 0).
Denote the competitive price as p. We need to distinguish two types of solutions.
   In the case of an interior solution, the winner with TFP  maximizes the following problem

                                      max             ¯ G ] - 0 L1+
                                                p[L - Q
                                        L

                                                                         1
                                                           p
whose FOC gives the optimal labor choice Linterior () = [ 0 (1+ ) ]
                                                                     +1- and the optimal output level

                         
Q      () = [ p ] +1- . Note that both optimal choices are independent of Q           ¯ G . Moreover,
 interior           0 (1+ )
the optimal profit is

                        ¯G
                                        1+
                                                   
                                                - +1           +1         +11+
                                                                                  ¯G
             interior (|Q ) = (p)
                                   +1- 
                                        0
                                                     -
                                                         (      ) - - (    ) - - pQ
                                                             1+         1+

 In the case of a corner solution, i.e. Q1 > Q                                    ¯ G so that
                                              interior (), the firm produces only Q
                                           1
     ¯ G , which gives L             ¯G
L = Q                   corner () = (Q /) . The profit is
                                           



                                                                ¯ G 1+
                                                                Q
                                              ¯G
                                     corner (|Q ) = -0 (           ) 
                                                                

   The optimal profit achievable is defined by  (|Q     ¯ G ) = max{            ¯G              ¯G
                                                                      corner (|Q ), interior (|Q )}.
                                                                                      

Note that for the loser, it is always optimal to adopt the interior solution. On the other hand, the
winner adopts the interior solution when Q¯ G is small and the corner solution otherwise. In summary,

    1. When Q ¯ G is small, i.e., Q
                                  ¯ G < Q
                                          interior (), regardless of its winning status, this firm hires the
       same amount of labor to equalize the marginal revenue and marginal labor cost. It produces
       the same amount of output in physical units in both cases. It makes a profit                     ¯G
                                                                                             interior (|Q )
       upon winning and                  ¯G         ¯ G upon losing. Therefore, in the bidding stage, the
                              interior (|Q ) + pQ
       firm knows the opportunity cost of winning the auction is (|Q          ¯ G < Q                    ¯G
                                                                                      interior ()) = pQ ,
       where pQ ¯ is essentially the opportunity cost of selling the same amount Q1 to the private
                 G

       market.

    2. When Q  ¯ G is large, i.e., Q¯ G > Q
                                             interior (), the government project pushes the firm to a
       high level of labor and a high marginal cost upon winning. In this case, the firm focuses on
       the government project and produces Q      ¯ G upon winning the auction, which requires a labor
                                                     ¯G 1
       amount s.t. L = Q     ¯ G . That is, L = ( Q
                                                       ) . On the other hand, the firm still produces at
                                                         
                                              1
                                                                                            1
                                                p                                p
       the interior solution Qinterior = [ 0 (1+) ] - using L
                                                        +1
                                                                   interior = [ 0 (1+ ) ]
                                                                                           +1- upon losing


       the auction. Note that winning leads to more production than losing and the difference is


                                                      22
      ¯ G - Q
     Q          interior . Moreover, the firm hires more labor upon winning than losing. Overall,
     the firm knows the difference between winning                                         ¯G >
                                                        and losing (opportunity cost) is (|Q
                                                    
                            ¯
                            Q G 1+          1+  -                          1+
     Q                             + (p) +1- 0 +1- ( 1+       +1- - (  )  +1- .
        interior ()) = 0 (  )                              )
                                 
                                                                      1+

The above two representations of the opportunity cost as a function of the TFP distribution gives
an overall distribution of opportunity cost, i.e., ()  F (·). In the first stage, the firm chooses the
optimal bid that solves the same problem as in the main text.


F     Online Appendix: Simulating the Model Using the Quantile
      Representation
Overview

For any given TFP and the outcomes from the first-stage (winner status and size of procurement
projects won), the second-stage of the model can be solved to give numerical values of the firm
outcomes such as profits, wages, and employment, which is the information needed to perform coun-
terfactual predictions. To solve the first-stage, we must account for equilibrium bidding behavior,
which depends on the size of the procurement project, the number of bidders, and the TFP distribu-
tion. The symmetric equilibrium described in the main text involves numerical integration, which is
costly since we need to solve this model many times in our counterfactual experiments. To speed up
this calculation, we implement the quantile representation method of Luo (2020). Here, we provide
an overview of the steps taken to solve the first-stage and second-stage problems.
    Second stage: Denote the TFP quantile function as () where, for example,  = 0.10 indicates
the 10th quantile of the TFP distribution. We use a log Normal distribution to approximate the
distribution of TFP, which allows for a simple mapping between  and , choosing the standard
deviation that matches the interquartile range of TFP (reported in Table 2). For each combination
of winner status, TFP quantile, and auction size d, , Q   ¯ G , we solve the second-stage problem for
firm and worker outcomes. This is done by numerical optimization of the profit function (equation
8) subject to the labor supply curve (equation 4), the production function (equation 6), and the
optimal intermediate inputs condition (equation 7).
    First stage: The challenge is to compute expectations of the second-stage across the distribution
of outcomes from the first-stage. To solve the first-stage, note that the opportunity cost of winning
an auction of size Q  ¯ G is  |Q ¯ G =  H () -  H |Q   ¯ G . Since  H is the winning firm's revenue in
                                       0          1                 1
the private market net of the total cost, it follows that 0H
                                                              > 1 H
                                                                    and thus  > 0. 1   H
                                                                                         is decreasing
    ¯                                  ¯
in Q , and 0 does not depend on Q . Moreover,  is decreasing in . In other words, higher
      G         H                        G

TFP firms have lower opportunity cost of producing in the government procurement market. Since
 represents quantiles of TFP, it has the standard uniform distribution. The probability that the
winning quantile is less than  is the probability that it is the lowest among all I bidders' draws
from the standard uniform distribution, yielding the probability I and associated density function
f1 (, I ) = II -1 . By similar reasoning, the density function of a losing firm's TFP quantile is
              I
f0 (, I ) = I - 1 (1 - 
                         I -1
                              ).


                                                 23
   What do we mean by "solution"? Let Yd |Q          ¯ G denote a second-stage outcome for a firm
characterized by TFP quantile  bidding in an auction of size Q ¯ G . Using the distribution functions
from the first stage, we compute the expected outcome as E Yd |Q ¯ G , I = 1 Yd |Q   ¯ G fd (, I ) d.
                                                                            0
For example, the probability that a bidder with TFP j wins the project is the probability that its
TFP is the highest among all participating bidders, i.e, H (j )I ,where H denotes the distribution
of TFP. This implies that the density function of the winner's TFP is IH (j )I -1 h(j ). The profit
function depends on who wins the auction, in particular, the TFP of the winner. The expected
profit of the winner is then,

          ¯1,j =            ¯ G ) × [IH (j )I -1 h(j )]dj =
                    1,j (j |Q                                                ¯ G ) × II -1 d
                                                                   1,j (j ()|Q

Note that this expectation depends on the combinations Q       ¯ G , I . One possibility is to solve the
model for each possible combination of Q       ¯ , I , and then average across them. In our setting,
                                                G

this is computationally infeasible. An alternative is to evaluate Q     ¯ G , I at representative values.
In practice, we choose the values of Q  ¯ G , I that provide the best fit to the additional rents from
procurements, (V ,  ). The best fit yields a model-simulated incidence on workers of $981, which
is very close to the main estimate of $959 in Table 2, and incidence on firms of $3,098, which is very
close to the main estimate of $2,873 in Table 2. The implied incidence share on workers is about 24
percent, which is close to our main estimate of 25 percent. It is reassuring to find that the best fit
is achieved at I = 10 bidders per auction, which is close to the mean observed value in the data of
8.7 bidders per auction.

Additional details

We now provide the derivation of the quantile representation of the optimal bidding strategy. Con-
sider a procurement auction model. Following (Guerre et al., 2000), we can rewrite the first-order
condition and obtain a representation of the cost as a function of observables:

                                                   1 1 - G(b)
                                        c=b-
                                                 I - 1 g (b)

where G(·) and g (·) are the bid distribution and density, respectively. Since the bidding strategy is
strictly increasing, we can further rewrite it in terms of quantiles:

                                                     1
                                   c() = b() -          [1 - ]b ()
                                                   I -1

where c(·) and b(·) are the cost quantile function and the bid quantile function, respectively. The
boundary condition is that the least efficient firm bids the highest, i.e., c(1) = b(1).
    Following (Luo, 2020), we can solve this ODE and obtain the mapping from cost quantile function
to bid quantile function
                                                         1
                            b() = (I - 1)(1 - )1-I           c(x)(1 - x)I -2 dx
                                                        




                                                   24
This representation is convenient for numerically solving the first-price procurement auction model,
as it allows us to write,
                                                                1
                       b () = - (I - 1)(1 - I )(1 - )-I             c(x)(1 - x)I -2 dx
                                                              

                               - (I - 1)(1 - )1-I c()(1 - )I -2

Rearranging,
                                                              1
                      1
                -        [1 - ]b () =(1 - I )(1 - )1-I            c(x)(1 - x)I -2 dx + c()
                    I -1                                     

                                    =c() - b().

Moreover, when   1, using L'Hospital's rule,
                                                1
                                                
                                                    c(x)(1 - x)I -2 dx
                            b(1) = lim(I - 1)                          = c(1)
                                   1                  (1 - )I -1




                                                    25
