                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     WHY DIDN'T THE COLLEGE PREMIUM RISE EVERYWHERE? EMPLOYMENT
            PROTECTION AND ON-THE-JOB INVESTMENT IN SKILLS

                                       Matthias Doepke
                                        Ruben Gaetani

                                      Working Paper 27331
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27331


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2020




We thank Marco Bassetto, Samuel Bentolila, Alex Bick, Christian Hellwig, Gueorgui
Kambourov, Claudio Michelacci, Moritz Kuhn, Elena Pastorino, Todd Schoellman, Robert
Ulbricht, David Wiczer, and participants at many seminar and conference presentations for
comments that helped to greatly improve the paper. We gratefully acknowledge financial support
from the National Science Foundation (grant SES-1260961). The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Matthias Doepke and Ruben Gaetani. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Why Didn't the College Premium Rise Everywhere? Employment Protection and On-the-Job
Investment in Skills
Matthias Doepke and Ruben Gaetani
NBER Working Paper No. 27331
June 2020
JEL No. E24,J24,J31

                                         ABSTRACT

Why has the college wage premium risen rapidly in the United States since the 1980s, but not in
European economies such as Germany? We argue that differences in employment protection can
account for much of the gap. We develop a model where firms and workers make relationship-
specific investments in skill accumulation. The incentive to invest is stronger when employment
protection creates an expectation of long-lasting matches. We argue that changes in the economic
environment have reduced relationship-specific investment for less-educated workers in the
United States, but not for better-protected workers in Germany.


Matthias Doepke
Northwestern University
Department of Economics
2211 Campus Drive
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
doepke@northwestern.edu

Ruben Gaetani
University of Toronto
105 St. George Street
Toronto ON, M5S3E6
(Canada)
ruben.gaetani@rotman.utoronto.ca
1   Introduction
In the United States, the wage gap between workers with and without a college education
has risen by more than 30 percentage points since the 1980s (Heathcote, Perri, and Violante
2010). During this period, Canada and the United Kingdom also saw substantial growth
in the college wage premium (Krueger et al. 2010). In contrast, the college wage premium
has barely changed in a number of continental European economies (Fuchs-Schündeln,
Krueger, and Sommer 2010; Jappelli and Pistaferri 2010). In this study, we focus on
the particular case of Germany, the largest European economy, where the college wage
premium actually fell between 1980 and 2006. Though it did go on to rise slightly, in 2013
the college wage premium was essentially the same as in 1980.
What explains these different trends between otherwise similar countries? Canonical
explanations for rising skill premia such as skill-biased technological change (SBTC) do
not suggest an immediate explanation, because advanced economies are likely to have
comparable exposure to technological shocks. Instead, we focus on the potential role of a
factor that does differ sharply between the United States and Europe, namely employment
protection. In the United States, most workers are employed at will, meaning they can be
dismissed at any time if the employer so chooses. Conversely, labor markets are highly
regulated in most European economies, which enact employment protection measures
such as firing costs. In Germany, regular employees can only be dismissed for a limited
set of reasons. Moreover, German law requires firms who lay off workers to follow a
Sozialauswahl (i.e., social criteria) when deciding which workers to dismiss, with special
protection given to older workers and those with high tenure. In practice, this means
that German workers enjoy considerable protection from layoffs after a few years with a
given employer, unless the firm shuts down an entire establishment.
We argue that employment protection matters for the college premium because it affects
both firms' and workers' incentives to invest in the relationship. To this end, we develop
a quantitative model of the labor market in which on-the-job skill accumulation is a major
source of income disparity between workers. Investment in skills is two-sided: firms
can decide to create either high-quality jobs that allow for accumulation of skills, or less
costly, low-quality jobs in which workers' productivity remains stagnant. Workers with a
high-quality job decide how much effort to put into accumulating skills.
The expected length of the employment relationship is an essential consideration in such
decisions. Firms and workers will be more inclined to invest in their relationship when
they expect more durable matches as a result of employment protection. If, as we argue,

                                             1
the skills of college-educated workers are less firm-specific than those of less-educated
workers, their skill accumulation decisions will depend less on the expected duration of a
given employment spell. Employment protection will thus have a differential impact on
the skill accumulation of college-educated and less-educated workers, which is important
for the college wage premium.

Our model predicts that the college wage premium will evolve differentially over time
between countries with and without employment protection if there is a rise in the
frequency of shocks that temporarily depress the productivity of existing firm-worker
matches. If such productivity shocks are rare, firms have little reason to dismiss workers
and expected job duration is high even without employment protection. Under such con-
ditions, the college premium will be similar in economies with and without employment
protection. However, when shocks become more frequent, the duration of employment
spells will fall in economies with less employment protection. Firms will have fewer
incentives to create high-quality jobs for less-educated workers (whose skills are more
job-specific), and these workers will have fewer opportunities to accumulate skills and
reduced incentives to acquire them. As a result, the college wage premium will rise. In
contrast, the impact of the change will be muted in economies with more employment
protection, resulting in little change in the college premium.

We use data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) in the United States and the
German Socio-Economic Panel (GSOEP) to verify that observed changes in the job-tenure
distribution align with our explanation for shifts in the college premium. We focus on
changes in the number of workers who spend most of their working lives with a single
firm. Specifically, we measure the fraction of male full-time workers aged 45­54 who
have worked for their current employer for at least 20 years. We find that in the early
1980s, the fraction of high-tenure workers in the United States was similar for both more-
and less-educated workers: around 42 percent for both groups. The fraction of high-
tenure workers subsequently declined to about 35 percent in 2010. In Germany, the share
of high-tenure workers in 1980 was similar to that of the United States. Subsequently,
high tenure declined for college-educated workers but actually increased slightly for
less-educated workers. This is exactly what our model predicts should happen in an
economy with employment protection in response to a higher frequency of shocks. The
different trends between education groups arise because more educated workers (whose
skills are more transferable) are able to take their skills to a new employer when a shock
hits, whereas less-educated workers rely on employment protection to continue with


                                            2
their current employer.

We use our model to assess the quantitative importance of on-the-job investment for
changes in the college wage premium. In a first exercise, we calibrate the model to match
a number of data moments from the United States in 1980 that include the college wage
premium, returns to experience, returns to tenure, and the job-tenure distribution by
education. We then allow a number of model parameters to change to match the shifts in
these data moments by the year 2010. In addition to the on-the-job investment channel
(triggered by a changed frequency of match-specific productivity shocks), the changes
we introduce into the model also include other factors such as shifts in overall skill bias
or returns to experience, which represent forces such as SBTC or variations in the relative
supply of more- and less-educated workers. A decomposition exercise shows that the
on-the-job investment channel can account for a large fraction of the rise in the college
premium in the United States: up to 36.5 percent in our preferred calibration. Most of this
change is due to a decline in the creation of high-quality jobs for less-educated workers.

We also compare the trends in the college wage premium among various cohorts in our
model compared to the data during the transition path. The model output coincides with
the observation that the college premium rose primarily among younger workers from
1980 to 1990, whereas the pattern had reversed by 2010, with a larger college premium
among older workers compared to 1980 in that year (Card and Lemieux 2001). These
observations on the transition path were not targeted, yet our model matches them well.

The final step of our analysis examines the role of employment protection by considering
the case of Germany. In our model exercise, we take the position that Germany is
subject to the same technological forces as the United States, but has a different regime of
employment protection. We introduce employment protection in the form of a firing cost
that increases with job tenure. We set the level of the firing cost to match observations
of the share of high-tenure workers in Germany. Then, we ask how this more protected
economy reacts to the same shocks that we introduced in our quantitative exercise for the
United States. We find that the increase in the college wage premium is almost halved
compared to the economy without firing restrictions. We conclude that the combination
of differences in employment protection and the on-the-job investment channel can go a
long way in explaining the different trends in the college wage premium between the
United States and Germany.

Our analysis has implications for the welfare consequences of imposing employment
protection. The quantitative model includes a number of frictions that may lead to

                                             3
inefficient job-creation and skill-investment decisions, including frictional labor markets,
wage rigidities, and a lack of firms' and workers' ability to commit to long-term contracts
that are contingent on skill investment. Given these frictions, we find that moderate
firing restrictions can indeed improve welfare, primarily because they induce firms to
create relatively more high-quality jobs that allow for the accumulation of skills.

The finding on the positive welfare effects of employment protection is, however, sensitive
to specific assumptions on frictions in the wage-setting process, which are difficult to pin
down precisely with existing evidence. Clearly, labor protection can also have negative
repercussions, such as lower job creation and higher unemployment (see, e.g., Bentolila
and Bertola 1990). Thus, our analysis does not provide an unqualified argument in favor
of more protection. Nevertheless, we believe that the channel identified in our model is
important for evaluating the full consequences of employment regulations such as those
now in place in Germany and many other advanced economies.

The following section relates our work to the existing literature on the college wage
premium and the effects of labor regulation. In Section 3, we describe the main empirical
patterns that motivate this study, including new findings on shifts in the number of
workers with high job tenure in the United States and Germany. Our quantitative model
is described in Section 4, and in Section 5 we explain how we calibrate the model to the
data. In Section 6 we describe our results, and Section 7 concludes.


2   Relationship to Literature
The best-known explanations for the upward trend in the college wage premium in the
United States include factors such as SBTC and trade liberalization (Katz and Murphy
1992; Katz and Autor 1999; Krusell et al. 2000; Autor, Levy, and Murnane 2003; Goldin and
Katz 2008; Guvenen and Kuruscu 2009; Jaimovich et al. 2019). The authors who propose
these explanations take the view that workers with higher education have benefited
disproportionately from the technological and institutional shifts that have occurred
since the 1980s. Our quantitative analysis allows for factors that increase the productivity
of highly educated workers, and we do find that these factors play a significant role.

Nevertheless, the on-the-job investment channel that we propose focuses primarily on
the skills of less-educated workers, and implies that such workers currently have fewer
opportunities for accumulating skills than in the past. This channel is consistent with new
evidence on the recent deterioration of the labor market opportunities of less-educated


                                             4
workers, a trend that directly contributes to increased inequality between education
groups (Autor 2019). Deteriorating outcomes for less-educated workers are evidenced
in stagnating income levels even as aggregate productivity keeps growing (Guvenen
et al. 2017), in worsening measures of job quality and security (Segal and Sullivan 1997;
Hollister 2011), and in other indicators of economic well-being (Coile and Duggan 2019).
Our analysis proposes a specific mechanism that can explain the increasing scarcity of
"good jobs" for less-educated workers.

Alternative explanations for the deterioration of labor market outcomes for less-educated
workers include automation and robotization (Hémous and Olsen 2018, Acemoglu and
Restrepo 2020), job polarization (Autor and Dorn 2013), and exposure to trade (Autor,
Dorn, and Hanson 2013). More closely related to our analysis, Acemoglu (1999) develops
a model in which changes in macroeconomic conditions generate a shift in the type of jobs
offered by firms. In his setting, as the supply of skilled workers increases, firms transition
from a pooling equilibrium with similar jobs offered to all workers to a separating
equilibrium in which jobs are specific to each skill type, which benefits educated workers
but harms the less educated.

The studies mentioned thus far do not, however, offer an explanation for why trends in
wage inequality have progressed differently in the United States and European countries
such as Germany. Among the earlier contributions on this specific issue, Acemoglu (2003)
does focus on the potential role of more regulated labor markets in Europe. Specifically,
based on Acemoglu and Pischke (1999b), he develops a mechanism by which a high
minimum wage may lead firms to adopt productivity-enhancing technologies for less-
educated workers. Intuitively, if the minimum wage is initially binding but no longer
applies when the technology is adopted, investing in the technology increases the firm's
share of the surplus, which raises the incentive to invest relative to firms in a less
regulated labor market. While related, this specific mechanism is less likely to be relevant
for Germany, where minimum wages were introduced only a few years ago.

Guvenen, Kuruscu, and Ozkan (2013) develop a mechanism complementary to ours,
arguing that increasingly progressive taxation lowered European workers' incentives
to invest in their skills, thus compressing the skill distribution relative to the United
States and lowering observed skill premia. While they similarly concentrate on the
accumulation of skills on the job, their primary focus is the top of the skill distribution,
whereas our model deals mainly with less-educated workers. This focus is shared with
Alon (2017), who argues that features such as apprenticeship programs in Germany pro-

                                              5
vide less-educated workers with differentiated skills, whereas investment in vocational
training for less-educated workers in the United States has decreased over time, leading
to a deterioration of skills in this group. This mechanism is also complementary to ours,
as it concentrates on the initial acquisition of skills by more- and less-educated workers,
whereas our model is concerned with investments in on-the-job skills acquisition. One
advantage of the employment-protection mechanism developed in our study is its dis-
tinct implications for the tenure distribution and returns to tenure in different education
groups, which can be empirically tested.

Our work also contributes to a literature on the macroeconomic consequences of dif-
ferences in labor regulation between the United States and European economies. In
particular, we build on Ljungqvist and Sargent (1998), who similarly develop a mech-
anism by which differences in labor regulation interact with changes in the economic
environment. However, they consider entirely different policies, outcomes, and economic
shifts; specifically, the impact of unemployment insurance on unemployment levels.
Other contributions that focus on unemployment include Blanchard and Summers (1986),
Bertola and Ichino (1995), Nickell (1997), Hornstein, Krusell, and Violante (2007), and
Kitao, Ljungqvist, and Sargent (2017). Our paper adds a new angle to this literature by
arguing that the level of employment protection has repercussions for education premia
in the labor market.

In addition, our analysis is related to the literature on on-the-job investment in skills
and the distinction of general versus firm-specific skills. There are a variety of reasons
why investment in skills on the job may fail to be efficient; see Acemoglu and Pischke
(1999a) for a discussion. We build, in particular, on the analysis by Wasmer (2006) of
investment in general versus firm-specific skills in a frictional labor market. Wasmer
argues that search frictions make investing in general skills less attractive, because such
skills pay off relatively more in future matches with other firms, which are harder to find
if there are search frictions. Similarly, employment protection makes job-specific skills
more attractive. The link between employment protection and investment in specific
skills is also central to our mechanism. However, Wasmer's analysis does not extend to
the implications for the college wage premium and cross-country inequality trends.

Finally, our empirical findings on shifts in the job-tenure distribution are relevant to
a recent literature on reduced dynamism in the US labor market. At first sight, this
literature may appear to contradict our finding of declining rates of high tenure. For
example, Hyatt and Spletzer (2016) document that average job tenure has risen in the

                                            6
United States since 1980, as has the fraction of workers with at least 5 years of tenure.
These observations can be reconciled by noting that part of the shift towards higher tenure
is due to population aging. Furthermore, there has been a shift towards reduced churn at
the beginning of employment spells, decreasing the fraction of workers with very low job
tenure. The facts we document here become apparent only when focusing on the share
of older workers with very high tenure (15 years or above), whereas most papers that
consider the share of high-tenure workers use a threshold of 10 years of tenure. Molloy,
Smith, and Wozniak (2019) document changes in the entire tenure distribution for the
United States and find, as we do, that the share of older workers with high tenure has
declined. In our quantitative model, we include an additional churn shock that destroys
a proportion of recently created matches to generate an overall tenure distribution that
matches the data.


3       The College Premium, Long-Term Tenure, and Returns to Tenure in
        the United States and Germany
In this section, we document the empirical facts that motivate our study and which
our quantitative model aims to account for. We focus on the evolution of key labor
market variables in the United States and Germany since the early 1980s. To this end,
we employ the 1981­2013 waves of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) for the
United States, and the 1984­2013 waves of the German Socio-Economic Panel (GSOEP)
for Germany.1 These data sets provide individual-level information on job tenure, wages,
and education, allowing us to perform a comparative analysis of the US and German
experiences. We focus on men aged 25 to 64 with at least a high school education.2 In the
German data, we focus on the original sample of the GSOEP (which only includes families
in West Germany), so that results are not influenced by the different work histories of
East German men that were sampled after reunification. We also construct a system of
weights that keeps the age distribution by education fixed with respect to the first year of
the sample (1981 for the PSID and 1984 for the GSOEP). All the statistics in this section
are constructed using this system of weights. Appendix A contains details on sample
selection and the construction of the main variables for the analysis.
    1
      The PSID was collected every year until 1997, and every other year from 1997 onwards. 1984 was the
first wave of the GSOEP.
    2
      We limit our attention to men because changes in women's job tenure over this period were dominated
by the large shifts in female labor force participation that occurred during this period.




                                                   7
3.1   Education Premia and the Share of College Graduates in the United States and
      Europe

As widely documented by the existing literature (Heathcote, Storesletten, and Violante
2010), the US economy has witnessed a sharp rise in the college wage premium since
the 1980s. The solid line in the top panel of Figure 1 displays the college wage premium
trend in the United States from 1981 to 2013, obtained by regressing log real wages on a
college education dummy and computing the trend component using a Hodrick-Prescott
filter. The estimated trend displays a sharp increase starting in the early 1980s, leading
to a peak at almost twice the original value in the mid-2000s and stabilizing thereafter
(Valletta 2016).

This increase in the returns to education coincided with a contemporaneous rise in the
relative supply of college-educated workers. The solid line of the bottom panel of Figure
1 shows the changing share of college graduates among US male workers starting in 1981,
revealing a steady upward trend from 36 percent in 1981 to 45 percent in 2013.

Beginning with studies by Katz and Murphy (1992), Krusell et al. (2000), and Acemoglu
(2002a), a sizeable literature has rationalized the contemporaneous increase in the market
price and the relative supply of skilled workers in the United States by suggesting
that technological advancements in recent decades have disproportionately favored
college-educated workers. Yet this explanation for the issue at hand is limited in that all
industrialized countries use similar technologies and have also experienced a similar rise
in the supply of college-educated workers, but patterns in the college wage premium
vary widely.

Germany is a case in point. The relative labor supply of college-educated workers in
Germany closely tracks US trends, but Germany did not see a comparable increase in
the college wage premium. The dashed line in the top panel of Figure 1 shows that the
college wage premium was similar in Germany and the US in the early 1980s, but it
subsequently rose in the United States while remaining flat in Germany.

The different trends for the college wage premium suggest that country-specific factors
have a substantial impact on the college premium in addition to skill-biased techni-
cal change. Our study is motivated by the observation that changes in the education
premium across countries are empirically correlated with measures of labor protection.
Figure 2 plots the percentage change in the college premium between 1980 and 2006
in a sample of OECD countries against the OECD labor protection index. The graph

                                            8
                                             College Premium

                    0.5



                    0.4



                    0.3



                    0.2
                           1985    1990        1995       2000     2005   2010


                                      Share of College Graduates
                   0.45

                    0.4

                   0.35

                    0.3

                   0.25

                    0.2

                   0.15
                           1985    1990        1995       2000     2005   2010

                                          United States      Germany


Figure 1: Top panel: The college wage premium in the United States and Germany among
workers aged 25­64, 1981 to 2013. Bottom panel: Share of college graduates among
workers aged 25­64, 1981-2013. The series represent five-year moving averages around
the focal year, smoothed using a Hodrick-Prescott filter with a smoothing parameter
equal to 100.

shows a strong negative correlation between growth in the college wage premium and
the labor protection index. Among the countries plotted, the United States has the least-
regulated labor markets and the fastest rise in the college wage premium. At the other
end of the scale, Germany, Italy and Spain--all countries with high levels of employment
protection--actually experienced a decline in the college wage premium over the same
period.

While this is a simple correlation and not necessarily a causal relationship, it motivates
our analysis of a channel through which employment protection can impact changes in
the college premium. Specifically, we argue that employment protection can increase
the incentives for workers and firms to make relationship-specific investments that pay
off if workers stay with the same firm for a long time. For workers, these investments
take the form of the costly acquisition of firm-specific skills. For firms, they take the form
of the creation of jobs that utilize such firm-specific skills and allow workers to acquire


                                                      9
                                45
                                      USA
                                35
        %ChangeinSkillPremium   25
                                        CAN
                                15                                   SWE
                                                      UK
                                 5

                                5 0            5            10          15 GER   20 ITA
                                15

                                25

                                35            OECDIndexofEmploymentProtection    SPA

Figure 2: Labor protection in the early 1990s and the change in the education premium
from 1980 to 2006. Data from Krueger et al. (2010) and Nickell (1997).

them. In our model, if worker-firm matches are subject to frequent productivity shocks,
employment protection can lead to an expectation of a longer duration of matches, which
in turn increases the incentive to invest in the relationship. The employment-protection
mechanism links changes in skill premia in the labor market to shifts in employment
duration for different groups of workers. We show that this connection is supported by
evidence from the United States and Germany.

3.2   The Fall in Long-Term Tenure

The link between employment regulation and the evolution of wage premia that we pro-
pose in this paper relies on the notion that workers in economies with more employment
protection experience less job turnover and hence are more likely to achieve long-term
tenure with a given employer. The PSID and the GSOEP data sets can be used to verify
whether this is actually the case.

We focus on the share of workers aged 45 to 54 who have been with their current
employer for at least 20 years, a group we term "long-term tenure" workers. Such workers
have spent most of their working lives with their current employers, and are therefore
especially likely to benefit from relationship-specific investments. Figure 3 displays the
changing share of long-term tenure workers in the United States and Germany from the
1980s to the 2010s, charted separately for college graduates and less-educated workers. In
the United States, this share displays a clear downward trend for both education groups,

                                                           10
declining from about 42 percent in 1981 to about 35 percent in 2013.3

The pattern for less-educated workers in Germany is strikingly different. While their
long-term tenure share is only slightly above the US level in 1984, there is no clear
downward trend in the following decades. The long-term tenure share first increases
substantially and then falls, returning to 1984 levels by 2013.

The US-Germany difference in less pronounced among college-educated individuals
(Figure 3, bottom panel), whose share of long-term tenure workers declines in both
countries. Our quantitative model accounts for this pattern by assuming that college-
educated workers have skills that are more transferable from one employer to another.
This implies that these workers are more likely to end up with a new employer in
response to match-specific shocks, even in economies with stringent labor market policies.
Put differently, labor protection has non-uniform effects for workers with more or less
transferable skills.

The trends in Figure 3 remain if we exclude public-sector workers. Specifically, excluding
public-sector employment does somewhat reduce the share of workers with high tenure
in both countries, consistent with higher job security for public-sector workers, but does
not change the general trends over time.

3.3     Returns to High Tenure for High School and College Graduates

The employment-protection mechanism relies on the presumption that the skills of college
graduates are more transferable between employers, meaning that their skill investment
is less affected by shocks that destroy long-lasting firm-worker matches. In our model,
differential transferability of skills results in less-educated workers having higher returns
to job tenure (i.e., the time worked at their current employer), whereas more-educated
workers have low returns to tenure but high returns to experience (the overall time
worked in the labor market across all employers). These patterns are supported by recent
findings in the empirical labor literature on returns to experience and job tenure.

Measuring returns to job tenure is complicated by possible selection bias: more skilled
workers may be more likely to be retained by the employer and achieve high tenure, mean-
ing that observed returns could partially reflect workers' ability. Altonji and Shakotko
(1987) argued that selection accounts for most of the empirical correlation of job tenure
and wages. However, this conclusion has been revised by Altonji and Williams (2005),
  3
      The substantial share of high-tenure workers in earlier US data is also noted by Hall (1982).


                                                     11
                                                High-School Graduates
                      0.55


                       0.5


                      0.45


                       0.4


                      0.35

                               1985      1990        1995       2000    2005   2010



                                                   College Graduates
                      0.45



                       0.4



                      0.35



                       0.3
                               1985      1990        1995       2000    2005   2010

                                                United States      Germany


Figure 3: Share of workers aged 45­54 with tenure of over 20 years at their current
employer in the United States and Germany, 1981-2013. Top panel: High-school graduates.
Bottom panel: College graduates. The series represent five-year moving averages around
the focal year, smoothed using a Hodrick-Prescott filter with smoothing parameter equal
to 100.

among others, who do find substantial returns to tenure. Buchinsky et al. (2010) ad-
dress the relationship between education and returns to tenure in the United States,
demonstrating that less-educated workers (especially workers with less than a high
school education) have higher returns to tenure and lower returns to experience than
do college-educated workers, which is the assumed pattern in our model. Studies that
use events such as mass layoffs to estimate the firm-specificity of human capital reach
similar findings. For example, Kletzer (1989) shows that blue-collar workers suffer large
losses of accumulated returns to job tenure after displacement, whereas managerial, pro-
fessional, and technical workers are much less affected4 . To the extent that less-educated
workers are more likely to be blue-collar workers, these findings align with our analysis.
   4
     In an overview of the job displacement literature, Kletzer (1998) characterizes the evidence as follows:
"The far larger dropoff in the contribution of predisplacement tenure to postdisplacement earnings for
blue-collar workers reveals the importance of factors such as specific human capital and job match effects
for these workers. In contrast, individual ability and transferable skills are a more important part of the
returns to tenure for the skilled white-collar group."


                                                        12
                                                 Log of hourly wage (ages 45­54)
                                                               US (PSID)
                                                  1981­1995                1996­2013
           Tenure >= 20, High school          0.272***                0.257***
                                              (0.043)                  (0.030)
           Tenure >= 20, College                          0.180***                 0.187***
                                                           (0.064)                 (0.045)
           Experience (polynomial)              yes          yes         yes         yes
           Year FE                              yes          yes         yes         yes
           Observations                        1,895        1,197       2,606       1,836
           R2                                  0.126        0.048       0.073       0.044
           Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered at indi-
           vidual level. The sample consists of male workers aged 45 to 54 who report
           between 500 and 5,000 hours worked in a year. Each column consists of a sepa-
           rate regression of log wages on a year fixed effect, a third-degree polynomial of
           potential experience, and an indicator variable for 20 years of tenure or more on
           the current job. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.

Table 1: Returns to high tenure for college- and less-educated workers in the United
States

Dustmann and Meghir (2005) use German firm closure data for identification to examine
returns to tenure and experience. They document that the least-educated workers have
low returns to experience but substantial returns to firm-specific tenure, also in line with
the employment-protection mechanism.

One question that remains unsettled is why less-educated workers have higher returns
to job tenure. It may be that the tasks performed by less-educated workers are indeed
more firm-specific and less transferable across employers. Another possibility is that the
accumulation of skills is primarily occupation-specific, and that less-educated workers are
more likely to be displaced from their current occupation after a job loss. This distinction
may have important policy implications. That said, for our objective of explaining
changes in the college wage premium, all that matters is that returns to job tenure differ
by education.

For the purposes of our quantitative analysis, we must ensure that our model incorporates
a quantitatively plausible gap in the returns to high job tenure for college- and less-


                                                  13
educated workers. We therefore compute empirical returns to high job tenure based on
PSID data for the United States and GSOEP data for Germany. To ensure consistency
with our earlier analysis of high-tenure workers, we focus on the returns to working
with a given employer for at least 20 years. Table 1 reports the estimated coefficients of
individual-level regressions of log-hourly wages on a set of year fixed effects, a third-
degree polynomial of potential experience,5 and a dummy variable that is one if the
worker has been with the same employer for at least 20 years. We run these regressions
on the sample of male PSID respondents aged 45 to 54 who report at least 500 hours of
yearly employment. We compute the returns to high tenure separately for workers with
a high school and college education,6 and also split the sample into an early (1981­1995)
and late period (1996­2013) to assess whether returns to high tenure change significantly
over time. In line with the literature, the estimated coefficients show that returns to high
tenure are much smaller for college educated workers. The change between the early and
late period is fairly small: workers with high tenure have a substantial pay advantage
in both periods, though there are considerably fewer such workers by the late period
(Figure 3).

Table 2 reports the results of an analogous set of regressions performed on the German
GSOEP sample. The average measured returns to high tenure are smaller than in the US
data, but the gap between more- and less-educated workers is similar. Patterns are also
similar between the earlier and the later periods.

To further validate the patterns reported in Tables 1 and 2, we run separate pooled
regressions on the PSID and GSOEP samples that include all workers aged 45 to 54
and regress the log-hourly wage on a set of year fixed effects, college attainment, and
long-term tenure dummy variables, as well as the interaction between the latter two. The
results are reported in Table 12 in the appendix. The coefficients of the interaction terms
are negative, consistent in magnitude, and statistically significant in both samples. The
size of the estimates implies that the premium enjoyed by high-tenure workers with a
high-school education is 10.7 percentage points higher than that for college-educated
workers in the United States, and 16.6 percentage points higher in Germany.

It is important to recognize that the results in Tables 1 and 2 do not control for selection
effects and therefore should not be interpreted as estimates of the causal effect of high
  5
   We define potential experience as current age minus (years of education + 6).
  6
   Individuals with some college education who have not completed a four-year tertiary degree are
counted as high-school graduates.


                                               14
                                                 Log of hourly wage (ages 45­54)
                                                          Germany (GSOEP)
                                                   1984-1995               1996-2013
            Tenure >= 20, High school          0.098***               0.158***
                                               (0.024)                 (0.029)
            Tenure >= 20, College                          -0.042                  -0.087*
                                                           (0.057)                 (0.044)
            Experience (polynomial)              yes         yes         yes         yes
            Year FE                              yes         yes         yes         yes
            Observations                        4,008       1,066       3,816       1,247
            R2                                  0.044       0.079       0.257       0.296
            Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered at indi-
            vidual level. The sample consists of male workers aged 45 to 54 who report a
            minimum of 20 hours worked per week in the last year. Each column consists of
            a separate regression of log wages on a year fixed effect, a third-degree polyno-
            mial of potential experience, and an indicator variable for 20 years of tenure or
            more on the current job. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.

    Table 2: Returns to high tenure for college- and less-educated workers in Germany

tenure on wages. Rather, we view these regressions as data moments that a quantitative
model of on-the-job skill accumulation should be able to match. Like the data, our model
is subject to selection effects, because initial skill and luck in skill upgrading affect the
likelihood of reaching high tenure. In our quantitative analysis below, we discipline
the model to generate the observed empirical link between high tenure and wages,
which includes both selection and skill-accumulation effects. Crucially, however, the
quantitative exercise is less concerned with the level of returns to high tenure (where
selection is likely to matter more) than the gap in empirical returns between more- and
less-educated workers.


4    A Labor Search Model with Skill Upgrading
In this section, we develop a quantitative model of job creation and on-the-job accumu-
lation of human capital that can account for the facts described in Section 3. The key
elements of the model are a life-cycle structure and relationship-specific investments
by both firms and workers. Firms decide to create jobs that either do or do not allow

                                                  15
for the accumulation of skills. If they have a job that allows for skills accumulation,
workers decide how much effort to invest in acquiring skills. The incentives to undertake
these two-sided investments depend on the expected length of the firm-worker relation-
ship which, in turn, is determined by the economic environment and by the extent of
employment protection.

4.1    Demographics and the Labor Market

Every year, a new cohort of workers enters the labor market. Workers' education e is
heterogenous, with e = H denoting a college education and e = L a lower level of
education. A cohort enters the labor market at age 25 and retires at age 65. Workers are
risk neutral and discount future periods with a yearly discount factor  < 1. A worker's
instantaneous utility is given by consumption minus the cost of effort z exerted to acquire
skills on the job. After retirement, workers' continuation utility is independent of their
skill accumulation. The continuation utility therefore does not affect decisions and is
normalized to zero. Each worker is characterized by a productivity level h on a skill
ladder, h  {h1 , . . . , hI }. When workers enter the labor market at age 25, their initial
productivity is drawn from a distribution F (h).

Unemployed workers are matched with a firm with probability  every period.7 Firms
create vacancies for either college-educated or less-educated workers. If the vacancy is for
less-educated workers, the firm also has to decide whether to make an investment such
that the created job allows the worker to accumulate skills (type-A job), or to forgo this
investment such that no skills can be accumulated (type-N job). Jobs for college-educated
workers are always of type A. The type of a job is denoted by p  {A, N }.

Jobs that allow for skill accumulation are more profitable, but also more costly to create.
There is heterogeneity across firms with respect to the cost of creating an accumulation-
type job, which makes the supply of these jobs responsive to relative profitability. Specif-
ically, after creating the vacancy, the firm draws the investment cost k from a uniform
                                  L          L                                L
distribution with limits c0 E JN     , c1 E JN  , where c1 > c0 > 0 and E JN     is the ex-
                                      8
pected profitability of N -type jobs. This investment represents the cost of creating an
   7
     We use an exogenous job-finding rate because there is little variation in unemployment across the
periods and countries that we compare in the quantitative exercise, and explaining unemployment is not
the focus of our analysis. However, it would be straightforward to endogenize the job-finding rate in the
usual way through a matching function.
   8
     We use a uniform distribution because our quantitative results depend primarily on the fraction of
type-A jobs and on how strongly this number varies with relative profitability, which pins down the two


                                                   16
                                                                          L
accumulation-type job. Scaling the distribution by the factor E JN           guarantees that
proportional shifts to the profitability of all jobs (say, through an increase in overall pro-
ductivity) do not affect the fractions of type-A and type-N jobs created.9 Given this cost,
the firm will open a type-A vacancy if and only if the cost k is lower than the difference
between the expected returns from the two types of vacancies:

                                              L      L
                                        k  E JA - E JN .

                 L
Hence, the share A of type-A jobs will be equal to:

                                                L          L
                     L                     E JA    - E JN          c0
                     A   = min max                        L
                                                              -         ,0 ,1 .                         (1)
                                            (c1 - c0 )E [JN ]   c1 - c0

Equation 1 illustrates that the share of jobs for L workers that allow for accumulation of
skills is an increasing function of the relative expected profitability of the two types of
           L        L
jobs, E JA    /E JN   .

4.2   Production and Turbulence Shocks

Once worker and firm are matched, they start producing. Under normal conditions, a
match between a firm and a worker of education e, skill level h, and potential experience
x (where x = 1 at age 25 and x = 40 at age 64) produces output y e (x, h) = ae (x)h. For a
given match, this initial output level changes over time for two reasons: a change in the
experience profile ae (x) or a change in skill h, provided that the job type allows for the
accumulation of skills. The term ae (x) captures all sources of life-cycle wage growth that
are not due to investment in skill by the worker.

The output level can also be affected by turbulence shocks, which are temporary but
persistent decreases in match-specific productivity. New matches in the first period of
the firm-worker relationship are not affected by these shocks. Before production takes
place in later periods, the match is affected by turbulence with probability  . If the shock
hits, the match productivity is reduced to a fraction < 1 of regular productivity, where
is drawn from a distribution G( ). A match can be subject to multiple turbulence shocks,
i.e., subsequent reductions in productivity by a fraction . A turbulence shock lasts until
parameters of the uniform distribution. Other distributions would give similar results provided that they
match the level and slope of the supply of type-A jobs in our calibrated model.
   9
     This scaling could arise from the investment requiring an input of unskilled labor; unskilled wages are
linked to profits through wage bargaining.


                                                    17
separation or until productivity returns to the regular level. The probability of the shock
being reversed is also given by (i.e., the size of the shock), implying that more severe
shocks (lower ) are more persistent.
In addition to turbulence shocks, the match can also be hit by an irreversible negative
shock that permanently reduces match productivity to zero, leading to immediate sepa-
ration. The probability of this separation shock depends on the worker's tenure at their
current job and is denoted by (t), where t  1 is tenure. The separation shock allows us
to match observed trends in the prevalence of short-duration jobs separately from that in
the share of workers with long-term tenure.10

4.3    Skill Accumulation and Skill Loss

Workers with jobs that allow for human capital accumulation choose how much effort
to exert in accumulating skills. A worker with education e  {H, L}, experience x, and
current productivity level hi can exert effort z at cost ae (x)hi z 2 . If the effort is successful,
a worker with skill level hi upgrades their skills to hi+1 , which happens with probability:

                                                              z
                                               p(z ) =           ,                                      (2)
                                                             z+1

where  > 0 is a parameter. We assume that, for given worker characteristics, the effort
exerted during regular times does not change when a turbulence shock hits.11 Upon
separation from any job, workers suffer a downgrading of their skills, so that a worker of
education e  {H, L} and skill level hi transitions to skill level hj with probability Qe (i, j ).
Here Qe (i, j ) = 0 if j > i, meaning that separation can never result in higher skills. The
Qe (i, j ) are defined as follows:

                                      Qe (i, j ) =  e Qe (i, j + 1) for j < i,                          (3)
                                 i
                                      Qe (i, j ) = 1.                                                   (4)
                               j =1


The parameter  e  0 captures the job specificity of the accumulated skills. A lower
value of  e implies a distribution of Qe (i, j ) that first-order stochastically dominates the
  10
     A rich literature has documented a decline in the rate of job turnover that is largely explained by
the decline in jobs with a very short duration. See, among others, Hyatt and Spletzer (2016), Pries and
Rogerson (2019), and Molloy, Smith, and Wozniak (2019).
  11
     This assumption is introduced for computational feasibility. Allowing for effort to be set endogenously
during turbulent times would not qualitatively alter the results. Note that because wages do not depend
on turbulence, optimal effort would only change due to a higher probability of a layoff during turbulence.


                                                        18
distribution for a higher value of  e . For example, a value of  e = 1 induces a uniform
distribution over skill levels smaller than or equal to the current one, whereas a value of
 e = 0 implies that current skills are fully retained. Our calibration below implies that
 L >  H , that is, less-educated workers experience greater skill loss upon separation
than do college-educated workers. Put differently, the skills of less-educated workers are
more job-specific, and hence less-educated workers' investment in skills depends more
on expected job tenure.

4.4   Wage Setting, Separations, and Employment Protection

In continuing matches, wage bargaining between worker and firm takes place every
period. Wages are set via Nash bargaining, with a downward wage rigidity that prevents
the wage from falling below the "prevailing wage" for the same type of worker-firm
matches. In non-turbulent times, Nash bargaining takes place such that the worker
                                                                                     e
retains a share  of the resulting surplus. We denote the resulting wage by wp          (x, h, t),
where e  {L, H } and p  {A, N }. Worker and firm bargain only over the wage; the
effort that the worker puts into accumulating skills cannot be contracted. The downward
wage rigidity takes the form of a law that states that for given worker characteristics x, h,
and t, firms cannot pay a wage lower than the prevailing wage for the corresponding
                                      e
matches under normal conditions, wp     (x, h, t). This rigidity always binds if the match is
subject to a turbulence shock.
Given wage rigidity, only the firm's surplus can turn negative when a turbulence shock
hits. The firm will decide to dissolve the relationship and fire the worker when the
continuation value falls below a firing cost that summarizes the level of employment
protection in the economy. The firing cost is proportional to the prevailing wage and
increasing in worker tenure t:

                                 e                   e
                                 p (x, h, t) = f (t)wp (x, h, t).


The coefficient f (t) captures the strength of employment protection for workers with t
years of tenure. The revenue generated by the firing cost goes to the government and
helps finance unemployment benefits. The firing cost is zero in the model economy
calibrated to the United States, but a positive firing cost applies when we match the
model to German data.
The wage setting process in the model features two sources of potential inefficiencies.
First, Nash bargaining does not provide the efficient level of incentives for investing in

                                               19
skills, because the worker bears the effort cost of investing but captures only a fraction
of the surplus generated. Second, the downward wage rigidity can lead to inefficient
separations: when a turbulence shock hits, the firm may fire the worker even if continuing
the relationship would be efficient. We do not model the frictions that give rise to these
inefficiencies, but rather impose a specific wage-setting process. The on-the-job training
literature has established that first-best contracts are difficult to achieve and that a
variety of frictions can lead to inefficient investment. In our setting, an efficient contract
would require a long-term commitment to a contingent contract by worker and firm and
contractibility of the worker's effort. Hence, inefficiencies will arise if the worker's effort
is unobservable or unverifiable, or if worker and firm cannot commit not to renegotiate a
contract in the future. These frictions are likely to be relevant in our context: for example,
workers are generally unable to commit not to quit a job, and can therefore use the threat
of quitting to force a renegotiation.

We impose the downward wage rigidity because without such a friction, the model
would generate large and counterfactual temporary wage reductions when a turbulence
shock hits. The wage rigidity can be motivated with an information friction if the firm
has private information about the turbulence shock. Arguably, firms are better informed
about productivity than workers, and workers will not agree to labor contracts that allow
the firm to reduce their wage arbitrarily based on information the worker cannot verify.

Our wage-setting assumptions are designed to be similar to benchmark labor search
models while avoiding large wage cuts and providing incentives to invest in skills.
However, the literature does not provide clear guidance about which wage setting
process provides the best match to the data in our setting. We consequently have explored
alternative wage setting mechanisms, such as Nash bargaining without a downward
wage rigidity. The basic conclusions of our analysis with respect to the sources of change
in the college wage premium are robust to alternative assumptions (provided that the
model is re-calibrated to match the same data moments). In contrast, wage setting
is relevant to welfare considerations when comparing different levels of employment
protection. We return to this point below.

4.5   The Decision Problems of Workers and Firms

We now have all of the pieces in place to describe the decision problems faced by workers
and firms in the model economy. First, consider a worker with education e  {H, L},
experience x, skill h, and tenure t, who is currently employed in a type-A job (accumula-

                                              20
tion of skills is possible). The only decision that this worker makes is how much effort
z to put into acquiring more skills. As long as the worker-firm match is not currently
experiencing a turbulence shock, the decision problem for this worker is described by
the following Bellman equation:

   e                  e
  VA (x, h, t) = max wA (x, h, t) - ae (x)hz 2 +  (1 - (t))(1 -  )Eh (VA
                                                                       e
                                                                         (x + 1, h , t + 1))
                   z

                       + (1 - (t))Eh ,      ~ e (x + 1, h , t + 1, ) + (t)Eh (U e (x + 1, h ))
                                            V                                                    .
                                              A


Here, U e (x + 1, h ) is the value function in case of unemployment tomorrow and V ~ e (x +
                                                                                    A
1, h , t + 1, ) is the value of being in an employment relationship tomorrow with turbu-
lence shock , which can be equal to the utility of unemployment if is sufficiently low
to induce separation. If the relationship continues, the expectation over h is governed
by effort z through the upgrade probability p(z ) defined in Equation (2). If the worker
becomes unemployed, expectations over h depend on the skill-loss probabilities defined
by Equations (3) and (4). The expectation over the size of the turbulence shock is
governed by the distribution function G( ).

Workers with a job that does not allow for skill accumulation (who are always less
educated) have no decisions to make, because quitting voluntarily is never optimal for
workers. Their utilities are described by the Bellman equation:

   L              L                               L
  VN (x, h, t) = wN (x, h, t) +  (1 - (t))(1 -  )VN (x + 1, h, t + 1)
                                       ~N
                          + (1 - (t))E V e
                                           (x + 1, h, t + 1, ) + (t)Eh U e (x + 1, h )           .

If the worker-firm match is currently experiencing a turbulence shock, the firm will fire
the worker if the shock is below a threshold ~e         p (x, h, t), which is determined by the
firm's problem. Hence, if < ~e   p (x, h, t), the continuation value for the worker is equal to
the expected value of unemployment, where expectations are based on the probability
distribution over skill losses, Qe (i, j ), which is defined by Equations (3) and (4):

                                   ~pe (x, h, t, ) = Eh [U e (x, h )] .
                                   V

Conversely, if  ~e
                 p (x, h, t) the value function for a worker with a type-A job is:


  ~A
  V e                e
      (x, h, t, ) = wA (x, h, t) - ae (x)hz  (x, h, t)2


                                                   21
                                               ~ e (x + 1, h , t + 1, )
                   +  (1 - (t))(1 -  )(1 - )Eh VN

                                               e
                        + (1 - (t))(1 -  ) Eh VN (x + 1, h , t + 1)

                    + (1 - (t))Eh ,      ~ e (x + 1, h , t + 1, ) + (t)Eh U e (x + 1, h )
                                         V                                                   .
                                          N


The value function reflects the possibility of productivity returning to the regular level
(with probability (1 - (t))(1 -  ) ) and the possibility of being hit by an additional
turbulence shock (with probability (1 - (t)) ). The value function under turbulence for
type-N jobs is analogous. The utility of unemployed workers is described by the Bellman
equation:

U e (x, h) = (1 - ) ae (x)hb + U e (x + 1, h) +  A
                                                 e e                       e
                                                   VA (x + 1, h, 1) + (1 - A   e
                                                                             )VN (x + 1, h, 1) ,

         e
Here, A    is the equilibrium share of type-A vacancies that allow for the accumulation
                                                            H
of skills. For college-educated workers, we always have A      = 1, but for less-educated
workers this share depends on the job-creation decisions of firms. Note that unemployed
workers find a new job right away with probability . Given that our model is formu-
lated at an annual frequency, requiring at least one period of unemployment after a
layoff would imply a counterfactually long duration of unemployment. Unemployment
compensation is given by a fraction b < 1 of regular match productivity ae (x)h.

We now turn to firms. The expected profit of a firm currently employing a worker with
education e, experience x, skill h, and tenure t in a type-A job is given by:

   e
  JA (x, h, t) = ae (x)h - wA
                            e
                              (x, h, t) +  (1 - (t))
                                   e
                        (1 -  )Eh JA                           ~e (x + 1, h , t + 1, )
                                     (x + 1, h , t + 1) + Eh , J                             .
                                                                A


The expected profit derived from a type-N job is:

   L
  JN (x, h, t) = aL (x)h - wN
                            L
                              (x, h, t) +  (1 - (t))
                                          L
                                  (1 -  )JN                       ~N
                                            (x + 1, h, t + 1) + E J L
                                                                      (x + 1, h, t + 1, )    .

These Bellman equations assume that the expected profit after a separation is zero. It
is straightforward to generate the zero-profit condition for vacant firms in the standard
way by adding a vacancy posting cost, a standard matching function, and a free entry
condition for posting vacancies. This would add additional parameters (such as matching


                                               22
efficiency) that would then be chosen to generate the job-finding rate that we target in
our calibration. As already mentioned, since we do not focus here on explaining how the
job finding rate varies over time, we simplify this aspect of the model by imposing zero
profits for vacant firms.
Next, consider the value of a matched firm currently experiencing a turbulence shock .
If the value of the firm conditional on continuation is below the education- and tenure-
specific firing cost, separation occurs. Hence, the value of the firm with a type-N job and
a turbulence shock is:

    ~N
    J e
        (x, h, t, ) = max ae (x)h - wN
                                     e
                                       (x, h, t) +  (1 - (t))
                            ~e (x + 1, h, t + 1, ) + (1 -  ) J e (x + 1, h, t + 1)+
               (1 -  )(1 - )JN                                N

                                               E     ~N
                                                     J e
                                                         (x + 1, h, t + 1, )    , -e
                                                                                   N (x, h, t) ,


where e
      N (x, h, t) is the firing cost. For a type-A job we have:


    ~A
    J e
        (x, h, t, ) = max ae (x)h - wA
                                     e
                                       (x, h, t) +  (1 - (t))
                                           ~e (x + 1, h , t + 1, ) +
                           (1 -  )(1 - )Eh JA

                    e
        (1 -  ) Eh JA (x + 1, h , t + 1) + Eh ,      ~A
                                                     J e
                                                         (x + 1, h , t + 1, )   , -e
                                                                                   A (x, h, t) .


The optimal firing decision of the firm arising from these value functions defines the
firing thresholds ~e
                   p (x, h, t) below which the firm lets go of the worker.

After a worker retires, the value of the firm and the utility of the worker are both zero
irrespective of skill level. As a result, the optimal choice of effort in the period preceding
retirement is equal to zero. We also assume that the government finances unemployment
benefits and spends revenue from the firing cost via lump-sum taxes and transfers that
are identical for all workers. Given that utility is linear in consumption, these taxes
and transfers do not affect any decisions. They therefore do not appear in the value
functions, which should then be interpreted as utility net of the consumption derived
from lump-sum transfers and taxes.

5     Model Calibration: Matching US Data for 1980 and 2010
In this section, we calibrate the model to match salient features of the US labor market in
the 1980s and the 2010s. This calibrated model allows us to quantify the extent to which

                                               23
the rise of economic turbulence can account for changes in education wage premia. We
then explore how labor protection legislation can help explain the different trends in the
US and German economies following rising turbulence starting in the 1980s.

Our calibration procedure is comprised of three steps. First, we directly assign values
to a subset of parameters that are common in the literature. The remaining parameters
are divided into two sets, one that is time-invariant and one that is allowed to change
over time (such as the frequency of turbulence shocks). In the second step, we calibrate
both sets of parameters such that the steady state of the model matches a set of target
moments for the US economy in 1980. In the third step, we recalibrate the time-variant
parameters to match a set of target moments for the year 2010.


Step 1: Assigned parameters We set the model period to be one year. The discount
factor is  = 0.95, which implies a yearly interest rate of 5.3 percent. The worker's
bargaining weight is set to  = 0.5, consistent with Gertler and Trigari (2009). The job
finding rate is set to  = 0.8, implying an average job search duration of three months.
The coefficient of the flow value of unemployment is set to b = 0.2, which reproduces
an average ratio of non-market to market production of 20 percent, consistent with an
average replacement ratio of 40 percent for half of the currently unemployed labor force.
The distribution G( ) of turbulence shocks is given by a uniform distribution on the
interval [0, ¯]. We set the value of ¯ to 0.6, implying a minimum productivity loss of 40
percent of regular productivity during turbulent times. This choice can be interpreted
as a normalization, since the model can rationalize the empirical share of workers with
long-term tenure with multiple combinations of frequencies of turbulence shocks,  , and
minimum productivity losses, ¯. In the case of a repeated turbulence shock, the new
  is once again uniformly distributed but on the interval [0, ^], where ^ is the current
turbulence shock. Table 3 summarizes the assigned parameters.


Step 2: Matching the 1980 US steady state Next, we jointly calibrate the remaining
parameters to match a set of target moments that characterize the US economy in the
early 1980s. The key moments of interest are the overall college wage premium, lifetime
wage growth, and the returns to long-term tenure for college-educated and less-educated
workers, as well as the share of workers with long-term tenure.

We impose two normalizations to help calibrate the model parameters. College-educated
workers always invest in skills, which makes it difficult to identify how much of their

                                           24
   Parameter Interpretation                        Value    Source/Target
                    Discount rate                   0.95    Yearly interest rate 5.25%
                    Job finding rate                 0.8    Av. duration unemployment 3 months
                    Bargaining weight                0.5    Gertler and Trigari (2009)
           b        Non-market productivity          0.2    Half receive replacement rate 40%
           ¯        Prod. loss in turbulence         0.6    Minimum 40% loss


                            Table 3: Directly assigned model parameters

wage growth is due to endogenous investment versus their exogenous lifetime experience
profile. In this analysis, we impose that the exogenous productivity term for college-
educated workers, aH (x), is constant in experience, meaning that the lifetime wage
growth of college graduates is entirely accounted for by the endogenous accumulation of
skills on the job. The constant productivity level for college-educated workers in the 1980s
calibration is denoted by AH  80 . Given the parameters that control the accumulation and
loss of skills, we can then calibrate the productivity process for less-educated workers,
aL (x), to match the profile of the college premium across different age groups. We impose
that the exogenous productivity term grows with experience at a constant rate, denoted
     L
by g80 :
                                                        L x-1
                                    aL         L
                                     80 (x) = A80 (1 + g80 )  ,

where we choose units so that AL   80 = 1. A second normalization concerns the share of
type-A jobs for less-educated workers that allow investment in skills. Since returns to
experience can be explained by different combinations of fractions of type-A jobs and
exogenous returns to experience, we impose that in 1980 all the vacancies for L workers
                    L
are of type A, i.e. A, 80 = 1 (meaning that the parameter c1 defining the upper bound for
the cost of creating a type-A job is sufficiently low). What matters for our quantitative
findings is the change in the share of type-A jobs over time rather than the initial level of
such jobs.

The remaining parameters are jointly calibrated to match a set of target moments derived
from the PSID for the years 1981­1986.12 Though the parameters do interact, there is
a specific target moment for most parameters that plays an outsized role in setting the
parameter value.
  12
       We use multiple years for the calibration to reduce measurement error due to small sample sizes.



                                                     25
     Parameter      Interpretation            Value    Related Targets
         L          L skill specificity        0.318   L tenure premium
         H          H skill specificity        0.045   H tenure premium
                    Prob. skill upgrade        0.494   Experience and college premia
          L
         g80        L productivity growth     0.0006   Experience and college premia
         AH
          80        Skill bias                 1.290   College wage premium
         80         Prob. turbulence shock     0.013   Long-term tenure
        80 (1)      Prob. separation shock     0.207   Short-term tenure
                    Pareto initial skills      4.571   L std. dev. log wage at age 25


                 Table 4: Calibrated parameter values for 1980 steady state

The jointly calibrated parameters are summarized in Table 4. The distribution of skills
for workers entering the labor market, F (h), is assumed to be a Pareto with shape
parameter  . The value for  is set to match the standard deviation of log hourly wages
for high-school graduates at age 25, which is given by 0.364.

The parameters that control the loss of skills upon separation,  L and  H , are set to
match the wage premium enjoyed by long-tenure workers. Specifically, we target the
wage premium of workers aged 45­54 with job tenures of between 20 and 30 years over
workers in the same age range with tenures of between 0 and 10 years. The calibrated
values imply a substantial loss of skills for workers of type L ( L is calibrated to be 0.318),
while the loss of skills for workers of type H is considerably smaller ( H is calibrated to
be 0.045). These calibrated values imply that less-educated workers acquire skills that
are more job-specific compared to college graduates. Figure 10 in Appendix C displays
the distribution functions over skill levels hi after job loss. A less-educated worker with
current skill h = h10 (i.e., the 10th step of the ladder) loses an average of 6.4 percent of
their skills upon separation, compared to only 0.7 percent for a college-educated worker.

The parameters controlling the accumulation of skills on the job,  , and the exogenous
                                                 L
productivity growth with age for L-workers, g80    , are calibrated to target college wage
premia for the age groups 25­34, 35­44, and 45­54, and the experience premia of H -
workers aged 35­44 and 45­54 compared to workers aged 25­34. This procedure targets
the difference in the steepness of the age-earning profile between college-educated and
less-educated workers and, hence, the increase in the college premium over the life cycle.

                                              26
                   Moment                                    Data    Model
                   L tenure premium                          0.238    0.232
                   H tenure premium                          0.126    0.127
                   Long tenure share                         0.414    0.414
                   Short tenure share                        0.154    0.155
                   L standard deviation log wage at 25       0.364    0.367
                   College premium 25­34                     0.244    0.234
                   College premium 35­44                     0.282    0.302
                   College premium 45­54                     0.367    0.357
                   H experience premium 35­44                0.229    0.209
                   H experience premium 45­54                0.383    0.395


                           Table 5: Model fit for 1980 calibration

The parameters controlling the frequency of turbulence shocks and exogenous separations
are determined by the share of workers with short-term and long-term tenure with their
current employer. Specifically, the probability of a turbulence shock, 80 , is set to match
the share of workers of ages 45­54 with current job tenure between 20 and 30 years,
which is 41.4 percent in our calibration period. As for exogenous separations, we impose
a process that declines to zero at a constant rate over the first 10 years of a job relationship.
This process is parameterized by the exogenous separation probability in the first year
80 (1). We pick the value of 80 (1) to match the share of short-tenure jobs (less than
two years of tenure) among workers aged 35­44, which is 15.4 percent in the target
period. Introducing this additional source of separations will allow us to account for the
simultaneous decline in jobs with long-term tenure and the stable fraction of jobs with
short tenure. The calibrated process for exogenous separations as a function of tenure in
the 1980 calibration is depicted by the solid line of Figure 11 in Appendix C

The calibrated parameters for the 1980 US steady state are listed in Table 4, and Table 5
compares the fit for the target moments between model and data. The calibrated model
successfully replicates the education and experience premia, tenure premia, and the
tenure distribution observed in the data. Further details on the calibration procedure are
provided in Appendix B.



                                               27
Step 3: Matching the 2010 Steady State Finally, we recalibrate the model to match a
set of target moments from the early 2010s. Our primary objective is to determine the
sources of the increase in the college wage premium from the 1980s to the 2010s. The
calibration procedure allows for multiple sources of changing wage premia, including
changes in turbulence and changes in the overall skill bias of technology. The calibration
procedure helps to identify these different channels by matching observed changes in
returns to experience, returns to college, and the tenure distribution.

For the 2010 calibration, we stipulate that the parameters  ,  ,  H , and  L are unchanged
from the 1980s. The remaining parameters are chosen such that the resulting steady state
of the model matches a set of target moments from the PSID for the years 2009­2013. In
                                                      L
the calibration, we treat the share of type-A jobs, A,  10 , as a parameter. We later back out
                                                                                           L
the values of the structural parameters c0 and c1 , which generate the calibrated shares A,  80
      L
and A,  10 following  Equation  (1), and use these  parameters     to generate counterfactuals
and decompositions.

We allow for two sources of change in the wage structure that are unrelated to the
turbulence mechanism. First, we allow for an overall change in returns to experience,
  e
g10 , which applies equally to college-educated and less-educated workers. This shift is
denoted by g10 , and serves to capture changes in the age-wage profile that are not due
to investment in skills on the job. Second, we allow for a shift in the overall skill bias AH
                                                                                            10 ,
i.e., the overall productivity of college-educated versus less-educated workers, which
captures factors such as skill-biased technical change. Including these elements allows us
to match the change in the college wage premium exactly and then decompose it into
contributions from different channels.

The skill bias parameter AH   10 , the change in returns to experience g10 , and the job
                          L
composition parameter A,10 are calibrated by matching the college wage premia for age
groups 25­34, 35­44, and 45­54, as well as the experience premia of H -workers aged
35­44 and 45­54 (again compared to workers aged 25­34). The calibration implies an
increase in overall returns to experience (g10 > 0) and a substantial decline in the share
of type-A jobs that allow for the accumulation of skills. These findings reflect an increase
in the steepness of the age-earnings profile for college-educated workers and a rise in the
college wage premium among older workers.

To estimate the frequency of the turbulence shocks, 10 , we target the change in the
share of workers aged 45­54 with current tenures of between 20 and 30 years from
the 1980s to the 2010s. This share declines by 8.07 percentage points, implying a 2.40

                                              28
    Parameter     Interpretation             Value    Related Targets
       g10        Change product. growth      0.006   Experience and college premia
       L
       A, 10      Share of type-A jobs        0.555   Experience and college premia
        AH
         10       Skill bias                  1.499   Experience and college premia
        10        Prob. turbulence shock      0.037   Long-term tenure
       10 (1)     Prob. separation shock      0.173   Short-term tenure


                Table 6: Calibrated parameter values for 2010 steady state

                     Moment                            Data    Model
                     Change long tenure share         -0.081   -0.081
                     Change short tenure share        0.009    0.009
                     H experience premium, 35­44      0.307    0.275
                     H experience premium, 45­54      0.506    0.522
                     College premium 25­34            0.408    0.411
                     College premium 35­44            0.541    0.537
                     College premium 45­54            0.645    0.647


                         Table 7: Model fit for 2010 steady state

percentage point increase of the estimated value for  . Similarly, to pin down the
frequency of exogenous separations for short-duration jobs, 10 (t), we target the change
in the share of workers aged 35­44 with current tenure below two years from the 1980s to
the 2010s. The calibrated value of (1) declines by 3.43 percentage points, consistent with
observations in the literature (e.g., Hyatt and Spletzer 2016, Molloy, Smith, and Wozniak
2019) documenting a recent decline in the prevalence of short-duration jobs. Figure 11 in
Appendix C illustrates how the estimated process for exogenous separations has changed
between the 1980 and 2010 calibrations.

Parameter values and the fit for targeted moments for the 2010 calibration are summarized
in Tables 6 and 7. The model successfully reproduces the observed changes in the tenure
distribution, returns to experience, and the college wage premium at different ages.




                                            29
6        Findings from the Quantitative Model
We now examine the extent to which the model can account for variation in the college
wage premium over time and across countries. First, we examine the sources of the
increase in the college wage premium in the United States, and then ask whether strict
employment protection can account for the relatively stable college wage premium in
Germany.

6.1        The Rise in the College Wage Premium in the United States

The two model calibrations for the United States in the 1980s and 2010s fully account for
the increase in the college wage premium during this period. In this section, we examine
the relative importance of the turbulence mechanism in accounting for this change.

Figure 4 provides a snapshot of the mechanism through which labor market turbulence
affects the college wage premium in the model. The figure displays the probability that a
worker with one year of tenure and at the bottom of the skill ladder (t = 1, h = h1 ) will
move up to the next step of the ladder, based on age and education.13 The probability of
upgrading skills declines for older workers, which reflects the shorter investment horizon
for workers who are closer to retirement.

In the 1980 calibration, the probability of accumulating skills is only slightly higher for
college-educated workers (solid line) than for less-educated workers (dashed line), mainly
because these workers' skills are more transferable. In contrast, less-educated workers
are much less likely to upgrade their skills in the 2010 calibration. This is due to the
higher level of turbulence shocks: workers and firms are both aware that matches are less
likely to be long-lived, which reduces the incentive to make match-specific investments.
For college-educated workers, investment in skills does not decrease. Because these
workers primarily accumulate transferable skills, their investment depends less on the
level of turbulence and, therefore, on the longevity of matches. In fact, the likelihood that
they upgrade their skills increases slightly due to the steeper productivity profile implied
by g10 , which induces higher incentives to exert effort in skill accumulation. The same
effect applies to less-educated workers, though to a lesser extent due to these workers'
high degree of skill specificity.

The decline in skill upgrading for less-educated workers from 1980 to 2010 reflects lower
investment from both sides: firms create fewer vacancies that allow for the accumulation
    13
         The trends are qualitatively identical for workers with higher tenure and skill levels.


                                                         30
                                           0.12



                                            0.1




            Probability of Skill upgrade
                                           0.08



                                           0.06



                                           0.04



                                           0.02



                                             0
                                                  0   5          10       15          20        25         30         35        40
                                                                                  Experience

                                                      Non-College, 1980   College, 1980    Non-College, 2010    College, 2010




Figure 4: Probability of skill upgrading by years of experience for L (dotted lines) and
H (solid lines) workers with tenure t = 1 and skill h = h1 , US calibration for 1980 (plain
lines) and 2010 (marked lines).

of skills, while workers in jobs that do allow for skill accumulation invest less in on-
the-job skill acquisition. In the calibrated model, the firm investment channel is more
important: the lower availability of accumulation-type jobs accounts for over 90 percent
of the wider gap in skill upgrading among workers with no experience (x = 1) and
minimum skills (h = h1 ).

The decline in the investment in relationship-specific capital among less-educated work-
ers results in a decline in their average human capital, and hence in a rise in the measured
college wage premium. The solid lines of Figure 5 show that the end-of-career (age 64)
skill distribution of college graduates stays roughly the same between the two steady
states. For these workers, the skill loss due to higher turbulence is moderate and fully
compensated by an increase in on-the-job investment in skills. By contrast, the distri-
bution of skills for less-educated workers (dashed lines) is shifted lower. A large part
of this shift is due to the endogenous adjustment of job creation towards more type-N
jobs that do not allow accumulation of skills. However, even when the job composition
is held constant at the 1980 values (diamond markers), the increase in turbulence and
the resulting surge in separations result in a substantial decline in accumulated human
capital.

Table 8 breaks down how these changes affect the college wage premium in the model
economy. The first two rows show the college premia in the 1980 and 2010 calibrations,

                                                                                   31
                                               1


                                              0.9




           Cumulative probability at age 64
                                              0.8


                                              0.7


                                              0.6


                                              0.5


                                              0.4


                                              0.3


                                              0.2


                                              0.1


                                               0
                                                    1              1.5                2              2.5                3              3.5             4
                                                                                                    Skill level

                                               Non-College, 1980         Non-College, 2010   Non-College, 2010, Only turbulence   College, 1980   College, 2010




Figure 5: Distribution of the skills of less-educated (dashed lines) and college-educated
(solid lines) workers at age 64, US calibration for 1980 (plain lines) and 2010 (marked
lines). The line with diamond markers denote the case in which only turbulence shocks
and individual effort are changed to the 2010 values, while the composition of vacancies
is kept to the 1980 value.

which closely match the data since college wage premia by age were included as target
moments. The overall college premium increases by 43 percentage points, more than
doubling between the two steady states. This is partially due to the mechanism of on-
the-job investment in skills and partially to the rise in the overall skill bias parameter. In
order to separate those channels, the third row of Table 8 shows the college premium
that the model generates in 2010 if we only feed in the consequences of larger turbulence
shocks. For this counterfactual, we focus entirely on the turbulence channel by leaving
wages and other parameters (including overall skill bias) unchanged at the 1980 level,
but changing the frequency of turbulence shocks and imposing the policy functions
that affect investment in skills by firms and workers to reflect their values in the 2010
calibration. We see that this mechanism alone leads to a 16-percentage point rise in the
college wage premium or 37 percent of the overall increase. Hence, in the quantitative
model, the mechanism of skill accumulation accounts for a substantial fraction of the rise
in the college premium. The remainder of this increase is primarily due to the rise in the
skill bias parameter AH , which captures channels already documented by the literature,
such as skill-biased technical change.

Higher turbulence shocks increase the college premium in part because firms create fewer
jobs that allow for the accumulation of skills, and in part because workers who do have


                                                                                                    32
      Setting                                                          College Premium
      1980 calibration                                                        0.38
      2010 calibration: turbulence and skill-biased technical change          0.81
      2010 calibration: only turbulence (changing job composition)            0.54
      2010 calibration: only turbulence (fixed job composition)               0.40


Table 8: The college wage premium in the model, 1980 and 2010 calibrations, full model
versus models with only the turbulence mechanism

such jobs have fewer incentives to accumulate skills and are fired more frequently. The
last row of Table 8 shows the change in the college premium if we also fix the composition
of job types, and hence isolate the effect of worker investment in skills. The increase in the
college premium is still positive but much smaller in magnitude (two percentage points,
as compared to 16 percentage points due to turbulence). Hence, the shift towards jobs
that do not allow for accumulation of skills accounts for most of the effect of turbulence
on the college premium.

The shift towards lower-quality jobs that do not allow for the accumulation of skills is
driven by a change in the relative profitability of the two types of vacancies. Figure 6
displays the gap in the relative expected profitability between jobs that allow for skill
accumulation versus those that do not as a function of the initial skill level of the worker
that is hired. Accumulation-type jobs are in general more profitable, especially when
matched with workers from the left of the skill distribution, who have high potential
for skill accumulation. However, the increase in turbulence reduces the profitability
advantage of accumulation-type jobs, primarily because of the higher likelihood of
shocks that will lead to separation. Given that these jobs are more costly to create, this
shift in profitability has a considerable effect on equilibrium job composition.

6.2     The College Wage Premium Across Cohorts During the Transition

So far, we have focused on a comparison of the college wage premium across the steady
states of our model, which correspond to the 1980 and 2010 calibrations. However, given
its life-cycle structure, the model also generates rich transitional dynamics. While we
do not take a stand on the exact timing of the change in economic turbulence, a robust
implication of the theory is that there are pronounced cohort effects during the transition.
When economic turbulence rises, the workers who are initially most affected are young

                                             33
                                             0.8


                                             0.7




             Relative returns, A vs N jobs
                                             0.6


                                             0.5


                                             0.4


                                             0.3


                                             0.2


                                             0.1


                                               0


                                             -0.1
                                                    2   4   6         8          10         12      14          16   18   20
                                                                          Initial level of skills

                                                                Non-College, 1980           Non-College, 2010




Figure 6: Profitability gap between jobs that do and do not allow for skill accumula-
tion (type-A versus type-N vacancies) in the 1980 (solid line) and 2010 (dashed line)
calibrations.

workers who have just entered the labor market. These workers have not yet accumulated
any relationship-specific skills, and the composition of jobs available to them (in terms of
the possibility of accumulating skills) will immediately reflect the change in turbulence.
In contrast, older workers continue to benefit from skills they have already accumulated,
as well as from the fact that many of them have jobs created in the past that allow for the
accumulation of skills.

To illustrate the transitional dynamics of the model, we start the economy in the steady
state corresponding to the 1980 calibration. Then, in 1981, the degree of turbulence  and
the job composition for vacancies of L workers changes unexpectedly and permanently to
their values in the 2010 calibration. We then compute the transition path of the economy
as subsequent cohorts enter the labor market.

Figure 7 shows how the college wage premium evolves differentially for younger and
older workers during the transition. The graphs display the college premium relative to
1980 separately for younger (25 to 39) and older (40 to 54) workers. Since we impose a
one-time change in the economic environment, all transitional dynamics are due to the
endogenous progression of state variables. The figure shows that the college premium
among younger workers rises substantially by 1990, whereas there is little change for the

                                                                                34
                                  1980                                        1990
              1.5                                         1.5



               1                                           1



              0.5                                         0.5



               0                                           0
                          25-39          40-54                        25-39          40-54



                                  2000                                        2010
              1.5                                         1.5



               1                                           1



              0.5                                         0.5



               0                                           0
                          25-39          40-54                        25-39          40-54




Figure 7: The college premium by age over time after a one-time increase in turbulence
(model)

older workers. This reflects the fact that a substantial fraction of older workers in 1990
are still in jobs that were created before the shock took place in 1981. The next panels
show that by 2000, the impact on younger and older workers is more even, with older
workers more affected than younger ones by 2010. The larger effect on older workers in
2010 reflects the importance that the model places on the life-cycle accumulation of skills,
meaning that the long-run impact on wages is larger for older workers at the end of their
life cycles than for younger workers.

Figure 8 presents the same information using the data. The changes in the college
premium are quantitatively larger because the dynamic model simulation only focuses
on the turbulence channel. Qualitatively, however, the pattern in the data is exactly the
same as in the model: in the first decade, the college premium rises primarily for the
young, in the second decade the impact evens out, and in the long run it is the older
workers who are more affected.14 This empirical pattern is suggestive of a mechanism
that affects successive cohorts when they first enter the labor market. Our model of
on-the-job investment in skills provides such a mechanism. It is encouraging that the key
prediction of cohort effects in the rising college wage premium is supported by the data.
  14
   The fact that the rise in the skill premium initially affected younger workers was first pointed out by
Card and Lemieux (2001).




                                                   35
                                  1980                                              1990
              2                                                2



             1.5                                              1.5



              1                                                1



             0.5                                              0.5
                          25-39          40-54                              25-39          40-54



                                  2000                                              2010
              2                                                2



             1.5                                              1.5



              1                                                1



             0.5                                              0.5
                          25-39          40-54                              25-39          40-54




                   Figure 8: The college premium by age over time (US data)

6.3    Labor Protection and the College Wage Premium in Germany

We now examine the extent to which labor protection legislation can help explain the
much lower rise in the college premium in Germany compared to the United States from
1980 to 2010. We view the US and German economies as sharing the same overall techno-
logical environment, and hence both economies are subject to skill-biased technological
change and increased turbulence. However, we propose that the impact of these changes
was mitigated in Germany due to stronger employment protection.

To isolate the role of employment protection, we compute the college wage premium
in the "Germany" variants of our 1980 and 2010 calibrations. These are identical to the
US calibrations except for the firing cost that firms have to pay when laying off workers
(which is zero in the US calibration). Given that there was little change in employment
protection for regular workers in Germany over this period, we impose the same firing
cost in 1980 and in 2010.15

Recall from Section 4.4 that the firing cost takes the following form:

                                         e                   e
                                         p (x, h, t) = f (t)wp (x, h, t).


To capture the fact that workers with higher tenure enjoy more employment protection,
we stipulate that the term f (t) increases linearly with tenure over the first ten years of a
  15
     The "Hartz" labor market reforms of the Schroeder government in the early 2000s reduced protection
for temporary contracts but left protections for high-tenure regular-contract workers intact.


                                                       36
                                                                              College Premium
 Setting                                                               No Firing Cost       Firing Cost
                                                                       "United States"      "Germany"
 1980 calibration                                                             0.38              0.38
 2010 calibration: turbulence and skill-biased tech. change                   0.81              0.60
 2010 calibration: only turbulence                                            0.54              0.39


Table 9: The rise in the college wage premium with and without employment protection

worker-firm match, and is constant afterwards. Hence, the firing cost is solely defined by
the initial value of f (1). Actual German employment protection laws do not take the form
of an explicit firing cost, but rather consist of detailed rules on conditions under which
a layoff is permissible, which include protections for older and higher-tenure workers.
We pin down the extent of the firing cost for the "Germany" calibration by focusing on
the effects of employment protection. Specifically, we target the difference in the share of
workers aged 45­54 with current tenure of 20 to 30 years in Germany between the two
steady states.16 This procedure results in f DE (1) = 0.23, implying that the firing cost is
equal to 23 percent of the regular wage in the first year of a worker-firm relationship.
This firing cost coefficient increases linearly to 230 percent of the regular wage once the
worker reaches ten years of tenure. The left panel of Figure 12 in Appendix C shows how
f DE (1) is identified by the share of long-tenure workers, while the right panel depicts
the magnitude of the estimated firing cost as a function of tenure.

Table 9 shows how labor protection affects the change in the college wage premium
over time in the model economy. The left column reproduces the findings from Table 8
for the model without employment protection ("United States"). The right column
shows the effect of labor protection on the college wage premium in the "Germany"
calibrations with labor protection for 1980 and 2010. The effect of labor protection on
the 1980 steady state is almost nil. This reflects the fact that low labor market turbulence
reduces the importance of the firing cost. In the 2010 calibration (second row), the college
wage premium in the "Germany" model increases by 22 percentage points, far less than
the 43-percentage point increase observed in the "United States" model. Employment
protection therefore reduces the increase in the skill premium by close to 50 percent and
  16
     Analogously to the calibration for the United States, we use the years 2009­2013 for computing targets
for the 2010s steady state. For the initial state, we use the first six years of data in GSOEP, 1984­1989.


                                                    37
                                                   1980    2010
                              "United States"      1.645   1.539
                              "Germany"            1.720   1.843


Table 10: Relative profitability of type-A compared to type-N vacancies across the two
steady states in the "United States" economy (no firing cost) and in the "Germany"
economy (with firing cost)

can account for much of the divergent trends in the college wage premium between
the United States and Germany displayed in Figure 1. The last row of the table shows
the impact of employment protection in the model with turbulence shocks but without
additional skill-biased technological change. Here we see that employment protection
prevents almost the entire 16-percentage point rise in the college wage premium that
occurs without protection. Hence, while employment protection does not offset general
skill-biased technological change, it does insulate the economy from the bulk of the
effects of increasing turbulence.

Table 10 illustrates the economics behind these findings. The top row displays the relative
profitability of type-A over type-N vacancies in the US calibration across the two steady
states. The increase in turbulence induces a decline in the relative profitability of type-A
vacancies, prompting a shift towards type-N vacancies and depressing the accumulation
of skills for less-educated workers, which leads to an increase in the college wage pre-
mium. By contrast, in the "Germany" model with employment protection (bottom row),
the relative profitability of type-A vacancies actually increases after the rise in turbulence.
Employment protection induces firms to retain workers even when relatively large turbu-
lence shocks hit, regardless of the type of job. When the frequency of turbulence shocks
increases, the profitability of type-N jobs sees a greater reduction because the lower value
of a type-N match makes retaining a worker in times of turbulence relatively more costly.
As a result, the fraction of type-A vacancies does not decline as turbulence increases and,
in equilibrium, the probability of a skills upgrade increases slightly (Figure 9).

6.4   The Impact of Labor Protection on Welfare

Table 11 describes how imposing employment protection affects output and welfare (on
consumption units) in the economy. Compared to the 1980 benchmark, turbulence shocks
on their own lower output and welfare because they lead to more frequent separations


                                              38
                                       0.12



                                        0.1
        Probability of Skill upgrade

                                       0.08



                                       0.06



                                       0.04



                                       0.02



                                         0
                                              0   5            10             15             20            25             30            35   40
                                                                                        Experience

                                                      Non-College, US, 1980        Non-College, US, 2010        Non-College, Germany, 2010




Figure 9: Probability of skill upgrading by years of experience for L workers with tenure
t = 1 and skill h = h1 , "United States" calibration for 1980 (plain line) and 2010 (dotted
line) and "Germany" calibration for 2010 (marked line).

and hence a greater destruction of job-specific capital. Employment protection lowers
these losses both in terms of output and welfare. This result is due to a portion of
separations in our model that occur in response to turbulence shocks being inefficient.
Excessive separations generate an expectation of a short work relationship and hence
dampen workers' and firms' incentives to invest in job-specific skills. Employment
protection can prevent some of these separations, limit the destruction of skills, and
produce incentives for greater accumulation of job-specific skills. However, the welfare
effects of employment protection are not unambiguous: some inefficient separations may
be prevented, but it may also preserve matches that should be terminated for reasons of
efficiency.

In order to explore the sources of welfare gains brought about by employment protection,
we decompose the welfare gains into two components. The last two rows of Table 11
show the results of this decomposition. First, we display the gains when the firing cost
is constrained to only affect separations, while leaving workers' and firms' investment
in skills unaffected. Restricting separations reduces both welfare and output compared
to the unconstrained case. Given firing costs at the level of the German economy, the
negative distortion from preventing separations counteracts the effect of the reduction
in skill loss upon separation, since limiting separations eventually implies that matches
that should be destroyed are inefficiently kept intact. The last row shows that the welfare

                                                                                      39
         Setting                                                               Output      Welfare
         1980                                                                      1          1
         2010: turbulence                                                       0.925       0.931
         2010: turbulence, employment protection                                0.972       0.969
         2010: turbulence, employment protection (only separations)             0.913       0.919
         2010: turbulence, employment protection (only investment)              0.983       0.980


Table 11: Output and welfare relative to 1980 in the model with turbulence and with
employment protection

gains from introducing labor protection originate entirely from the increased incentives
to invest in job-specific capital.

It is important to keep in mind that our model only provides for a partial welfare analysis
and does not capture all tradeoffs that are relevant to the introduction of employment
protection measures. First, welfare results are sensitive to assumptions on wage bargain-
ing, in particular the downward wage rigidity. The extent to which wage bargaining
fails to set efficient incentives for investing in relationship-specific skills is difficult to
quantify. Second, our analysis keeps the job finding probability fixed. In a model with
endogenous job creation, firing restrictions would affect labor market tightness and
unemployment.17 For these reasons, this analysis should be interpreted as identifying
a channel through which employment protection may have beneficial effects, which in
a full analysis would have to be weighed against other well-known channels through
which excessive protection may reduce welfare.


7        Conclusion
There are major differences in employment protection across countries. In Europe,
widespread firing restrictions and insider-outsider labor markets protect senior workers
at the expense of their junior and temporary counterparts. Excessive employment protec-
tion can lead to well-known negative repercussions, including the high levels of youth
unemployment observed in a number of European countries.

In this paper, we consider a different channel through which certain forms of employment
    17
    Bratti, Conti, and Sulis (2018) argue that excessive employment protection can also push more workers
into temporary contracts and thereby reduce training.


                                                   40
protection can have potentially beneficial effects. By creating the expectation of long-
lasting employment relationships, employment protection can facilitate investments by
workers and firms in relationship-specific capital. Employment protection is especially
valuable when frequent turbulence shocks threaten to generate inefficient separations
and the destruction of such capital.

We argue that the impact of employment protection on relationship-specific investments
can help explain divergent trends in the college wage premium between countries with
tight employment protection such as Germany and countries with low levels of pro-
tection such as the United States. When turbulence shocks that temporarily lower the
productivity of worker-firm matches become more frequent, the expected duration of
employment relationships will fall in countries with little employment protection, result-
ing in less investment in relationship-specific capital. These effects are more pronounced
for less-educated workers, whose skills are more job-specific than those of more edu-
cated workers. For this reason, a rise in turbulence raises the college wage premium
in countries such as the United States, but has little impact in countries with greater
employment protection such as Germany. We argue that the employment-protection
mechanism can account for close to half of the divergent trends in the college wage
premium between the United States and Germany. The mechanism is also consistent
with observed trends in job tenure and returns to tenure for more- and less-educated
workers, as well as the observation that less-educated workers in the United States have
experienced little growth in real wages in recent decades.

Our work could be extended in different directions. In our analysis, we focus on match-
specific investments that improve the productivity of a given worker-firm pair. One could
also consider more general investments by firms in technologies that are complementary
to workers' accumulated firm-specific skills. That is, while some firms' production
technology relies on having experienced workers, other technologies work equally well
with inexperienced workers. In a model of directed technological change along the
lines of Acemoglu (2002b), the incentive to develop technologies that work well with
experienced workers would be higher if (because of labor regulation) a firm is more likely
to have many such workers in the future. The direction of technical change in the context
of a search model has previously been considered by Michelacci and Lopez-Salido (2007),
but not from the perspective of the skill premium in the labor market.

In terms of modeling workers' careers, a natural next step would be to consider a
framework that allows for job-to-job transitions and job ladders (as in Moscarini and

                                           41
Postel-Vinay 2019). Job-to-job transitions do occur in our framework, because workers can
quickly find a job after a separation. However, we do not focus on job-to-job transitions
as a source of wage growth. Voluntary job-to-job transitions would naturally interact
with firms' incentives to invest in the relationship.18

Our employment protection model focuses on blanket protections that apply to all work-
ers and can be interpreted as government regulations. Another potential source of firing
restrictions are unions. It would be interesting to relate the employment-protection mech-
anism to changes in the reach of unions over time and across countries (see, for example,
Acemoglu, Aghion, and Violante 2001 for an analysis of the role of deunionzation for
inequality). However, deunionization does not offer an immediate explanation for the
object of study here, namely the different trends between the United States and Ger-
many, since union coverage has fallen drastically since the 1980s in Germany (Dustmann,
Ludsteck, and Schönberg 2009).

When comparing the skill transferability of more- and less-educated workers, the question
of why college-educated workers have more portable skills is relevant. One possibility is
that portable skills are ultimately linked to a worker's occupation, and college-educated
workers have a higher likelihood of being able to continue in the same occupation after a
layoff (Kambourov and Manovskii 2009b; Kambourov and Manovskii 2009a; Böhm, von
Gaudecker, and Schran 2019).

Lastly, the creation of different types of jobs plays a central role in our theory, and it
would be useful to provide more direct empirical evidence on what characterizes these
job types. Along these lines, Gregory (2020) uses German data to document heterogeneity
in the steepness of workers' earnings profiles across firms, which corresponds well with
the two job types in our theory. Bayer and Kuhn (2019) consider the ability to transition
into jobs that involve more responsibility to be an important source of wage growth.
Type-A jobs in our environment could be interpreted as settings were firms make such
transitions possible. There can also be heterogeneity across jobs in terms of job security
(Jarosch 2015, Jung and Kuhn 2018), which would naturally interact with the incentive to
invest in the relationship-specific skills emphasized in our theory. In short, there are many
opportunities for future research on the relationship between employment protection,
investment in relationship-specific skills, and wage inequality in modern economies.
  18
    See Lentz and Roys (2015) for an analysis that integrates job-to-job transitions with the issue of general
job-specific training.




                                                     42
References
Acemoglu, Daron. 1999. "Changes in Unemployment and Wage Inequality: an Alterna-
   tive Theory and Some Evidence." American Economic Review 89 (5): 1259­1278.
      . 2002a. "Directed Technical Change." Review of Economic Studies 69 (4): 781­809.
       . 2002b. "Technical Change, Inequality, and the Labor Market." Journal of Economic
   Literature 40 (1): 7­72.
      . 2003. "Cross-Country Inequality Trends." Economic Journal 113:F121­F149.
Acemoglu, Daron, Philippe Aghion, and Giovanni L. Violante. 2001. "Deunionization,
  Technical Change and Inequality." Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy
   55 (1): 229­264.
Acemoglu, Daron, and Jorn-Steffen Pischke. 1999a. "Beyond Becker: Training in
  Imperfect Labour Markets." The Economic Journal 109 (453): 112­142.
Acemoglu, Daron, and Jörn-Steffen Pischke. 1999b. "The Structure of Wages and
  Investment in General Training." Journal of Political Economy 107 (3): 539­572.
Acemoglu, Daron, and Pascual Restrepo. 2020. "Robots and Jobs: Evidence from US
  Labor Markets." Forthcoming, Journal of Political Economy.
Alon, Titan. 2017. "Earning More by Doing Less: Human Capital Specialization and the
   College Wage Premium." Unpublished Manuscript, Northwestern University.
Altonji, Joseph G., and Robert A. Shakotko. 1987. "Do Wages Rise with Job Seniority?"
   Review of Economic Studies 54 (3): 437­459.
Altonji, Joseph G., and Nicolas Williams. 2005. "Do Wages Rise with Job Seniority? A
   Reassessment." Industrial and Labor Relations Review 58 (3): 370­397.
Autor, David, and David Dorn. 2013. "The Growth of Low-Skill Service Jobs and the
  Polarization of the US Labor Market." American Economic Review 103 (5): 1553­97.
Autor, David, David Dorn, and Gordon H Hanson. 2013. "The China Syndrome: Local
  Labor Market Effects of Import Competition in the United States." American Economic
  Review 103 (6): 2121­68.
Autor, David H. 2019. "Work of the Past, Work of the Future." AEA Papers and
  Proceedings 109:1­32.
Autor, David H., Frank Levy, and Richard J. Murnane. 2003. "The Skill Content of
  Recent Technological Change: An Empirical Exploration." The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 118 (4): 1279­1333.

                                          43
Bayer, Christian, and Moritz Kuhn. 2019. "Which Ladder to Climb? Decomposing Life
   Cycle Wage Dynamics." Unpublished Manuscript, University of Bonn.
Bentolila, Samuel, and Giuseppe Bertola. 1990. "Firing Costs and Labour Demand: How
   Bad is Eurosclerosis?" Review of Economic Studies 57 (3): 381­402.
Bertola, Giuseppe, and Andrea Ichino. 1995. "Wage Inequality and Unemployment:
   United States versus Europe." In NBER Macroeconomics Annual, edited by Ben S.
   Bernanke and Julio J. Rotemberg, 13­66. MIT Press.
Blanchard, Olivier J., and Lawrence H. Summers. 1986. "Hysteresis and the European
   Unemployment Problem." In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1986, edited by Stanley
   Fischer, 15­90. MIT Press.
Böhm, Michael J., Hans-Martin von Gaudecker, and Felix Schran. 2019. "Occupation
  Growth, Skill Prices, and Wage Inequality." Unpublished Manuscript, University of
  Bonn.
Bratti, Massimiliano, Maurizio Conti, and Giovanni Sulis. 2018. "Employment Protec-
   tion, Temporary Contracts and Firm-Provided Training: Evidence from Italy." IZA
   Discussion Paper 11339.
Buchinsky, Moshe, Denis Fougère, Francis Kramarz, and Rusty Tchernis. 2010. "Interfirm
   Mobility, Wages and the Returns to Seniority and Experience in the United States."
   Review of Economic Studies 77 (3): 972­1001.
Card, David, and Thomas Lemieux. 2001. "Can Falling Supply Explain the Rising
   Return to College for Younger Men? A Cohort-Based Analysis." Quarterly Journal of
   Economics 116 (2): 705­746.
Coile, Courtney, and Mark Duggan. 2019. "When Labor's Lost: Health, Family Life,
   Incarceration, and Education in a Time of Declining Economic Opportunity for
   Low-Skilled Men." Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Dustmann, Christian, Johannes Ludsteck, and Uta Schönberg. 2009. "Revisiting the
  German Wage Structure." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 124 (2): 843­881.
Dustmann, Christian, and Costas Meghir. 2005. "Wages, Experience and Seniority."
  Review of Economic Studies 72 (1): 77­108.
Fuchs-Schündeln, Nicola, Dirk Krueger, and Mathias Sommer. 2010. "Inequality Trends
   for Germany in the Last Two Decades: A Tale of Two Countries." Review of Economic
   Dynamics 13 (1): 103­132.


                                         44
Gertler, Mark, and Antonella Trigari. 2009. "Unemployment Fluctuations with Staggered
   Nash Wage Bargaining." Journal of Political Economy 117 (1): 38­86.
Goldin, Claudia, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2008. The Race between Education and Technology.
   Cambridge, Massachusetts: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.
Gregory, Victoria. 2020. "Firms as Learning Environments: Implications for Earnings
   Dynamics and Job Search." Unpublished Manuscript, NYU.
Guvenen, Fatih, Greg Kaplan, Jae Song, and Justin Weidner. 2017. "Lifetime Incomes in
  the United States Over Six Decades." NBER Working Paper 23371.
Guvenen, Fatih, and Burhanettin Kuruscu. 2009. "A Quantitative Analysis of the
  Evolution of the U.S. Wage Distribution, 1970­2000." NBER Macroeconomics Annual
  10 (3): 482­517.
Guvenen, Fatih, Burhanettin Kuruscu, and Serdar Ozkan. 2013. "Taxation of Human
  Capital and Wage Inequality: A Cross-Country Analysis." Review of Economic Studies
  81 (2): 818­850.
Hall, Robert E. 1982. "The Importance of Lifetime Jobs in the U.S. Economy." American
  Economic Review 72 (4): 716­724.
Heathcote, Jonathan, Fabrizio Perri, and Giovanni L Violante. 2010. "Unequal We Stand:
  An Empirical Analysis of Economic Inequality in the United States, 1967­2006."
  Review of Economic Dynamics 13 (1): 15­51.
Heathcote, Jonathan, Kjetil Storesletten, and Giovannni L. Violante. 2010. "The Macroe-
  conomic Implications of Rising Wage Inequality in the United States." Journal of
  Political Economy 118 (4): 681­722.
Hémous, David, and Morten Olsen. 2018. "The rise of the Machines: Automation,
  Horizontal Innovation and Income Inequality." Unpublished Manuscript, University
  of Zurich.
Hollister, Matissa. 2011. "Employment Stability in the US Labor Market: Rhetoric versus
  Reality." Annual Review of Sociology 37:305­324.
Hornstein, Andreas, Per Krusell, and Giovanni L. Violante. 2007. "Technology-Policy
  Interaction in Frictional Labour-Markets." Review of Economic Studies 74 (4): 1089­
  1124.
Hyatt, Henry R, and James R Spletzer. 2016. "The Shifting Job Tenure Distribution."
  Labour Economics 41:363­377.

                                         45
Jaimovich, Nir, Sergio Rebelo, Arlene Wong, and Miao Ben Zhang. 2019. "Trading Up
   and the Skill Premium." NBER Macro Annual.
Jappelli, Tullio, and Luigi Pistaferri. 2010. "Does Consumption Inequality Track Income
   Inequality in Italy?" Review of Economic Dynamics 13 (1): 133­153.
Jarosch, Gregor. 2015. "Searching for Job Security and the Consequences of Job Loss."
   Unpublished Manuscript, Princeton University.
Jung, Philip, and Moritz Kuhn. 2018. "Earnings Losses and Labor Mobility Over the
   Life Cycle." Journal of the European Economic Association 17 (3): 678­724.
Kambourov, Gueorgui, and Iourii Manovskii. 2009a. "Occupational Mobility and Wage
  Inequality." Review of Economic Studies 76 (2): 731­759 (04).
      . 2009b. "Occupational Specificity of Human Capital." International Economic
   Review 50 (1): 63­115.
Katz, Lawrence F., and David H. Autor. 1999. "Changes in the Wage Structure and
   Earnings Inequality." Chapter Chapter 26 of Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 3,
   edited by Orley Ashenfelter, , and David Card. North Holland.
Katz, Lawrence F., and Kevin M. Murphy. 1992. "Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987:
   Supply and Demand Factors." Quarterly Journal of Economics 107 (1): 35­78.
Kitao, Sagiri, Lars Ljungqvist, and Thomas J. Sargent. 2017. "A Life-cycle Model of
   Trans-Atlantic Employment Experiences." Review of Economic Dynamics 25:320­49.
Kletzer, Lori G. 1989. "Returns to Seniority After Permanent Job Loss." American
   Economic Review 79 (3): 536­543.
Kletzer, Lori G. 1998. "Job Displacement." Journal of Economic Perspectives 12 (1): 115­136.
Krueger, Dirk, Fabrizio Perri, Luigi Pistaferri, and Giovanni L. Violante. 2010. "Cross-
   sectional Facts for Macroeconomists." Review of Economic Dynamics 13 (1): 1­14.
   Special issue: Cross-Sectional Facts for Macroeconomists.
Krusell, Per, Lee E Ohanian, José-Víctor Ríos-Rull, and Giovanni L Violante. 2000.
  "Capital-Skill Complementarity and Inequality: A Macroeconomic Analysis." Econo-
   metrica 68 (5): 1029­1053.
Lentz, Rasmus, and Nicolas Roys. 2015, November. "Training and Search On the Job."
   NBER Working Paper 21702.
Ljungqvist, Lars, and Thomas J. Sargent. 1998. "The European Unemployment
   Dilemma." Journal of Political Economy 106 (3): 514­550.

                                           46
 Michelacci, Claudio, and David Lopez-Salido. 2007. "Technology Shocks and Job Flows."
    Review of Economic Studies 74 (4): 1195­1227.
 Molloy, Raven, Christopher L. Smith, and Abigail Wozniak. 2019. "Changing Stability
   in U.S. Employment Relationships: A Tale of Two Tails." Unpublished Manuscript,
   Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.
 Moscarini, Giuseppe, and Fabien Postel-Vinay. 2019. "The Job Ladder: Inflation vs.
   Reallocation." Unpublished Manuscript, Yale University.
 Nickell, Stephen. 1997. "Unemployment and Labor Market Rigidities: Europe versus
    North America." Journal of Economic Perspectives 11 (3): 55­74.
 Pries, Michael J, and Richard Rogerson. 2019. "Declining Worker Turnover: the Role of
    Short Duration Employment Spells." NBER Working Paper 26019.
 Segal, Lewis M, and Daniel G Sullivan. 1997. "The Growth of Temporary Services
    Work." Journal of Economic Perspectives 11 (2): 117­136.
 Valletta, Robert G. 2016. "Recent Flattening in the Higher Education Wage Premium:
    Polarization, Skill Downgrading, or Both?" NBER Working Paper 22935.
 Wasmer, Etienne. 2006. "General versus Specific Skills in Labor Markets with Search
   Frictions and Firing Costs." American Economic Review 96 (3): 811­831.


A       Data Appendix
The main data sources for the empirical analysis and the model calibration are the
Panel Study of Income Dynamics for the United States, and the Socio-Economic Panel
(GSOEP) for Germany. The PSID is conducted by the Survey Research Center (SRC) at
the University of Michigan and can be accessed freely via their website.19 The GSOEP
is administered by the German Institute for Economic Research, DIW Berlin. More
information on the GSOEP and how researchers can gain access to it is available on the
Institute's website.20


Panel Study of Income Dynamics The PSID was conducted on a yearly basis between
1968 and 1996, and every two years from 1997 onwards. The structure of the PSID is a
panel in which individuals belonging to a PSID family in 1968 are followed over time
  19
       https://psidonline.isr.umich.edu/default.aspx
  20
       https://www.diw.de/en/soep


                                                   47
as they form a new household or re-join their previous one. We focus on individuals in
families belonging to the original SRC sample, which is designed to be representative of
the US population.

We focus on male respondents who, at the time of the interview, are identified as their
family's head.21 For consistency with the assumptions on demographics in the model, we
restrict attention to individuals aged 25­64 who declare that they only work for someone
else. Hence, we exclude self-employed individuals and those who answer that they work
for "Both someone else and self."

We define a single education variable for each individual that corresponds to the maxi-
mum reported educational attainment, or the maximum number of years of education.
Workers are classified as having a high-school degree if they report at least 12 but less
than 16 years of education, and as having a college degree if they report at least 16 years
of education. We discard individuals with less than 12 years of education. We define real
earnings per hour as earnings per hour deflated via the CPI, using 2010 as base year. We
discard observations where the resulting real hourly earnings are below 7.50 2010 dollars,
or the total number of hours worked is below 500 or above 5,000 in the last year.

Potential experience is defined as current age minus (years of education + 6). The
employment tenure variable is continuously available starting from 1981. Until 1993,
the information is reported as the number of months with the current employer. From
1994 onwards, the information is reported in three separate questions for years, months,
and weeks with the current employer, which must be added to obtain a single tenure
figure. To maintain consistency with the quantitative model, we then adjust the tenure
figure by taking the minimum between the tenure information and age - 25. We discard
observations for which the resulting months of tenure are more than 12 × (age - 16).

All the statistics in the paper are computed using a system of weights that keeps the age
distribution constant in every year to the 1981 distribution.


Socio-Economic Panel The German GSOEP has been conducted on a yearly basis since
1984. Similarly to the PSID, the GSOEP is a longitudinal study that periodically surveys
the same set of families that were interviewed in the original sample. Although there have
been expansions in the samples in 1990 (East German sample) and in 1994 (immigrant
  21
    The PSID reports that: "Historically, PSID has used the term Head to refer to the husband in a
heterosexual married couple and to a single adult of either sex. Starting in 2017, the term "Reference
Person" replaced "Head." For more information visit: https://psidonline.isr.umich.edu/Guide/FAQ.aspx.


                                                 48
sample), we focus on the original sample, which only includes families originally from
West Germany.

We focus on male respondents aged 25­64 who do not declare themselves to be self-
employed. We infer self-employment from the "generated" variable labeled "STIB -
Occupational Position."

The GSOEP provides separate variables for college attainment and total years of education
and training. We define a college degree variable for each individual if college completion
is reported at some point in the panel. For those who do not report college completion, we
define a unique educational attainment variable for each individual, based on the highest
number of years of education recorded in the panel for that individual. We then generate
a high-school degree variable if the individual reports at least 10.5 years of education or
training. We discard observations that report less than 10.5 years of education or training.

We discard workers who declare less than 20 hours of work per week. We postulate a
minimum hourly wage that is equal, in every year, to the 2015 statutory minimum wage
(8.50 euros per hour), discounted by the relative price index.

Starting with the system of individual weights provided by the GSOEP for the original
sample, we construct a system of weights that keeps the age distribution constant over
the years to the 1984 distribution, in an analogous manner to the US sample.


B   Model Computation
In computing the model, we impose a vector of 20 possible values for individual human
capital, h, log-spaced between h1 = 1 and h20 = 20. We discretize the vector of turbulence
shocks, , as 10 equally spaced values between 0.01 and ¯ = 0.6.

The calibration routine minimizes a loss function defined, for each vector of parameters
p, as the sum of the squared differences between the data-generated and the model-
generated moment:


                        min L(p) =       am [Datam - M odelm (p)]2 .
                                     m


where the weight am is set equal to 10 for the moments that concern the fraction of
workers with short- and long-term tenure (which is particularly important to match
given our mechanism), and equal to one for the other moments.

                                             49
C   Additional Figures and Tables

                                              Log of hourly wage (ages 45­54)
                                        US (1981-2013)              DE (1984-2013)
           Tenure >= 20                      0.281***                   0.122***
                                              (.030)                      (.021)
           College graduate                  0.488***                   0.475***
                                              (.035)                      (.053)
           Interaction                        -.107**                   -.166***
                                              (.048)                      (.050)
           Exper. 3rd degree pol.               yes                        yes
           Year FE                              yes                        yes
           # Obs.                              7,578                     10,137
           R2                                  0.241                      0.268
          Notes: Standard errors clustered at individual level in parentheses. For the
          PSID, the sample consists of male workers aged 45 to 54 who report between
          500 and 5,000 hours worked in a year. For the GSOEP, the sample consists of
          male workers aged 45 to 54 who report a minimum of 20 hours worked per
          week in the last year. Each column consists of a separate regression of log wages
          on a year fixed effect, a third-degree polynomial of potential experience, and an
          indicator variable for 20 years of tenure or more on the current job. *** p < 0.01,
          ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.

Table 12: Returns to high tenure for college- and less-educated workers in the US (PSID)
and Germany (GSOEP).




                                                  50
                                         1

                                        0.9

                                        0.8
               Cumulative Probability
                                        0.7

                                        0.6

                                        0.5

                                        0.4

                                        0.3

                                        0.2

                                        0.1

                                         0
                                              1                                            1.5           2                2.5               3             3.5             4
                                                                                                             Human capital after separation

                                                                                                                    Non-College         College




Figure 10: Cumulative probability of falling to any skill level h after a separation with
skill level h = h10 for L (dotted line) and H (solid line) workers.




                                                                                0.25
                                              Probability of exog. separation




                                                                                 0.2




                                                                                0.15




                                                                                 0.1




                                                                                0.05




                                                                                  0
                                                                                       2         4   6          8         10       12           14   16         18   20
                                                                                                                      Years of tenure

                                                                                                                        1980      2010




Figure 11: Probability of exogenous separation as a function of tenure for L and H
workers in the 1980 (solid line) and 2010 (dotted line) calibrations.




                                                                                                                         51
                                                                   Identification of firing cost                                             Firing cost and tenure
                                                     -0.012                                                                        2.5



                                                     -0.014
         Difference in long-term tenure, 1980-2010




                                                                                                                                    2

                                                     -0.016


                                                                                                                                   1.5
                                                     -0.018
                                                                                                                     Firing cost




                                                      -0.02
                                                                                                                                    1


                                                     -0.022

                                                                                                                                   0.5
                                                     -0.024



                                                     -0.026                                                                         0
                                                          0.2   0.22       0.24        0.26        0.28   0.3                            0     5                     10   15
                                                                       Firing cost at tenure = 1                                                   Years of Tenure




Figure 12: Left panel: Difference in the share of long-term tenure workers in Germany
and the US as a function of the firing cost, and difference in the data (dotted black line).
Right panel: Calibrated firing cost as a function of years of tenure with current employer.




                                                                                                                52
