                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      PARTY ON: THE LABOR MARKET RETURNS TO SOCIAL NETWORKS AND
                             SOCIALIZING

                                    Adriana Lleras-Muney
                                       Matthew Miller
                                       Shuyang Sheng
                                     Veronica T. Sovero

                                      Working Paper 27337
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27337


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2020




We are grateful to seminar participants at Northwestern University, SOCCAM, the all-California
Labor Economics conference and Santa Barbara University. This project was supported by the
California Center for Population Research at UCLA (CCPR), which receives core support (P2C-
HD041022) from the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development (NICHD). Research done prior to joining Audible. Audible is a subsidiary of
Amazon. All views contained in this research are the author's own and do not represent the views
of Amazon or its affiliates. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Adriana Lleras-Muney, Matthew Miller, Shuyang Sheng, and Veronica T. Sovero. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Party On: The Labor Market Returns to Social Networks and Socializing
Adriana Lleras-Muney, Matthew Miller, Shuyang Sheng, and Veronica T. Sovero
NBER Working Paper No. 27337
June 2020
JEL No. I20,J31

                                          ABSTRACT

A person's schooling years are a formative time for cognitive development, and also a period of
intense social interaction and friendship formation. In this paper, we estimate the production of
social capital during adolescence and its effect on wages. We develop a model where homophily
and coordination play crucial roles in the decision to socialize and study, which in turn determine
educational attainment, network formation, and labor market outcomes. We document that
individuals make investments to accumulate friends and other forms of social capital. Sometimes
these investments compete with schooling investments (particularly when they involve alcohol
consumption), but not always. These social investments have payoffs in the labor market and
cannot be thought of as pure leisure. We estimate that receiving five to six friend nominations in
adolescence has an impact on wage earnings of approximately 10%, comparable to a broad set of
estimates of the return to an additional year of schooling. Therefore, policies that alter the
schooling environment should be evaluated by their impacts on social capital as well as their
impact on education.

Adriana Lleras-Muney                             Shuyang Sheng
Department of Economics                          Department of Economics
9373 Bunche Hall                                 UCLA
UCLA                                             8283 Bunche Hall
Los Angeles, CA 90095                            Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER                                         ssheng@ucla.edu
allerasmuney@gmail.com
                                                 Veronica T. Sovero
Matthew Miller                                   Lam Family College of Business
Audible                                          San Francisco State University
1 Washington St.                                 San Francisco, CA 94116
Newark, NJ 07102                                 vsovero@sfsu.edu
mattmmiller@g.ucla.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w27337
1       Introduction
    The determinants of individuals' labor market success are of great interest to economists.
Substantial progress has been made in the last 50 years in the study of the e ects of education
and ability on earnings. Consensus has emerged that today the returns to schooling are
large, with estimates ranging from 2 to 15% (Card, 2001). Yet there remains substantial
unexplained variation in wages.1 Existing work strongly suggests that non-cognitive "soft"
traits (that are not typically measured by test scores or intelligence) play a crucial role in
the labor market, despite the fact they may not a ect education outcomes (Heckman, 2006;
Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzua, 2006; Heckman, Pinto, and Savelyev, 2013). But what these
skills are, how they are formed and why they matter is poorly understood.
    This paper focuses on estimating the production of social capital during adolescence and
its e ect on education and wages. Adolescence is an intense period of socialization when
individuals start to become independent and develop both social skills and many lifetime
friendships (Heckman and Mosso, 2014a). Individual social capital can be thought of as
having two key components: an individual's "sociability" or social skills, and an individual's
connections. Glaeser, Laibson, and Sacerdote (2002) phrase it as a "person's social charac-
teristics ­ including social skills, charisma, and the size of his Rolodex" (size of the network).
Recent evidence suggests that social skills are important. They are associated with large and
growing returns in the labor market (Deming, 2015; Weinberger, 2014). A person's network
is presumably related but distinct from their social skills. The size and connectedness of
an individual's social network can help immensely in finding a job, receiving promotions,
bonuses, and preventing job loss (Calvo-Armengol and Jackson, 2004; Montgomery, 1991;
Elliott, 2001; Granovetter, 1973; Granovetter, 1985; Corcoran, Datcher, and Duncan, 1980).
    We estimate the formation of friendships (networks) during adolescence and the causal
returns to having more friends on wages, holding initial sociability constant. Figure 1 pro-
vides preliminary evidence that the adolescent network size (the number of friends one has)
is associated with large increases in wage earnings among adult men and women (Panel A).
Wage earnings increase monotonically with the size of the network: moving from having
no friends to having 20 friends increases log wages by 0.5 log points. The increase in wage
earnings associated with one more friend is about 2.5 percent. By comparison, one more
year of education leads to about 10 percent higher earnings (Panel B). This does not imply
necessarily that these estimates are causal. But we posit that individuals perceive these
    1
    This puzzle in the literature summarized by Weiss (1995) who explains that years of schooling and work
experience are highly correlated with labor market outcomes, but "estimates suggest that courses, test scores,
and measurable learning in secondary school can explain ... less than one-quarter of the higher earnings of
high school graduates ... what accounts for the other three quarters of earnings?"



                                                      2
returns to socializing as causal and, thus, spend time and e ort on social activities.
    We develop a model of social investments and how they determine network size and where
coordination and homophily play crucial roles.2 Students make studying and socializing de-
cisions while facing a constraint on their time in a non-cooperative game. Both studying and
socializing investment decisions, along with cognitive and social endowments, determine the
level of education and the number of friends, both of which serve as forms of human capital
that earn returns in the labor market. In making these decisions, individuals must take other
individuals' actions into account because, by its very nature, it is not possible for individuals
to socialize and form friendships without coordinating with others. Making friends requires
interacting and spending time with other individuals, whereas studying does not. But inter-
acting with others is not enough to make friends- links in the network (friendships) are only
formed if a pair of individuals share (or not) certain characteristics with potential friends
(homophily) (Jackson, 2005; Graham, 2015).
    We exploit this model to estimate wage returns using Add Health data, a longitudinal
study that tracks individuals from middle school into young adulthood. We use the de-
terminants of friendships (homophily and cohort size) and other determinants of schooling
as intruments for education and friendships to obtain unbiased estimates of their wage re-
turns. Because the data contain information about individual-level relationships, as well as
cohort and school-level information, we can estimate the formation of links as a function of
homophily within a school cohort. Thus we identify the e ects of friendships on wages by
exploiting the di erence (or distance) between an individual's characteristics and their peers
within a school while holding the mean characteristics of their cohort constant. We assume
that these distances a ect wages through education and networks only, conditional on the
school fixed e ect and cohort mean characteristics.
    We estimate that making five to six friends has an impact on wage earnings of approx-
imately 10% compared with a broad set of estimates of the return to an additional year of
schooling and not statistically significantly di erent from OLS estimates. Our findings are
consistent other recent papers pointing out that excessive attention to traditional education
measures like test scores might lower the long term outcomes of individuals and, thus, their
well-being because they reduce investments in other important forms of human capital.3 They
also suggest that education interventions that are becoming very common, such as remote
learning, might deter from social capital formation and result in lost lifetime wages.
    This paper makes several contributions. There is large literature on peer e ects in edu-
  2
     Our model is in the spirit of the econometric models on social interactions in endogenously formed
networks (Goldsmith-Pinkham and Imbens, 2013; Johnsson and Moon, 2017; Hsieh and Lee, 2016; Auerbach,
2016;Qu and Lee, 2015a;Ridder and Sheng, 2018).
   3
     In addition to the papers cited above, also see Xiang and Yeaple (2018).


                                                  3
cation (e.g. Epple and Romano, 2011;Calvó-Armengol, Patacchini, and Zenou, 2009). There
is also a smaller set of papers on skill formation has focused on the role of either time alloca-
tion (Caetano, Kinsler, and Teng, 2019) or peers (Agostinelli, 2018). Our setting considers
the joint formation of both education and social skills that requires both peers and time.
We highlight that investments in social skills and on networks di er from investments in
other skills because they require coordination: one cannot party alone, but one can study
alone. This also di ers from other peer e ects in the education literature, which typically
posits that peers' characteristics matter for education only because they a ect a student's
outcomes directly (exogenous peer e ects). We go further by suggesting that decisions to
study (or to socialize) are jointly determined. Therefore, our model is one with endogenous
social e ects.4 We have some empirical evidence that supports the notion that coordination
is important in this setting. Technically, our model provides a micro-foundation for strategic
network formation models with individual fixed e ects, as in Graham (2017), where the fixed
e ect corresponds to the individual's decision to socialize.
    We provide the first estimates of the causal labor market returns to social capital that
account for endogeneity in both education and friendships. The closest paper to ours is by
Conti et al. (2013), who also attempt to estimate causal returns to friendships. Our paper
di ers in a few key ways. First, we take a model-based approach to derive instruments
for estimating individual friendship links and predict network size, whereas they directly
estimate the e ects of network size. Second, our model implies that because both outcomes
are endogenous and use some of the same inputs (time and peers), it will not be possible
to obtain unbiased estimates of their returns without instrumenting for both, as we do.
Nevertheless our estimates are, in fact, not too di erent from theirs although our point
estimates are somewhat larger.
    Last, we document that individuals make investments to accumulate friends and other
forms of social capital, consistent with the large returns to individual social capital reported
in the literature and with the predictions of the model. Because social investments have
valuable returns in the labor market (and elsewhere), they compete with other human cap-
ital investments such as studying. Interestingly, we find that education and networks are
positively correlated, suggesting that it is possible for individuals to increase both, though
this depends on how one socializes. We also observe that high IQ individuals invest in their
networks, not just their education, and that social individuals also study. Thus, we find
there is never complete specialization based on initial endowments.
    This paper is organized as follows. We first present our model (Section 2). Next, we
  4
    This is consistent with evidence from Mehta, Stinebrickner, and Stinebrickner (2019) who document
that study time by peers predicts individuals' education outcomes such as GPA.



                                                 4
describe the data and document the basic patterns in the data (Section 3). In Section
4, we document investments in cognitive and social capital. In Section 5, we describe our
empirical strategy for estimating the returns to education and network size on wages. Section
6 presents the results of the network formation and education formation model. The wage
results are in Section 7. Section 8 discusses the results and investigates mechanisms. Section
9 concludes with a discussion of the policy implications of our results, a review of limitations
of this study and directions for future research.

2       Model
In our model, each individual i has to decide how to allocate their time (which we normalize
to 1) between hours of studying (Hi ), socializing (Si ), and leisure (Li = 1  Hi  Si ). Studying
increases cognitive capital or education (denoted by Ei ), whereas socializing improves social
capital (number of friends, denoted by Di ). Both Ei and Di raise wages. Any remaining
time net of studying and socializing is devoted to pure leisure, which has no labor market
returns. This represents time spent on solo activities such as watching television or sleeping.
    Following Card (1999), we assume the individual's utility is determined by consumption
and leisure (which is split into social and non-social leisure time),5 and can be written as

                       U (Ei , Di , Hi , Si , Xi , Ái , ,i , ÷i )
                   = ln Y (Ei , Di , Xi , Ái ) + Vs (Si , Xi , ,i ) + Vl (1  Hi  Si , Xi , ÷i )               (1)

Labor market earnings Y (Ei , Di , Xi , Ái ) depend on cognitive capital ( Ei ), social capital
(Di ), observed characteristics (Xi ), and unobserved characteristics of the individual that
a ect earnings (Ái ). Xi is a vector of observed characteristics of individual i, which includes
individual-specific characteristics such as cognitive (IQ) and social endowments (sociability),
as well as school-specific characteristics. The unobserved characteristics Ái can be any traits
that are specific to the labor market, e.g., competence, motivation, etc.6
     Vs (Si , Xi , ,i ), the utility from socializing, depends on the time one spends socializing
(Si ), one's type of endowment (Xi ) and one's unobserved preference for socializing, denoted
by ,i .7 Vl (1  Hi  S i , Xi , ÷i ) is the utility from other forms of leisure and depends on the
    5
     We assume that all earnings are consumed. We abstract from saving and borrowing considerations in
this paper because we only observe earnings in the data once.
   6
     We exclude Si from ln Yi , which is a crucial exclusion restriction for our IVs to be valid. More explicitly,
we are assuming that socializing increases one's utility (it is leisure) but it does not directly a ect earnings,
except through its e ect on one's network and education. This will turn out to be a crucial assumption later
on for our IVs to be valid.
   7
     We do not explicitly include Ei and Di in the utility from socializing, but this is equivalent to defining
Vs as Vs (Si , Ei , Di , Xi , ,i ) and replacing Ei and Di with their reduced forms.



                                                             5
amount of leisure (1  Hi  Si ), one's type or endowment (Xi ) and the unobserved preference
for leisure (÷i ).8 Both ,i and ÷i are assumed to be privately observed by i.
    We consider a static model, but the primitive variables in our model are realized with
a certain timing. At the beginning of the schooling period, each student i observes the
public characteristic profile X = (X1 , . . . , Xn ) and her private preferences ,i and ÷i , and
then decides how much time to spend on studying Hi and socializing Si . Her Ei and Di are
realized at the end of the schooling period. After the schooling period, student i enters the
labor market, Ái is realized, and she receives earnings Y (Ei , Di , Xi , Ái ).
    Following standard practice in the literature, we assume the log of earnings depends on
education, networks and other traits and takes the form

                                 ln Y (Ei , Di , Xi , Ái ) = re Ei + rs Di + -- Õ Xi + Ái                                  (2)

where re represents the returns to cognitive capital and rs represents the returns to social
capital. -- Õ Xi captures the e ect of the observed characteristics of i. We assume that Xi is
independent of Ái , ,i , and ÷i for all i. However, Ái can be correlated with ,i and ÷i . Given
X , ,i , ÷i , and the choices for Hi and Si , an individual's expected utility is given by

             E [ U (Ei , Di , Hi , Si , Xi , Ái , ,i , ÷i )| Hi , Si , X, ,i , ÷i ]
        = E [ ln Y (Ei , Di , Xi , Ái )| Hi , Si , X, ,i , ÷i ] + Vs (Si , Xi , ,i ) + Vl (1  Hi  S i , Xi , ÷i )

where

            E [ ln Y (Ei , Di , Xi , Ái )| Hi , Si , X, ,i , ÷i ]
       = re E [ Ei | Hi , Si , X, ,i , ÷i ] + rs E [ Di | Hi , Si , X, ,i , ÷i ] + -- Õ Xi + E [ Ái | Hi , Si , X, ,i , ÷i ]


Production of education and social capital.
Ei and Di depend on initial endowments and on the time individuals allocate to each activity.
If individual i spends Hi studying, then the expected education given Hi , Si , X , ,i and ÷i is

                                     E [ Ei | Hi , Si , X, ,i , ÷i ] = a (Xi , Xi ) Hi ,                                   (3)

where a (Xi , Xi ) (henceforth, ai (X )) is productivity per unit time with respect to educa-
tional output. Productivity depends on Xi , the observed characteristics of i, which include
   8
    The cost of studying is netted from Vs (Si , Xi , ,i ) + Vl (1  Hi  S i , Xi , ÷i ), so this summed utility can
be positive or negative.



                                                                 6
their IQ (cognitive skills) and extroversion (sociability skills)9 and other characteristics, such
as the school they attend. For instance, individuals with higher IQ may be more productive
at studying and learn the same material faster than those with lower IQ. It also depends on
Xi = (Xj , j "= i), the observed characteristics of others i, and it can be cohort-specific.
This allows for (exogenous) peer e ects in education, namely, the possibility that individuals
learn faster (or slower) depending on the characteristics of their classroom peers.10
    The production of social capital is di erent from a standard production function because
it requires coordination­you cannot "party alone." We assume i becomes a friend of j
under two conditions: they spend time together (they socialize), and they decide to be
friends because they like each other (they derive nonnegative utility from the friendship). If
individuals i and j spend Si and Sj amounts of time socializing, then the probability that j
nominates i as a friend is given by

                        Pr ( Dji = 1| Hj , Hi , Sj , Si , X, ,i , ÷i ) = p (Xj , Xi ) Sj Si                   (4)

where the likelihood that i and j meet depends on how much time they spend socializing
Sj Si .11 Importantly, both i and j have to spend time socializing together (Si > 0 and
Sj > 0) for them to have a non-zero probability of becoming friends.12 p (Xj , Xi ) (hereafter,
pji (X )) represents the likelihood that i becomes a friend of j , conditional on their meeting.
The likelihood of becoming friends depends on the individual and shared characteristics of i
and j. This feature captures the empirical finding that individuals tend to form friendships
with other individuals with whom they share similar characteristics, often referred to as
homophily (Jackson, 2008). Empirically, we measure homophily as the absolute distance in
traits, which we refer to as "social distance."
     Individual i's social capital is measured by the number of friends or connections she has.
Specifically we will use her in-degree Di , the number of individuals who nominate i as a
friend:
                                                 ÿ
                                           Di =     Dji                                      (5)
                                                         j "=i

    9
      In the model and later in the empirics, we focus attention on extraversion as the main social trait. We
discuss this choice in more detail in the empirical section.
   10
      The model does not assume endogenous peer e ects in education because there is no coordination in
the education production function.
   11
      This model is similar in spirit to dyadic network formation models with fixed e ects (Graham, 2017),
where the time spent socializing Si and Sj act as individual e ects. Unlike Graham who considers additive
individual e ects, we consider interactive individual e ects Si Sj to account for the coordination in socializing.
   12
      While individuals may engage in shared activities (such as studying) with others, we assume that there
is no socializing (friendship formation) occurring. Put di erently, studying with others is an outcome of
prior socialization (friends study together).



                                                        7
where Dji is an indicator for whether j nominates i as a friend.


How do individuals decide how much to study and socialize? Best
response functions and equilibrium.
Given her information X and Ái , individual i chooses Hi and Si in order to maximize her
expected utility. Expected labor market earnings are a function of i's expected education,
expected in-degree, observable characteristics, and expected labor market shocks. For indi-
vidual i, the expected in-degree depends on the time she spends socializing and the expected
amount of time others spend socializing.13 We make the assumption that conditional on X ,
,i and ÷i , Hi and Si are uncorrelated with Ái , i.e., E [ Ái | Hi , Si , X, ,i , ÷i ] = E [ Ái | X, ,i , ÷i ].
In other words, studying and socializing have no direct e ect on earnings: they a ect the
earnings only through their e ects on education and in-degree.14
    Given the beliefs E [ Sj | X ] for j "= i, the optimal amounts of studying Hiú and socializing
Siú satisfy the following first-order conditions

                                                                     ^ Vl
                                                   re ai (X ) =            (1  Hiú  Siú , Xi , ÷i )        (6)
                                                                     ^ Li
             ^ Vs ú                    ÿ                             ^ Vl
                  (Si , Xi , ,i ) + rs       pji (X ) E [ Sj | X ] =       (1  Hiú  Siú , Xi , ÷i )        (7)
             ^ Si                      j "=i                         ^ L i


where ^ ^ Vl
         Li
             (Li , Xi , ÷i ) denotes the derivative of Vl (Li , Xi , ÷i ) with respect to Li = 1  Hi 
Si . The optimal amounts of studying and socializing balance the marginal utility with the
marginal cost of studying and socializing, respectively. The marginal benefit from studying
(the left-hand side of (6)) is the additional earnings from studying one more unit of time.
The marginal benefit of socializing (the left-hand side of (7)) has two terms. The first term
is the direct utility individuals derive from socializing one more unit of time. The second
term comes from the additional earnings individuals get when they socialize and accumulate
additional social capital. The marginal cost of studying and socializing is the utility loss due
to one less unit of leisure, respectively.
  13
     Individual i needs to form an expectation about how much time others will spend socializing because
Sj , j "= i, depends on j 's preference for socializing vj , which is not observed by i.
  14
     This is a crucial exclusion restriction for us to get valid instruments. See Section 5 for more details.




                                                       8
       Then, under standard assumptions,15 we can derive the optimal Hiú , Siú and Lú
                                                                                    i


                         Hiú = 1  Siú  Lú
                                        i                                                                                                              (8)
                                            Q                                                                          R
                                                                           ÿ
                         Siú = gs are ai (X )  rs                                  pji (X ) E [ Sj | X ] , Xi , ,i b                                   (9)
                                                                           j "=i

                          i = gl (re ai (X ) , Xi , ÷i )
                         Lú                                                                                                                          (10)

where gs and gl denote the inverse of the marginal utility functions from socializing and from
leisure respectively.
    The optimal amount of socializing depends on the decisions of others to socialize; thus,
Equation (8) corresponds to the "best response function" of a given individual, who takes
others' actions as given. In a Bayesian Nash equilibrium, Siú satisfies the equilibrium condi-
tion
                          S       Q                                                                         R- T
                                                           ÿ                           Ë      - È            -
                                                                                            ú-
                                                                                                             -
         E [ Siú | X ] = E U gs are ai (X )  rs                        pji (X ) E          Sj - X , Xi , ,i b- V
                                                                                                             -X ,             for all i.             (11)
                                                               j "=i                                         -


Let E [ S ú | X ] = (E [ S1
                          ú
                            | X ] , . . . , E [ Sn
                                                 ú
                                                   | X ])Õ be a belief profile. Because E [ S ú | X ] oe [0, 1]n
and the right-hand side of (11) is a continuous function of the components in E [ S ú | X ], by
Brower's fixed point theorem there exists at least one equilibrium E [ S ú | X ]. Although there
might be multiple equilibria, in Appendix 1 we show that under additional assumptions there
exists a unique equilibrium in which the best response is given by
                                        Q                                                                           R
                                                                       ÿ                      Ë       - È
                                                                                                    ú-
                          Siú = gs are ai (X )  rs                             pji (X ) E          Sj - X , Xi , ,i b .                              (12)
                                                                       j "=i


   This equation states that the optimal level of social investment is a function of the
returns to schooling, the returns to social capital, schooling inputs, homophily and initial
endowments.


2.1       Empirical implications.
We now investigate a few properties of the model that can be examined empirically.

Proposition 1. If there are no labor market returns to social capital (rs = 0), then in an
OLS regression of log earnings on socializing, the coe cient on socializing will be negative
(the coe cient on studying will be positive) when education and in-degree are not controlled
  15                                                  ^ 2 Vs                                                                  ^ 2 Vl
       We assume that   ^ Vs
                        ^ Si   (Si , Xi , ,i ) > 0,   ^ Si 2    (Si , Xi , ,i ) < 0,        ^ Vl
                                                                                            ^ Li   (Li , Xi , ÷i ) > 0, and   ^ L2
                                                                                                                                       (Li , Xi , ÷i ) < 0.
                                                                                                                                   i




                                                                               9
for.

Proof. See Appendix 2. If there are no social returns (rs = 0), then the optimal amount of
socializing becomes
                                 Siú = gs (re ai (X ) , Xi , ,i )                     (13)

In this case, individuals still socialize (Siú > 0), but socializing would have negative returns
in the labor market because it is pure leisure. In Section 7.1, we will show that socializing
is in fact associated with higher wages, contrary to a model where socializing is simply
utility-increasing.

Proposition 2. If coordination matters (friendship formation depends on i's socializing
e ort Si and the socializing e ort of others Si ), then the formation of friendship links will
depend on both the sender's and receiver's homophily measures.

Proof. See Appendix 2. This proposition provides an empirical test for whether coordination
plays a role in social capital formation. The network formation in (4) requires both students
to coordinate on their socializing to form a friendship link. Coordination is not a key
assumption to generate investments in social capital, but is a natural assumption given the
nature of socializing. When coordination matters, the likelihood that j nominates i as a
friend depends on the socializing decisions of both the sender j and the receiver i, which are
a function of their respective homophily measures. If coordination does not matter, then
the likelihood of forming a friendship depends only on the receiver's socializing. Therefore,
the homophily measures of the sender would no longer a ect the formation of the friendship.
We test this prediction when we estimate the formation of friendships. 16

Proposition 3. If we estimate the earnings equation by OLS, then the estimated returns to
education and in-degree will be biased. Without further assumptions, the directions of the
biases in the OLS estimates of returns to education and in-degree are ambiguous.

Proof. See Appendix 2. In the model, both education and in-degree can be correlated with
the error term because tastes for leisure and for socializing are unobserved. If we estimate
the earnings equation by OLS, then the estimated returns to education and in-degree will be
biased; however, this proposition states that ex-ante it is not possible to assign the direction
of the bias. In Section 6, we use an instrumental variables approach to estimate the returns
to in-degree that are based on our model. We also investigate explanations for the direction
of the bias we observe in the results.
  16
    This result relies on the assumption that the sender j 's homophily measures with respect to other
students do not a ect her socializing productivity with i in their friendship (pji (X )).


                                                 10
Proposition 4. Increasing an individual's homophily level has ambiguous predictions on
socializing and on social capital.

Proof. See Appendix 2. While the model suggests that homophily plays a role in social
capital formation, it cannot be used to extrapolate whether a student would accumulate
more social capital in an environment where she is more similar to her peers. For instance,
one might expect that i's socializing is increasing in her homophily or similarity to her
classmates (decreasing in distance). But predictions are in fact ambiguous because of general
equilibrium e ects: when placing i in a new group of students who are socially farther to
her, it is unclear how much the other students will socialize in this new setting. Therefore,
the e ect of homophily on social outcomes is an empirical question.

Proposition 5. Without further assumptions, the e ect of an individual characteristic Xi
on socializing Siú ,and, thus, on social capital is theoretically ambiguous. The same is true
for studying Hiú and education.

Proof. See Appendix 2. One might expect that individuals reinforce their initial endow-
ments, but that is not necessarily the case. If we assume that extroversion does not a ect
studying productivity, then extroverts spend more time socializing and less time studying.
Consequently, they accumulate more social capital and less education. Whether or not
smart students socialize more depends on their socializing and studying productivity. If the
marginal productivity of socializing is increasing in intelligence and large enough to induce
a reduction in studying time, then high-IQ students can accumulate more social capital. We
investigate these questions empirically.


3     Data
3.1    Add Health data
Our main data is the restricted-use National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent to Adult
Health (henceforth, "Add Health"), which contains detailed data on the friendship networks
of individuals in middle school and high school (Harris et al., 2009). There are two main
samples in the Add Health data: the in-school sample and the in-home sample. The in-school
sample is a roster of all students in a given school during the 1994/1995 school year. The
in-school questionnaire includes basic demographic data as well as friendship nominations.
A random sample of the students interviewed in school was selected for in-home interviews
in Wave 1 during the 1994/1995 school year (ages 12-18 years) and tracked over subsequent


                                             11
survey waves. In Wave 4, respondents were ages 24-32 years. For this sample, we observe
measures of endowments, investments, and cognitive and social outcomes we now describe.
     Summary statistics are presented in Table 1. Our estimation sample includes 9,738
individuals with complete data for our key measures.17 Our key outcome of interest is
total earnings from wages or salary in the last year. This variable is asked of everyone.18
Individuals in our sample made roughly $38,000 in the previous year.
     Our primary measure of social capital is a person's in-degree. For a given student i, i's
in-degree is the number of people who nominate i as one of their friends in Wave 1. In-
degree has been widely used in the social network literature as an objective measure of an
individual's social capital because it does not rely on self-reporting (Conti et al. (2013)).
However, because individuals could list up to five nominations of each gender, this measure
might underestimate a student's actual number of friends (some friends were not listed),
or overestimate it (if individuals felt compelled to list five friends but had fewer). Another
measure of social capital is network size, which represents the total number of individuals
who either sent a nomination to student i or received a nomination from student i.19 On
average, in-degree is 4.5, while network size is 7.1. Figure 2 presents histograms of in-degree
and network size. As expected, network size is more comprehensive, with fewer individuals
listing zero friends compared with in-degree. However, network size is likely to be measured
with more error because it relies on self-reported friendships. We return to this issue later
in the paper.20
     We use self-reported extroversion as the main measure for the social tendencies (endow-
ment) of individuals. About 65% of individuals report being extroverted. Extroversion and,
conversely, introversion or shyness, is one of the "Big Five" psychological traits, and there
is evidence this trait is both relatively stable over time (Cobb-Clark and Schurer, 2012) and
associated with higher education and better labor market outcomes (Lenton, 2014;Widiger,
2017;John and Srivasta, 1999), consistent with columns 4 and 5.21
     Education-related output is measured by years of schooling and GPA. Both measures
predict wages and could be used in our wage regressions. However, years of schooling is
more commonly used in the literature and is available for many more survey participants, so
  17
     We drop observations with missing cognitive test scores, gender, age, and whether the student is white.
  18
     We drop 1-individuals (2%) who did not know their wage earnings in the last year even if they provided
a rough guess, and 2-individuals who report 0 wage earnings (~6%) so they were unemployed the entire year.
  19
     We also examine other measures of social capital in the empirical results.
  20
     Total network size has an additional disadvantage for our purposes: there are many individuals that are
named as friends who are not interviewed by Add Health and whose characteristics we cannot observe. This
makes the estimation of network formation more di cult.
  21
     Due to the survey design this measure is missing for 25% of individuals in the data: shyness was measured
in Wave 2, which was a follow-up survey conducted one year after Wave 1. Students who were in grade 12
during Wave 1 were not surveyed during Wave 2.


                                                     12
we will use this measure for most of our analysis. On average, individuals in our data obtain
almost 15 years of schooling.
    The Add Health Picture Vocabulary Test (AHPVT) score is our main measure for cog-
nitive endowment or IQ. This test, administered in Wave 1, is an abbreviated version of the
widely used Peabody Picture Vocabulary test and it measures verbal ability. While this test
is not an overall measure of intellectual ability, it has a high correlation with other intelligence
tests (Canivez, 1995; Hodapp and Gerken, 1999; Dunn and M.Dunn, 2007). Consistent with
this, high-IQ individuals have more years of schooling, higher GPAs, and higher earnings
(columns 2 and 3).
    Our model separates time spent studying from socializing and other activities, but mea-
sures of time allocation are limited in Add Health. We observe reported study e ort (no
e ort, some e ort, very hard study e ort), which captures whether individuals are really
studying as opposed to listening to music or daydreaming while they "study". On average,
37% of individuals report studying very hard.
    Reliable metrics for socializing prove the most elusive. We do not observe hours spent
with others, or on social activities. However, we observe reported frequencies of time spent
with friends and frequency of alcohol consumption. Respondents report time spent with
friends as either never, sometimes, or frequently hanging out with friends, and 38% report
frequently hanging out with friends (this fraction is larger among extroverts). We assume
that the decision to consume alcohol during high school and college is primarily a decision
to socialize (measures socializing e ort). Alcohol consumption among adolescents appears
to be largely motivated by its capacity to facilitate social interactions and boost the energy
of social events (Feldman et al., 1999; Kuntsche et al., 2005). About 46% report drinking
moderately or frequently and, consistent with its social role, extroverts report drinking more.


4     Do people invest in social capital? Investments in
      cognitive and social capital
We start by showing that education and social capital increase with socializing and studying
investments. Figure 3 shows that studying e ort is associated with greater years of schooling
(panel a), albeit with a decreasing rate. Similarly, friendships increase time spent with friends
or with drinking (panels d and f). Surprisingly, time spent with friends is not associated
with lower schooling outcomes (except for those that socialize a lot) and neither is drinking,
except for those that a drink a lot (panels c and e); surprisingly, more studying is associated
with more (not fewer) friends, except for those who study a lot (panel b).


                                                13
    Table 2 reports the results from regressing outcomes on investments, school fixed e ects,
peer characteristics and other predetermined individual characteristics. We consider two
social outcomes: in-degree and network size, and two education outcomes, years of schooling
and GPA. As expected, study e ort is strongly and positively correlated with education
outcomes. Individuals who exert some (very hard) study e ort have 0.5 (0.7) more years
of schooling and have a GPA that is 0.13 (0.34) points higher than those who report not
exerting any e ort. Interestingly, the number of friendships is also increasing in modest study
e ort (one hour results in 0.3 more nominations or in 0.5 more individuals in the network),
though studying very hard does not; also as expected, those who sometimes (frequently)
spend time with friends have 0.8 (1.2) more friends. Spending time with friends, however,
does not predict negative schooling outcomes­the coe cients are statistically insignificant.
Together these results suggest that individuals who spend some time studying together can
increase both their schooling and social outcomes.22
    Those who drink (occasionally or frequently), however, do so to the benefit of their
friendships and to the detriment of their schooling outcomes. For example, individuals who
drink alcohol frequently (more than once a month) have 0.6 more friends but obtain 0.35
fewer years of schooling and their GPA is 0.21 points lower relative to those who drink
less frequently. This suggests that individuals who drink frequently substitute away from
studying instead of consuming less leisure.
    These results suggest that social investments result in friendships, consistent with our
model. But perhaps the causality runs the other way; i.e., those who have friends spend time
with friends and drink with them. To investigate this issue, we make use of the fact that we
have a measure of the number of friends in adulthood. Unfortunately, this measure is self
reported and categorical.23 However, it can be used to assess if the timing of investments
lines up with a causal interpretation. Table 3 shows that drinking and spending time with
friends in Wave 3 (when individuals are in their early twenties) increases the number of adult
friendships (column 1), even controlling for the number for friends in adolescence (column
2). Column 2 further shows that once education, friendships and social investments in
adulthood are accounted for, social investments in adolescence do not matter much: in these
regressions, drinking in adolescence lowers the number of adult friends and other socializing
measures are insignificant, except for "frequently hanging out with friends" in W1 (though
  22
     Interestingly, IQ positively predicts both cognitive and social capital, even conditional on investments.
Extroversion predicts social outcomes, conditional on investments, but not cognitive ones. This suggests
that either the investments are not fully accounted for or that these traits have independent benefits in the
production of these forms of capital.
  23
     This comes from the question "How many close friends do you have?" The possible answers are: zero,
one to two, three to five, six to nine, and ten or more friends.



                                                     14
this coe cient is smaller than the coe cient for "frequently hanging out with friends" in
W3).
    In sum, our results suggest that individuals spend time and e ort in both schooling
and socializing activities, and that these activities do in fact increase schooling outcomes
and network size. Interestingly, we find that studying and socializing are not necessarily
in conflict: moderate socializing increases education, and moderate studying increases one's
friends. Indeed, there is a positive correlation (0.15) between education and network size that
remains positive even after conditioning on covariates (Appendix Figure A.1). This suggests
that the existing perception, documented by Bursztyn and Jensen (2015), that there is a
trade-o between education and socializing, is not necessarily correct. But there does appear
to be a trade-o between studying and some social activities like drinking. And there is also
a trade-o for individuals doing very high levels of either activity.


5    Estimating Returns to Social Capital
We now turn our attention to estimating the labor market returns to social capital. We wish
to estimate the following equation

                              ln Yi = re Ei + rs Di + y (Xi ) + Ái

where the outcome of interest is the log of earnings for a given individual i and the objects
of interest are the coe cients for education Ei and in-degree Di . Proposition 4 shows that
OLS estimates of re and rs will be biased because both education and friendships are jointly
determined. So we require instruments for both education and in-degree to estimate the
causal e ect of social capital. The ideal instruments Zi satisfy three conditions: i) they
predict Ei and Di ; ii) they a ect wages only through Ei and Di ; and iii) they can separately
identify E and D.
    Our model motivates our choice of instrumental variables. Recall that pji , the probability
that j nominates i as a friend, depends on the likelihood they become friends upon meeting.
We assume that pji depends on the social distance between j and i, defined as |Xi  Xj |. This
social distance would be a valid instrument for the friendship because it a ects the friendship
formation. Thus homophily a ects socializing and studying e ort, and ultimately, education
and number of friends, but it does not directly a ect the earnings of i, conditional on the
friendship and on the education level. Similarly, proper instruments for education a ect
the productivity in education production ai but not earnings, conditional on education. For
example, peer characteristics and cohort-specific education supply side measures likely a ect


                                              15
ai , but are unlikely to directly a ect earnings, except through their e ect on education (and
networks). For these instruments to be valid, we need to assume that the time spent studying
Hi and socializing Si does not have a direct e ect on earnings; otherwise, Hi and Si would
be part of Ái , and the IVs would not be excluded from the earnings equation. This is the key
identifying assumption.24
     How to construct individual-level instruments? We model pairwise interactions, whether
i is a friend of j as a function of the distance between i and j . But the wage equation is at
the individual level; thus, a function of the total number of friends i has (i's in-degree). A
simple solution is to directly instrument for in-degree by aggregating the homophily measures
(summing over them). This approach that uses aggregated instruments could be ine cient:
Newey and McFadden (1994) and Wooldridge (2010) show that under homoscedasticity (in
the earnings equation), an e cient instrument for in-degree is given by E ( Di | Zi ), i.e., the
projection of in-degree onto the pairwise homophily measures.25 Instead we proceed as
follows. We start by estimating the likelihood i and j will be friends as a function of their
homophily

                                                                            Õ ¯
                       E ( Dji | Zi ) = --1
                                          Õ
                                            |Xi  Xj | + --2 Zi + --3
                                                          Õ e      Õ
                                                                     Xi + --4 Xc + ­s .                       (14)

Because i's in-degree is the sum of i's friendship nominations from other students, our instru-
                                                                            q
ment for in-degree is the sum of the predicted nominations, E ( Di | Zi ) = j "=i E ( Dji | Zi ).26
We use distance in gender, race, age, and "the number of years a student has been at
their school" as our main homophily measures.27 Except for years in school, the previous
  24
     If Hi and Si have a direct e ect on earnings, then they would enter the earnings equation through Ái .
Because our IVs are variables that a ect productivity in the education production ai and preference in the
social capital production pji , they would be correlated with Ái through Hi and Si and, thus, become invalid.
  25
                                                                                    ! - "1
     Under heteroscedasticity, an e cient instrument for in-degree is given by E Á2     -
                                                                                       i Zi     E ( Di | Zi ), i.e.,
the projected in-degree divided by the projection of the squared error term in earnings onto the pairwise
homophily measures. Because the error term in earnings Ái is at the individual level,     ! while
                                                                                              - " the pairwise
homophily measures in Zi are at the pair level, it is not obvious how to estimate E Á2       i Zi . We try to
                                                                                              -
                                                2
approximate it by projecting the estimated Ái onto the aggregate homophily measures, but this seems to
introduce too much noise. Therefore, we only use the unadjusted projected in-degree as the instrument.
  26
     Using the predicted in-degree as an instrument instead of a regressor in the second stage is also in line
with what Angrist and Pischke, 2009, Section 4.6 suggest to avoid a forbidden regression in the case of a
nonlinear first stage. Our first stage is nonstandard in a di erent way: it is at the pair level. Using the
predicted values as instruments and keeping the original moment condition with the observed endogenous
variables would allow us to obtain consistent estimates.
  27
     In principle we could also include distances in IQ, shyness and socio-economic status indicators but these
have a lot of missing values due to the survey design. Students who were not included in the in-home surveys
do not have information on IQ, whether they are extroverted, and SES covariates. We experimented with
alternative approaches, namely limiting our estimation sample to individuals with non-missing covariates.
We found evidence that this was not a randomly selected sample, which biased our estimated coe cients in
this approach. It is important to note that we observe all nominations sent to i regardless of whether they
are in our main analytic sample (the in-home sample in Add Health).


                                                        16
literature has already demonstrated these measures are excellent predictors of friendship
formation (Jackson, 2008). As usual, we include the instruments for education (Zie ) (more
on this below) and iÕ s characteristics Xi in this first stage. We also control for the mean
                               ¯ c and the school fixed e ect ­s to account for sorting of indi-
characteristics in iÕ s cohort X
viduals into schools, and for variation in the composition of students across cohorts within
a school. We estimate a linear specification but we also estimate a probit specification as a
robustness check.
    The identification assumption is that the pairwise homophily measures |Xi  Xj | are
excluded from the earnings equation conditional on these controls. For example, we control
for i's gender, the fraction of i's cohort that is female and a school fixed e ect. Thus, the
coe cient --1 in the first stage is identified by comparing pairs of individuals that are in the
same school, and are in a cohort with the same gender composition, but who are of the same
or opposite gender. At the aggregate level this is akin to saying that the instrument for in-
degree is the interaction between i's gender and the gender composition of i in their school,
controlling for the mean gender in i's cohort. The interaction is the excluded instrument.
In other words, we are comparing di erent cohorts within a school that have identical mean
characteristics but di erent variances in these characteristics.
    We also estimate a first stage for years of schooling using the following specification:
                                                    ÿ
                                                                                   Õ ¯
                     E [ Ei | Zi ] = --1 Zi + --2
                                       Õ e      Õ
                                                            |Xi  Xj | + --3
                                                                          Õ
                                                                            Xi + --4 Xc + ­s
                                                    j "=i


where Zie are the instruments for education. Gender and race distances are highly predictive
of individual schooling outcomes (Sacerdote, 2011) as is the distance with peers' ages, often
referred to as "relative age" (Black, Devereux, and Salvanes, 2011). These are also instru-
ments for friendships, after aggregation. Because we need additional excluded variables to
separately identify the e ect of education from that of in-degree, we also include five other
instruments, which are inspired by recent work: 1-distance in maternal education; 2-distance
in whether father lives in the household (which also proxies for SES); 3-distance in physical
maturity; 4-racial distance with teachers; and 5-cohort size.28 As before we control for cohort
  28
    Recent work suggests that measures of the dispersion in backgrounds (maternal education, father pres-
ence) within a cohort a ect education (Bifulco, Fletcher, and Ross, 2011), as does distance in distance in
physical maturity (Sabia and Rees, 2012). Recent work also suggests that students benefit from being of the
same race as their teachers (Gershenson, Holt, and Papageorge, 2016; Egalite, Kisida, and Winters, 2015;
Redding, 2019). We calculate the race composition of teachers at the school level and include the racial
distance between a student and teachers. Finally we include cohort size. Larger cohorts are likely associated
with having larger class sizes, which has been suggested to have adverse a ects on academic achievement
(Angrist and Lavy, 1999); however, Wo[ss]mann and West (2006) and Woessmann (2016) suggest this matters
only when teachers are of low quality).



                                                             17
mean characteristics, including the mean SES characteristics of peers and of their parents
(X¯ c ) and school fixed e ects (­s ). Our identifying assumption is again that conditional on
the school fixed e ects and the mean peer characteristics, the instruments do not directly
a ect wages except through education and in-degree.
     Estimation and inference. With the predicted in-degree and years of schooling as
the instruments, we estimate the parameters in the earnings equation by GMM.29 To allow
for heteroscedasticity in the earnings equation, we implement the estimation by two-step
GMM provided in STATA, which uses the optimal weighting matrix that accommodates
heteroskedasticity. Because we use the predicted values as the instruments instead of re-
gressors, the default formula in two-step GMM gives us the correct standard errors. It
is well-known that instruments for education could be weak. We therefore provide robust
confidence intervals for the e ects of education and in-degree that are immune to weak
instruments and heteroskedasticity as proposed by Andrews (2018).


6      The Formation of Social and Education Capital
6.1     What predicts network formation?
We now estimate the network formation using data on bilateral pairs that can be constructed
using Add Health as in Eq. (14). We concentrate on predicting nominations within the same
grade, which account for 80% of all nominations.30
    The results are presented in Table 4 (Appendix Tables A.1 and A.2 show the results for
receiver controls and peer means). The first column shows the results for all pairs of students
regardless of their gender. Consistent with the findings in the literature, homophily is an
important predictor of friendship formation. The coe cients for white, female, age and years
at school distances are negative and statistically significant, confirming that friendship nom-
inations are more likely when the sender and receiver are similar in all of these dimensions.
Because of missing data we are unable to study the e ect of other homophily measures.31
    Individual receiver characteristics also predict nominations. Tall and physically mature
individuals, those with high IQs, extroverts, women, whites, and those who have been in
school for more years receive more nominations­all these coe cients are statistically signifi-
  29
     We use predicted education as an instrument for education.
  30
     Estimation of all possible pairs is computationally burdensome. Our exploratory work suggested that
estimating the entire possible network would take substantially more time but make little di erence to the
estimates.
  31
     When measuring total distance,
                                  q we need to correct for the fact that many pairwise distances are missing
for these measures. Specifically, j "=i |Xi  Xj | will be biased downward if we exclude pairwise distances
where Xj is missing. Our approach is to impute missing data when Xj is missing.


                                                    18
cant. The fact that IQ predicts nominations can help explain the positive correlation between
in-degree and educational attainment. Interestingly, individuals who come from high-SES
households (measured by income, food stamp receipt, presence of parents) are more likely
to receive a friendship nomination, providing some evidence that individuals are attracted
to those who may provide valuable connections in the labor market.32
    Some (but not all) education instruments matter for friendship formation: those in large
cohorts are less likely to become friends and those with large racial distance with teach-
ers make more friends. Importantly, three education instruments (distance in father pres-
ence, mother's education and physical maturity) are not statistically significant predictors of
friendships. This suggests we might be able to separately identify the e ects of education and
in-degree in the second stage. However the F-statistics testing the joint significance of the
excluded instruments are only barely above 10, suggesting the instruments might be weak.
Nevertheless predicted nominations statistically significantly increase nominations: one more
predicted nomination results in 0.27 actual nominations, conditional on other controls.33
    Gender e ects. Prior research has often restricted attention to same sex friendships,
because mixed gender nominations can also represent romantic interests (e.g. Fletcher, Ross,
and Zhang, 2013). Mixed-gender friendships might also form di erently because these friend-
ships are di erent in nature ­ indeed female and male networks exhibit di erent properties
(Lindenlaub and Prummer, 2014). Columns 2-4 of Table 4 investigate this. Overall, there is
great similarity across columns: female-female friendships (column 2), male-male friendships
(column 3), and female-male friendships (column 4) are predicted, in general, by the same
factors though there are some di erences. Age, race, and years at school distance matters
less across genders, but physical maturity matters more, consistent with the view that some
opposite-gender nominations correspond to romantic relationships.34 In addition, the share
of females in the cohort a ects males and females di erently (Appendix Table A.2). Women
are less likely to become friends in school cohorts with more females, whereas males are
more likely to become friends when the share of females is higher. In the next section we
investigate whether the wage return to same-sex or opposite-sex relationships di ers.
    Coordination tests. By examining whether the likelihood of forming a link depends on
the homophily measures of the sender, we can test whether there is coordination in network
formation (see Section 2.1). We implement this test using both the overall in-school sample
  32
     All coe cients for mean cohort characteristics, except for mean income, are both individually and jointly
statistically insignificant, but it is di cult to separately identify the e ects of the group means once individual
and pair distances are controlled for.
  33
     Results available upon request. We obtain this result by regressing nominations on predicted nominations
and controls.
  34
     There are other notable di erences in the magnitude of the predictors of friendships by gender that are
worthy of further investigation. A full exploration of these di erences is beyond the scope of this paper.


                                                        19
and the smaller in-home sample (used in our estimation). The results are in Appendix Table
A.3. In both samples, the social distances of the sender to his/her peers measured by white,
female, age, and years at school are all statistically significant, suggesting that coordination
is crucial in the formation of social capital.


6.2     The production of education
The results for years of schooling are presented in Table 5. Recall that these regressions
are estimated at the individual level rather than the pair level and include school fixed
e ects.35 Individual characteristics have the expected signs: IQ statistically significantly
raises education, whereas extroversion does not. Mean peer and teacher characteristics also
show previously observed patterns. Greater maternal education in one's cohort is associated
with more years of schooling, whereas a greater share of peers receiving food stamps is
associated with fewer years of schooling. If teachers di er from students in their race, then
students have fewer years of schooling and lower GPAs. However, this e ect is statistically
insignificant in the years of schooling estimates. But not all peer characteristics matter.
Cohort size, mean extroversion, and mean peer IQ are not statistically significant.
    Homophily measures matter. Consistent with the literature on relative age, individuals
in cohorts with greater age dispersion end up with lower education outcomes. Conditional
on the mean maternal education of your peers, greater dispersion in maternal education also
negatively predicts years of schooling and GPA. We find similar results for total distance
in father's presence and physical maturity: conditional on the mean, dispersion in these
outcomes lowers attainment. These results suggest that segregating students into groups that
are homogeneous in terms of age, physical maturity, and SES improves schooling outcomes.
There are some exceptions. Race diversity does not statistically predict education outcomes,
and neither does diversity in years at school. Suprisingly, greater female distance increases
education, suggesting same gender schools are detrimental for some children.
    The fact that some of the instruments that predict networks are not significant predictors
of education suggests that we will be able to separately identify the e ects of education and
networks in the wage equation. But the F-value on the excluded instruments is less than 10
for education and only slightly above 10 for networks despite the fact that many variables are
statistically significant. This suggests that the excluded instruments are weak, a complication
that we deal with in the estimation of the wage returns, which we turn to now.
  35
     As a result some of the measures in the pair-wise regressions cannot be easily separately identified. For
example at the pairwise level we compute female distance. At the aggregate level this measure becomes the
total gender distance. This measure is now very similar to the fraction of females in the group and di ers
only in functional form.



                                                     20
7     The Returns to Social Networks
7.1    Preliminary evidence that social investments have returns in
       the labor market
If socializing were pure leisure, then it would be expected to detract from labor market pro-
ductivity (Proposition 5). However, we claim that individuals socialize in part because it
increases their wages. Some preliminary evidence for this is presented in Table 7, which shows
the results of a regression of (log) wages on individual endowments (IQ and extroversion),
and individual and school characteristics (as in Table 2). In column 1, we do not control
for education and network size, but we include social and educational investments. We find
that study time and e ort are statistically significant predictors of wages. More interest-
ingly, moderate or large alcohol consumption in high school does not decrease wages: these
coe cients are positive and statistically insignificant. Time spent with friends is positively
and statistically significantly associated with higher wages. Column 2 repeats the estimation
controlling for years of schooling. Now time and e ort on studying are no longer significant
predictors of wages (the coe cients are now much smaller and statistically insignificant),
consistent with the idea that they only a ect wages because of their e ect on education.
Coe cients on drinking become even smaller and remain statistically insignificant. Time
spent with friends remains positive and a statistically significant predictor of wages. We can
reject the hypothesis that drinking and socializing have negative e ects on wages, suggesting
these activities are not simply pure leisure but also serve as investments.


7.2    IV estimates of the e ects of education and networks on wages
We now present our estimates of the causal e ects of education and network, which are
obtained after instrumenting both measures. These regressions control for endowments (IQ
and extroversion), pre-determined characteristics (age, years at school, SES, white, gender),
peer characteristics and school fixed e ects as in previous tables. The identifying assumption
is that, conditional on the controls, the homophily and schooling instruments a ect wages
only through their e ect on education and (grade) in-degree.
    Table 8 shows the results. Column 1 reproduces the OLS from the previous table to
make the comparison between IV and OLS easier. Column 2 shows the IV results. The
coe cient on years of schooling is now 13%, consistent with previous IV estimates of the
causal return to school which also find similar point estimates, and similar increases (30%)
in the coe cient of education compared with OLS (Card, 2001). The IV estimate of the
return to friendships is about 9% and statistically significant. It is about four times larger

                                             21
than the OLS estimates, though the standard errors are large.


7.3     Why is the IV estimate larger than OLS?
There are two possible reasons: measurement error and omitted variable bias.
    Measurement error. Table 6 investigates the sensitivity of OLS estimates to our
choice of network measure. Column 1 shows that one more person in one's network increases
wages by 1 percent. Column 2 investigates whether being nominated (in-degree) or nomi-
nating someone (out-degree) has the same e ect on wages.36 The results show that in-degree
matters but out-degree does not. In column 3, we use in-degree in one's cohort: for com-
putational reasons, this is the measure we predicted in the previous section.37 We find that
more nominations in one's grade is associated with a 2.2 percent increase in wages, very
similar to the coe cient for in-degree. In column 4, we investigate whether same-gender and
opposite-gender friends are associated with the same returns in the labor market. Same-
gender friendships in adolescence appear much more useful later on: one more friend of one's
gender raises wages by 3.3 percent, whereas a friend of the opposite sex only increases wages
by 1 percent, perhaps because they do not correspond to friendships; however, both are
statistically significant predictors of wages. Finally, in column 5, we compare friends with
high and low engagement. Friends are classified as high-engagement if individuals report
doing many activities with the nominated person such as going out, talking on the phone,
visiting their home etc.38 One more close friend is associated with 3.3 percent higher wages,
whereas a low-engagement friend is only associated with 1.1 percent higher wages. Both,
however, are statistically significant predictors of wages.
    These results suggest in-degree is a good measure but also suggest there might be impor-
tant measurement error. Measurement error on network size can generate attenuation bias
and result in large IV estimates. The extent of attenuation depends on the signal-to-noise
ratio in in-degree. To assess this, we estimate plausible values of the signal-to-noise ratio.
Appendix Table A.5 shows the variance-covariance measures for various measures of in-degree
(after they have been regressed on all other covariates). We use this table to compute the
  36
      Note that network size = in-degree + out-degree  reciprocal degree.
  37
      The number of possible pairs grows very large. However, the benefit of using this large data is limited
because although the number of possible friends increases three-fold, the number of actual friends only raises
by 1 (see summary statistics in Table 1). This is because as the results in previous section shows individuals
like to make friends with people of the same age, with the exception of cross-gender relationships.
   38
      We use a measure of tie strength inspired by Gee, Jones, and Burke (2017). For each nomination in
the survey, the sender (nominator) states if they do five activities together (going to the friend's house,
meeting during the week, meeting over the weekend, talking on the phone, and talking about a problem). A
nomination is coded as high-intensity if the person listed three or more of these interactions.




                                                     22
possible extent of the bias, and conclude the bias is potentially large.39 For example, suppose
that high-activity nominations are the "true" network measure, and that grade in-degree is
the poor measure. Also suppose that the measurement error is not classical. The covariance
between (residualized) grade in-degree and (residualized) high-engagement degree is 2.3, and
the (residualized) variance of grade in-degree is 8.3. Their ratio is about 1/4, suggesting than
IV coe cients could be four times larger than OLS, consistent with our findings.
    Omitted variable bias. Omitted variable biases in our model are in general ambiguous
(Proposition 3). The bias is given by the correlation between education or in-degree and
the error term in earnings, multiplied by the inverse of the matrix X Õ X , where X consists
of the two columns of residualized education and residualized in-degree. In our sample, the
inverse matrix (X Õ X )1 has positive diagonal elements and negative o -diagonal elements,
and the latter are relatively small. Thus the signs of the OLS biases in the returns are
mostly determined by the correlations that education and in-degree have with the error
term. Our results suggest that the correlation between in-degree and Ái is negative, yielding
a downward bias in the social returns (depending on X Õ X ). For example this would be the
case if individuals who have a strong taste for socializing also have a strong taste for leisure.


7.4     Robustness checks.
Columns 3-10 of Table 8 conduct a series of robustness checks.
    Comparison with previous estimates. Column 3 shows the results if we instrument
for in-degree but not for education, as in Conti et al. (2013). These estimates are substantially
lower than our IV estimates for education, and higher for in-degree. This is consistent with
the predictions of our model: because these are jointly determined, estimates that instrument
only for one will be biased. However, the standard errors in all the IV estimations are large.
    Aggregate 2SLS. Rather than estimating individual friendship links, we can follow the
standard approach in the literature and directly regress student i's in-degree on the aggregate
instruments to estimate Di (Section 5).40 Columns 4 and 5 present estimates that use the
aggregate first stage for in-degree and instrument for education (column 4) or not (column
5). The point estimates for in-degree (0.42 and 0.6) are still higher than OLS, though smaller
than with the pair-wise approach. The coe cient of education is much more sensitive to
these alternative specifications, possibly because our instruments for education are weaker.
    First stage non-linear model. In columns 6 and 7, we estimate the first stage using
  39
     For classical measurement error, the ratio is given by the variance of the true measure divided by the
variance of in-degree (Wooldridge (2010)). For non-classical measurement error, the ratio is given by the
covariance between in-degree and the true measure, divided by the variance of in-degree.
  40
     First stage estimates for in-degree at the aggregate level are presented in Appendix Table A.4.



                                                    23
a probit model instead of a linear probability model. The point estimates for in-degree
are again higher than OLS. Again, the coe cient on education also changes substantially
depending on whether we instrument for it or not.
    Weak instruments. These results, combined with the low F-statistics on the first stage
for education and in-degree suggest that our instruments are weak. We follow the approach
proposed by Andrews (2018) and compute confidence sets that are robust to weak IV and
heteroscedasticity. The confidence set of in-degree ranges from 0.019 to 0.196. These bounds
are wide but they do not include 0.41
    We conclude that the preponderance of the evidence supports the assertion that there are
positive causal returns to social networks in the labor market. However, the exact magnitude
of the return is di cult to ascertain and includes OLS estimates.


8      Interpretation and Limitations
8.1     Interpretation
Why are friendships in adolescence related to adult wages and how do we interpret our
findings? Our findings do not imply that adolescent friends by themselves a ect wages. We
estimate a "reduced form" coe cient of the e ect of friends in adolescence, which includes
the direct e ect of adolescent friends as well as many indirect e ects. Appendix Table A.6
shows adolescent friendships are associated with a host of other intermediate outcomes in
adulthood. Individuals with more connections in adolescence are more socially connected in
adulthood: they have a higher score on the Extraversion Personality Scale (column 1), and
they report having more friends (column 2). Social skills and social networks in adulthood
are both associated with improved labor market outcomes (Deming, 2015; Schmutte, 2015).42
    What do these results imply about the importance of social and cognitive skills observed
early in life? Table 8 shows the results from regressing wages on these endowments, without
controlling for years of schooling or in-degree. The results show that both IQ and extroversion
in Wave 1 have large and statistically significant associations with wages. The returns to
extroversion are large: being an extrovert increases wages by roughly the same amount as
one standard deviation in IQ. Interestingly, neither IQ nor extroversion measured during
adolescence garner greater wages once we control and instrument for years of schooling and
in-degree. To a first approximation then, schooling and in-degree capture the two most
  41
     The confidence set for education is [-0.012; 0.227]. It is wide likely in part because our instruments for
education are weak.
  42
     We investigated other mechanisms. We found decreases in the likelihood of being depression (column 4)
but no impact on marital outcomes (column 3), or the likelihood individuals are working (column 5).


                                                      24
important dimensions through which these endowments a ect wages.
    We empirically investigate how these early skills a ect investments (Table 9), and the
returns to these investments (Table 10). Extroverts spend more time socializing compared
with shy individuals: they drink more and are more likely to frequently hang out with friends.
They are less likely to report studying very hard relative to shy individuals. However, ex-
troverts have greater returns to studying and socializing: both activities increase education
and networks. Extroverts also appear to su er somewhat lower education losses from drink-
ing and spending time with friends. On net extroversion increases network size but does
not a ect education. IQ is di erent. High-IQ individuals do not necessarily invest more in
schooling or friends but have larger returns to education and social investments. In the case
of drinking however, they have larger costs as well compared to low-IQ individuals. On net
higher IQ leads to greater networks and schooling.
    Summary. Overall we find that individuals invest to reinforce initial endowments, spend-
ing relatively more time in the activity they have greater returns on. However, there is no
full specialization--individuals with a high endowment in one dimension still invest in the
alternative skill. This occurs because IQ and extroversion a ect the rate of return to so-
cializing and to studying. On net, the wage returns to extroversion mostly operate through
the e ect of extroversion on networks, while leaving schooling outcomes unchanged. On the
other hand the returns to IQ operate through both greater schooling and greater network
size. A rough computation suggests that about 10% of the returns to IQ operate through
greater networks. Finally, the results suggest individuals study together and that this ben-
efits both friendship formation and schooling outcomes, particularly for extroverts and for
high IQ individuals. But drinking presents a large trade-o .


8.2     Limitations
This paper has some limitations related to measurement. It is for data quality reasons that
we abstain from estimating a full structural model. If we did, then we could conduct counter-
factual analysis to investigate for example how earnings distributions would change if schools
provided more support for students to socialize, banned alcohol, or sorted individuals di er-
ently into groups. The challenge in estimating the utility function and production functions
is that important model components are poorly observed.43 The time spent socializing is
  43
     Our measures of individual sociability and social behaviors are limited. We worked with a self-reported
indicator of extroversion, which is considered one of the five important personality traits. However spoken
skills, non-verbal language, and other forms of emotional intelligence are likely to contribute to a per-
son's social skills. Relatedly, data on schooling and socializing investments are vague, self-reported, and
categorical­ideally, we would have access to data on time spent studying or socializing.



                                                    25
poorly measured and so are social skills.44 We do not observe some well-known determinants
of education outcomes.45 The measurement of IQ and education-related outcomes (GPA,
test scores) has received substantial attention in the social sciences. However, the measure-
ment of other important individual traits, such as social skills, is in its infancy (Deming,
2015). Another di culty we encounter is that missing data on individual characteristics
makes it very di cult to estimate network formation models. Missing data on a single node
prevents estimation of the formation of any links to that node.


9      Conclusions
This paper has shown that individuals with more adolescent friendships make more money as
adults and that as a result, individuals invest time and resources in the development of their
network. Although socializing activities can detract from educational activities, particularly
if they are associated with alcohol consumption, individuals still socialize, optimally so,
partly because of the high return that a large network commands. Our estimates suggest
that having a large network of friends appears to increase one's wage. The magnitude of this
e ect is not trivial, though our estimates are not precisely estimated. Our estimates suggest
that five friends in adolescence increases wages as much as one year of school or more.
     Our results suggest that social skills, in particular extroversion, have large returns in
the labor market. We do not find that schooling and socializing are necessarily substitutes,
though they can be as when socializing occurs under the influence of alcohol. Interestingly
social skills are known to be modifiable throughout childhood and into adolescence, whereas
other cognitive skills are less so (Heckman and Mosso, 2014b). Our research suggests that
greater attention needs to be paid to the development of these social skills as they might
provide avenues for improving the lifetime outcomes of individuals who received low cognitive
investments early in childhood. Our results also confirm recent findings emphasizing the
importance of adolescence as a formative period for socio-emotional outcomes (Jackson et
al., 2020) and particularly for friendships (Denworth, 2020).
     The importance of socialization during schooling years has further implications for higher
education policy. Many colleges and universities face criticism for investing in infrastructure
for non-academic, recreational facilities that are believed to contribute to increasing tuition
  44
     Without knowing Si , we will have to replace Si by the model-predicted optimal socializing Siú
                                                                                                    (X, ,i ) and
estimate a reduced-form version of the production functions, hoping that we are able to uniquely determine
the structural parameters from the reduced-form estimates. To make sure that this procedure can yield
consistent estimates, we have to at least correctly specify (1) the utility function and production functions,
and (2) the equilibrium selection mechanism, when there are multiple equilibria.
  45
     For example, we do not observe classroom size (only cohort size) or teacher quality, both of which which
determine education and wages (Chetty, Friedman, and Rocko , 2014; Krueger, 1999).


                                                      26
levels (Jacob, McCall, and Stange, 2013). These investments are more reasonable in the
presence of high returns to socialization. Our results help rationalize why, for instance,
Greek fraternities and sororities persist, despite the fact that they can detract from strictly
academic endeavors. While partying decreases education, it does not necessarily decrease
wages.
    Therefore education interventions and other policies that a ect school environments
should be evaluated by their impacts on non-education measures as well as their impact
on education. Education interventions that raise schooling outcomes but depress social ones
might not ultimately benefit individuals. For example, the recent proliferation of massively
open online courses (MOOCs) might negatively a ect social life, despite their potential aca-
demic benefits. The rise of online schooling could have long lasting negative e ects on wages.
On the other hand, policies that promote joint studying might have very large returns in
both academic and social spheres.


References
Agostinelli, Francesco. 2018. "Investing in childrenâs skills: An equilibrium analysis of social
  interactions and parental investments." Working Papers 2018, Arizona State University.
  URL https://economics.yale.edu/sites/default/files/agostinellij mp.pdf.

Alan, Sule, Teodora Boneva, and Seda Ertac. 2019. "Ever Failed, Try Again, Suc-
  ceed Better: Results From a Randomized Educational Intervention On Grit*." URL
  https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjz006.

Andrews, Isaiah. 2018. "Valid Two-Step Identification-Robust Confidence Sets for
 GMM."       The Review of Economics and Statistics 100 (2):337­348.        URL
 https://doi.org/10.1162/RESTa 0 0682.

Andrews, Isaiah, James H. Stock, and Liyang Sun. Forthcoming. "Weak Instruments in IV
 Regression: Theory and Practice." Annual Review of Economics .

Angrist, Joshua and JÃ¶rn-Ste en Pischke. 2009. Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Em-
 piricist's Companion.

Angrist, Joshua D and Victor Lavy. 1999. "Using Maimonides' rule to estimate the e ect of
 class size on scholastic achievement." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 114 (2):533­575.

Auerbach, Eric G. 2016. "Identification and Estimation of Models with Endogenous Network
 Formation."

                                              27
Bandiera, Oriana, Iwan Barankay, and Imran Rasul. 2010. "Social incentives in the work-
  place." The Review of Economic Studies 77 (2):417­458.

Bifulco, Robert, Jason M. Fletcher, and Stephen L. Ross. 2011.   "The E ect of
  Classmate Characteristics on Post-secondary Outcomes: Evidence from the Add
  Health."   American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 3 (1):25­53.      URL
  http://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/pol.3.1.25.

Black, Sandra E, Paul J Devereux, and Kjell G Salvanes. 2011. "Too young to leave the nest?
  The e ects of school starting age." The Review of Economics and Statistics 93 (2):455­467.

Blume, Lawrence E, William A Brock, Steven N Durlauf, and Yannis M Ioannides. 2010.
  "Identification of social interactions." .

Bramoullé, Yann, Habiba Djebbari, and Bernard Fortin. 2009. "Identification of peer
  e ects through social networks." Journal of Econometrics 150 (1):41 ­ 55. URL
  http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0304407609000335.

Bramoullé, Yann, Rachel Kranton, and Martin D'amours. 2014. "Strategic interaction and
  networks." The American Economic Review 104 (3):898­930.

Bursztyn, Leonardo and Robert Jensen. 2015. "How Does Peer Pressure A ect Educational
  Investments?" The quarterly journal of economics :qjv021.

Caetano, Gregorio, Josh Kinsler, and Hao Teng. 2019. "Towards causal estimates of children's
  time allocation on skill development." Journal of Applied Econometrics 34 (4):588­605.
  URL https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/jae.2700.

Cai, Hongbin, Hanming Fang, and Lixin Colin Xu. 2011. "Eat, drink, firms, government:
  An investigation of corruption from the entertainment and travel costs of Chinese firms."
  The Journal of Law and Economics 54 (1):55­78.

Calvo-Armengol, Antoni and Matthew O Jackson. 2004. "The e ects of social networks on
  employment and inequality." The American Economic Review 94 (3):426­454.

Calvó-Armengol, Antoni, Eleonora Patacchini, and Yves Zenou. 2009. "Peer e ects and
  social networks in education." The Review of Economic Studies 76 (4):1239­1267.

Canivez, Gary L. 1995. "Validity of the Kaufman Brief Intelligence Test: Comparisons With
  the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children Third Edition." Assessment 2 (2):101­111.
  URL https://doi.org/10.1177/107319119500200201.


                                            28
Card, David. 1999. "The causal e ect of education on earnings." Handbook of labor economics
  3:1801­1863.

------. 2001. "Estimating the return to schooling: Progress on some persistent econometric
  problems." Econometrica 69 (5):1127­1160.

Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, and Jonah E. Rocko . 2014.                           "Mea-
 suring the Impacts of Teachers I: Evaluating Bias in Teacher                       Value-
 Added Estimates."    American Economic Review 104 (9):2593­2632.                    URL
 http://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/aer.104.9.2593.

Cobb-Clark, Deborah A and Stefanie Schurer. 2012. "The stability of big-five personality
  traits." Economics Letters 115 (1):11­15.

Conley, Timothy, Nirav Mehta, Ralph Stinebrickner, and Todd Stinebrickner. 2015. "Social
  Interactions, Mechanisms, and Equilibrium: Evidence from a Model of Study Time and
  Academic Achievement." Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

Conley, Timothy G and Christopher R Udry. 2010. "Learning about a new technology:
  Pineapple in Ghana." The American Economic Review 100 (1):35­69.

Conti, Gabriella, Andrea Galeotti, Gerrit Mueller, and Stephen Pudney. 2013. "Popularity."
  Journal of Human Resources 48 (4):1072­1094.

Corcoran, Mary, Linda Datcher, and Greg Duncan. 1980. "Information and influence net-
  works in labor markets." Five thousand American families: Patterns of economic progress
  8 (S 1):37.

Cunha, Flavio, James Heckman, and Lance Lochner. 2006. "Interpreting the Evi-
 dence on Life Cycle Skill Formation." chap. 12. Elsevier, 1 ed., 697­812. URL
 https://EconPapers.repec.org/RePEc:eee:educhp:1-12.

Deming, David J. 2015. "The growing importance of social skills in the labor market." Tech.
  rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

Denworth, Lydia. 2020. Friendship: The Evolution, Biology, and Extraordinary Power of
  Life's Fundamental Bond. W. W. Norton Company, 1 ed.

Dunn, Lloyd and Douglas M. M.Dunn. 2007. Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test. Minneapolis,
 MN: Pearson.



                                            29
E. Carrell, Scott, Mark Hoekstra, and Elira Kuka. 2018. "The Long-Run E ects of Disruptive
  Peers." American Economic Review 108:3377­3415.

Egalite, Anna J., Brian Kisida, and Marcus A. Winters. 2015.        "Rep-
  resentation in the classroom:    The e ect of own-race teachers on stu-
  dent achievement."   Economics of Education Review 45 (C):44­52.   URL
  https://ideas.repec.org/a/eee/ecoedu/v45y2015icp44-52.html.

Elliott, James R. 2001. "Referral hiring and ethnically homogeneous jobs: How prevalent is
  the connection and for whom?" Social Science Research 30 (3):401­425.

Epple, Dennis and Richard E. Romano. 2011. "Chapter 20 - Peer E ects in Educa-
  tion: A Survey of the Theory and Evidence." North-Holland, 1053 ­ 1163. URL
  http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780444537072000037.

Feldman, Linda, Bart Harvey, Philippa Holowaty, and Linda Shortt. 1999. "Alcohol use
  beliefs and behaviors among high school students." Journal of Adolescent Health 24 (1):48­
  58.

Fiorini, Mario and Michael P Keane. 2014. "How the allocation of children's time a ects
  cognitive and noncognitive development." Journal of Labor Economics 32 (4):787­836.

Fletcher, Jason, Stephen Ross, and Yuxiu Zhang. 2014.        "The Determi-
  nants and Consequences of Friendship Composition."  Working Papers 2014-
  016, Human Capital and Economic Opportunity Working Group.         URL
  https://ideas.repec.org/p/hka/wpaper/2014-016.html.

G Victora, Cesar, Rajiv Bahl, Aluisio J D Barros, Giovanny V A França, Susan Horton,
  Julia Krasevec, Simon Murch, Jeeva Sankar, Ne Walker, Nigel C Rollins, Katrina Allen,
  Shyamali Dharmage, Caroline Lodge, Karen Peres, Nita Bhandari, Ranadip Chowdhury,
  Bireshwar Sinha, Sunita Taneja, Elsa Giugliani, and Linda Richter. 2016. "Breastfeeding
  in the 21st century: Epidemiology, mechanisms, and lifelong e ect." The Lancet 387:475­
  490.

Gee, Laura K., Jason Jones, and Moira Burke. 2017. "Social Networks and Labor Markets:
 How Strong Ties Relate to Job Finding on Facebook's Social Network." Journal of Labor
 Economics 35 (2):485­518. URL https://doi.org/10.1086/686225.

Gershenson, Seth, Cassandra M. D. Hart, Joshua Hyman, Constance Lindsay, and
 Nicholas W. Papageorge. 2018. "The Long-Run Impacts of Same-Race Teachers."


                                            30
  NBER Working Papers 25254, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.             URL
  https://ideas.repec.org/p/nbr/nberwo/25254.html.

Gershenson, Seth, Stephen B Holt, and Nicholas W Papageorge. 2016. "Who believes in me?
 The e ect of student­teacher demographic match on teacher expectations." Economics of
 Education Review 52:209­224.

Glaeser, Edward L., David Laibson, and Bruce Sacerdote. 2002. "An Economic Ap-
  proach to Social Capital*." The Economic Journal 112 (483):F437­F458. URL
  https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/1468-0297.00078.

Goldsmith-Pinkham, Paul and Guido W. Imbens. 2013. "Social Networks and the Identifi-
 cation of Peer E ects." Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 31 (3):253­264. URL
 https://doi.org/10.1080/07350015.2013.801251.

Graham, Bryan S. 2015. "Methods of identification in social networks." Annu. Rev. Econ.
  7 (1):465­485.

Graham, Bryan S. 2017.         "An Econometric Model of Network                   Forma-
  tion With Degree Heterogeneity."    Econometrica 85 (4):1033­1063.                URL
  https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.3982/ECTA12679.

Granovetter, Mark. 1985. "Economic action and social structure: The problem of embed-
  dedness." American journal of sociology 91 (3):481­510.

Granovetter, Mark S. 1973. "The strength of weak ties." American journal of sociology
  78 (6):1360­1380.

Harris, K.M., C.T. Halpern, E. Whitsel, J. Hussey, J. Tabor, P. Entzel, and J.R. Udry.
  2009. "The National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent to Adult Health: Research Design."
  http://www.cpc.unc.edu/projects/addhealth/design.

Heckman, James, Rodrigo Pinto, and Peter Savelyev. 2013. "Understanding the mecha-
  nisms through which an influential early childhood program boosted adult outcomes."
  The American economic review 103 (6):2052­2086.

Heckman, James J. 2006. "Skill formation and the economics of investing in disadvantaged
  children." Science 312 (5782):1900­1902.

Heckman, James J. and Stefano Mosso. 2014a. "The Economics of Human Devel-
  opment and Social Mobility." Annual Review of Economics 6 (1):689­733. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-economics-080213-040753.

                                           31
------. 2014b.        "The Economics of Human Development and So-
  cial Mobility."    Annual Review of Economics 6 (1):689­733. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-economics-080213-040753.

Heckman, James J, Jora Stixrud, and Sergio Urzua. 2006. "The e ects of cognitive and
  noncognitive abilities on labor market outcomes and social behavior." Journal of Labor
  economics 24 (3):411­482.

Hodapp, Albert F. and Kathryn C. Gerken. 1999.            "Correlations between
 Scores for Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test III and the Wechsler Intelligence
 Scale for Children III."  Psychological Reports 84 (3_suppl):1139­1142.   URL
 https://doi.org/10.2466/pr0.1999.84.3c.1139.

Hsieh, Chih-Sheng and Lung Fei Lee. 2016. "A Social Interactions Model with Endogenous
  Friendship Formation and Selectivity." Journal of Applied Econometrics 31 (2):301­319.
  URL https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/jae.2426.

Jackson, Matthew O. 2005. "The economics of social networks." .

Jackson, Matthew O. 2008. Social and Economic Networks. Princeton, NJ, USA: Princeton
  University Press.

Jackson, Matthew O, Brian W Rogers, and Yves Zenou. 2016. "The economic consequences
  of social network structure." .

Jacob, Brian, Brian McCall, and Kevin M Stange. 2013. "College as Country Club: Do
  Colleges Cater to Students' Preferences for Consumption?" Tech. rep., National Bureau
  of Economic Research.

John, O.P. and S. Srivasta. 1999. The Big Five trait taxonomy: History, measurement, and
  theoretical perspectives. New York, NY, USA: Guilford Press.

Johnson, William R. 2017. "Parties or Problem Sets: Review Article on How College Works
  and Paying for the Party." Journal of Economic Literature .

Johnsson, Ida and Hyungsik Roger Moon. 2017. "Estimation of Peer E ects in Endogenous
  Social Networks: Control Function Approach." SSRN Electronic Journal .

Kerr, Norbert L and R Scott Tindale. 2004. "Group performance and decision making."
  Annu. Rev. Psychol. 55:623­655.



                                          32
Krueger, Alan B. 1999.       "Experimental Estimates of Education Production
  Functions."   The Quarterly Journal of Economics 114 (2):497­532.    URL
  http://www.jstor.org/stable/2587015.

Kuntsche, Emmanuel, Ronald Knibbe, Gerhard Gmel, and Rutger Engels. 2005. "Why do
 young people drink? A review of drinking motives." Clinical psychology review 25 (7):841­
 861.

Lenton, Pamela. 2014. "Personality characteristics, educational attainment and wages: an
  economic analysis using the British cohort study." The She eld Economic Research Paper
  Series 201401.

Lindenlaub, Ilse and Anja Prummer. 2014. "Gender, Social Networks And Performance." .

Mas, Alexandre and Enrico Moretti. 2009. "Peers at work." The American Economic Review
 99 (1):112­145.

Mehta, Nirav, Ralph Stinebrickner, and Todd Stinebrickner. 2019. "TIME-USE AND ACA-
 DEMIC PEER EFFECTS IN COLLEGE." Economic Inquiry 57 (1):162­171. URL
 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/ecin.12730.

Montgomery, James D. 1991. Social networks and persistent inequality in the labor market.
 Center for Urban A airs and Policy Research.

Muralidharan, Karthik and Ketki Sheth. 2016. "Bridging Education Gender Gaps in Devel-
 oping Countries: The Role of Female Teachers." Journal of Human Resources 51 (2):269­
 297. URL https://ideas.repec.org/a/uwp/jhriss/v51y2016i2p269-297.html.

Newey, Whitney K. and Daniel McFadden. 1994.          "Chapter 36 Large sam-
  ple estimation and hypothesis testing."    Elsevier, 2111 ­ 2245.     URL
  http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1573441205800054.

Qu, Xi and Lung-fei Lee. 2015a. "Estimating a spatial autoregressive model with an
 endogenous spatial weight matrix." Journal of Econometrics 184 (2):209­232. URL
 https://ideas.repec.org/a/eee/econom/v184y2015i2p209-232.html.

------. 2015b.     "Estimating a spatial autoregressive model with an endoge-
  nous spatial weight matrix."  Journal of Econometrics 184 (2):209­232. URL
  https://ideas.repec.org/a/eee/econom/v184y2015i2p209-232.html.




                                           33
Redding, Christopher. 2019. "A Teacher Like Me: A Review of the E ect of Studen-
  tâTeacher Racial/Ethnic Matching on Teacher Perceptions of Students and Student Aca-
  demic and Behavioral Outcomes." Review of Educational Research 89 (4):499­535. URL
  https://doi.org/10.3102/0034654319853545.

Rees, Daniel I. and Joseph J. Sabia. 2011.   "The E ect of Migraine Headache
  on Educational Attainment." Journal of Human Resources 46 (2):317­332. URL
  http://jhr.uwpress.org/content/46/2/317.abstract.

Ridder, Gert and Shuyang Sheng. 2018. "Estimation of Social Interactions in Endogenous
  and Strategically Formed Networks." Working Papers 2018, UCLA.

Sabia, Joseph and Daniel Rees. 2012.         "Does the number of sex part-
  ners a ect educational attainment?     Evidence from female respondents to
  the Add Health."     Journal of Population Economics 25 (1):89­118.    URL
  https://ideas.repec.org/a/spr/jopoec/v25y2012i1p89-118.html.

Sacerdote, Bruce. 2011. "Chapter 4 - Peer E ects in Education: How Might They Work,
  How Big Are They and How Much Do We Know Thus Far?" Elsevier, 249 ­ 277. URL
  http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780444534293000041.

Schmutte, Ian M. 2015. "Job Referral Networks and the Determination of Earn-
  ings in Local Labor Markets." Journal of Labor Economics 33 (1):1­32. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1086/677389.

Stevens, Stephan, Alexander L Gerlach, and Fred Rist. 2008. "E ects of alcohol on ratings of
  emotional facial expressions in social phobics." Journal of anxiety disorders 22 (6):940­948.

Stock, James H and Motohiro Yogo. 2002. "Testing for weak instruments in linear IV
  regression."

Weinberger, Catherine J. 2014. "The increasing complementarity between cognitive and
 social skills." Review of Economics and Statistics 96 (4):849­861.

Weiss, Andrew. 1995. "Human capital vs. signalling explanations of wages." The Journal of
 Economic Perspectives 9 (4):133­154.

Widiger,  T.A.   2017.       The Oxford Handbook of the Five                            Factor
 Model.     Oxford library of psychology. Oxford University Press.                       URL
 https://books.google.com/books?id=1V6UjwEACAAJ.


                                              34
Woessmann, Ludger. 2016. "The Importance of School Systems: Evidence from International
 Di erences in Student Achievement." Journal of Economic Perspectives 30 (3):3­32. URL
 https://ideas.repec.org/a/aea/jecper/v30y2016i3p3-32.html.

Wooldridge, Je rey M. 2010.         Econometric Analysis of Cross                 Section
 and Panel Data, MIT Press Books, vol. 1.         The MIT Press.                    URL
 https://ideas.repec.org/b/mtp/titles/0262232588.html.

Woolley, Anita Williams, Christopher F Chabris, Alex Pentland, Nada Hashmi, and
 Thomas W Malone. 2010. "Evidence for a collective intelligence factor in the performance
 of human groups." science 330 (6004):686­688.

Wo[ss]mann,  Ludger and Martin West. 2006.            "Class-size e ects in
 school systems around the world:       Evidence from between-grade varia-
 tion in TIMSS."       European Economic Review 50 (3):695­736.         URL
 https://ideas.repec.org/a/eee/eecrev/v50y2006i3p695-736.html.

Xiang, Chong and Stephen Yeaple. 2018. "The Production of Cognitive and Non-cognitive
  Human Capital in the Global Economy." Working Paper 24524, National Bureau of Eco-
  nomic Research. URL http://www.nber.org/papers/w24524.




                                           35
Tables and Figures




                     36
                                      Figure 1: Log Earnings on Education and Social Outcomes

                        11                                                                        11




                      10.5                                                                      10.5
       Log Earnings




                                                                                 Log Earnings
                       10                                                                        10




                       9.5                                                                       9.5



                                                                Male                                                                       Male
                                                                Female                                                                     Female
                            9                                                                         9
                                10   12       14     16        18      20                                 0       5         10        15          20
                                          Years of Schooling                                                          Network Size

     Data: Add Health restricted-use data (estimation sample).

Note: Add Health restricted-use data. Nonparametric plots of log earnings on years of schooling in panel (a) and
        network size in panel (b). Both series separate out males and females with non-zero earnings.




                                                    Figure 2: Social Capital Histograms

                      .15                                                                       .15




                       .1                                                                        .1
       Fraction




                                                                                 Fraction




                      .05                                                                       .05




                       0                                                                         0
                                0    5        10     15        20      25                                 0   5        10        15    20         25
                                             In-Degree                                                        Send & Receive Net Size


 Note: In-degree captures the total number of friendship nominations received by an individual. Network size is
 measured by counting the total number of people who either sent a nomination to an individual or received a
                                       nomination from the individual.



                                                                            37
                                                     Figure 3: Education and Social Capital Production

                                            Schooling and Study Effort                                                                Network Size and Study Effort
  Years of Schooling   15                                                                                            8




                                                                                                      Network Size
                                                                                                                     7
                       14
                                                                                                                     6


                       13                                                                                            5
                                   Never        Not hard               Hard         My best                               Never             Not hard               Hard         My best


                                       Schooling and Friend Time (weekly)                                                      Network Size and Friend Time(weekly)
                       15                                                                                            8
  Years of Schooling




                                                                                                      Network Size
                                                                                                                     7
                       14
                                                                                                                     6


                       13                                                                                            5
                               Not at all      1-2 times             3-4 times      >4 times                             Not at all        1-2 times             3-4 times      >4 times


                                             Schooling and Drinking                                                                    Network Size and Drinking
                       15                                                                                            8
  Years of Schooling




                                                                                                      Network Size
                                                                                                                     7
                       14
                                                                                                                     6


                       13                                                                                            5
                               Never        Yearly         Monthly         Weekly       Daily                            Never          Yearly         Monthly         Weekly      Daily

Data: Add Health restricted-use data




                                                             Figure 4: Friends in Adulthood on In-degree

                             5.5
    Number of Friends (W4)




                              5




                             4.5




                              4
                                     0                                              5                                                    10                                                15
                                                                                                In Degree (W1)




                                                                                                 38
                               Table 1: Add Health Summary Statistics
                                            (1)       (2)         (3)                   (4)        (5)
                                           Total     Hi IQ     Low IQ                Extrovert     Shy
Outcomes
Annual Earnings (W4)                         38522.3         42109.4     34338.8      37941.4     35966.3
                                            (45814.7)       (44699.3)   (46741.0)    (38680.8)   (40573.2)
Intermediate Outcomes
Yrs of School(W4)                             14.80           15.37       14.14        14.84       14.76
                                             (2.102)         (1.929)     (2.103)      (2.111)     (2.078)
GPA (W2)                                      2.837           2.990       2.654        2.845       2.823
                                             (0.742)         (0.734)     (0.710)      (0.735)     (0.755)
In-Degree (W1)                                4.475           4.790       4.107        4.863       4.025
                                             (3.670)         (3.838)     (3.426)      (3.813)     (3.344)
In-Degree (grade)                             3.450           3.729       3.125        3.800       3.150
                                             (3.115)         (3.239)     (2.931)      (3.293)     (2.822)
Network Size (W1)                             7.150           7.590       6.637        7.684       6.675
                                             (4.355)         (4.425)     (4.215)      (4.463)     (4.081)
Investments
Some Study Effort (W1)                        0.517           0.537       0.492        0.517       0.489
                                             (0.500)         (0.499)     (0.500)      (0.500)     (0.500)
Very Hard Study Effort (W1)                   0.375           0.345       0.411        0.379       0.416
                                             (0.484)         (0.476)     (0.492)      (0.485)     (0.493)
Sometimes Drink (W1)                          0.302           0.316       0.286        0.309       0.268
                                             (0.459)         (0.465)     (0.452)      (0.462)     (0.443)
Frequently Drink (W1)                         0.165           0.175       0.154        0.163       0.124
                                             (0.372)         (0.380)     (0.361)      (0.369)     (0.330)
Sometimes Hang with Friends (W1)              0.527           0.543       0.507        0.515       0.558
                                             (0.499)         (0.498)     (0.500)      (0.500)     (0.497)
Frequently Hang with Friends (W1)             0.387           0.375       0.401        0.402       0.345
                                             (0.487)         (0.484)     (0.490)      (0.490)     (0.475)
Predetermined Characteristics
IQ (W1)                                       101.8           112.4       89.49        102.4       100.9
                                             (14.17)         (7.445)     (9.355)      (13.65)     (14.74)
Extrovert (W2)                                0.648           0.661       0.631          1           0
                                             (0.413)         (0.407)     (0.418)        (0)         (0)
Peer IQ (WI)                                  101.0           103.4       98.13        101.2       100.2
                                             (6.773)         (6.343)     (6.135)      (6.672)     (6.873)
Peer Extrovert (W2)                           0.642           0.649       0.634        0.670       0.616
                                             (0.134)         (0.144)     (0.121)      (0.103)     (0.113)
IQ Distance                                   13.71           13.38       14.10        13.51       14.11
                                             (5.925)         (5.394)     (6.469)      (5.554)     (6.051)
Shy Distance                                  0.431           0.422       0.443        0.330       0.616
                                             (0.173)         (0.179)     (0.166)      (0.103)     (0.113)
Observations                                  9148            4925        4223         4406        2407
Note: Means by group reported; standard deviations in parentheses. W1 stands for Wave I, etc.
Frequent Drinking denotes drinking more than 2-3 times per month.
 p < 0.05,  p < 0.01,  p < 0.001




                                                       39
                                          Table 2: Social and Education Production on Investments and Endowments
                                                             (1)            (2)              (3)             (4)                               (5)
                                                     Yrs of School(W4) GPA (W2) In-Degree (grade) In-Degree (W1)                        Network Size (W1)
     Some Study Effort (W1)                            0.4795              0.1336              0.3890                 0.2984                 0.5182
                                                        [0.0668]            [0.0303]            [0.0998]              [0.1152]                [0.1214]
     Very Hard Study Effort (W1)                       0.7111              0.3429               0.2363                  0.0831               0.4531
                                                        [0.0764]            [0.0332]            [0.1065]               [0.1159]               [0.1238]
     Sometimes Drink (W1)                              -0.2023             -0.1104             0.3258                 0.4486                 0.4167
                                                        [0.0505]            [0.0218]            [0.0807]               [0.0991]               [0.1091]
     Frequently Drink (W1)                             -0.3541             -0.2177             0.3562                 0.6156                 0.5615
                                                        [0.0635]            [0.0281]            [0.1172]               [0.1354]               [0.1452]
     Sometimes Hang with Friends (W1)                   0.1114               0.0354            0.5567                 0.6703                 0.6761
                                                        [0.0659]            [0.0359]            [0.1151]               [0.1323]               [0.1697]
     Frequently Hang with Friends (W1)                  -0.1101             -0.0098            0.7731                 1.0325                 1.0602
                                                        [0.0728]            [0.0396]            [0.1226]               [0.1315]               [0.1697]




40
     IQ (W1)                                           0.0342              0.0114              0.0087                 0.0071                 0.0123
                                                        [0.0022]            [0.0009]            [0.0024]              [0.0031]                [0.0038]
     Extrovert (W2)                                      0.0375              0.0047            0.3920                 0.5237                 0.6255
                                                        [0.0454]            [0.0176]            [0.0829]               [0.0949]               [0.1059]
     Mean IQ                                             0.0062              0.0065              0.0042                 0.0075                -0.0053
                                                        [0.0093]            [0.0056]            [0.0167]               [0.0197]               [0.0270]
     Mean Extroverted                                   -0.0075              0.0071              0.4468               0.6814                  0.8827
                                                        [0.1444]            [0.1276]            [0.3111]              [0.3364]                [0.4400]
     Observations                                         8837                6065                8837                  8837                    8837
     R2                                                  0.1973              0.1529              0.0772                0.0726                  0.0734
     Source: Add Health restricted-use data. W1 stands for Wave I, etc. Includes school fixed effects. Sample size is smaller than main estimation sample
     due to missing effort values. Individual controls include age, years at school, household income, mother's education, height, weight, physical
     development, and indicators for whether the student is white, female, father is present in the HH, and food stamp recipient.Cohort level controls
     include mean extrovert, mean IQ, mean age, mean years at school, mean HH income, mean mother's schooling, fraction female, fraction live with
     father, and fraction food stamp recipients. Standard errors are clustered at the school level.
        p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01
                         Table 3: Adult Social Capital Production
                                              (1)                     (2)
                                         Friends(W4)             Friends(W4)
Yrs of School(W4)                              0.1759                       0.1764
                                                [0.0215]                     [0.0213]
In-Degree (W1)                                 0.0424                       0.0456
                                                [0.0099]                     [0.0099]
Moderate Drinker (W3)                           0.1302                       0.1534
                                                [0.0747]                     [0.0780]
Frequent Drinker (W3)                          0.5629                       0.5762
                                                [0.1243]                     [0.1255]
Sometimes Hang with Friends (W3)               0.2993                       0.2935
                                                [0.0702]                     [0.0723]
Frequently Hang with Friends (W3)              0.7513                       0.7266
                                                [0.0777]                     [0.0787]
Some Study Effort                                                             0.0991
                                                                             [0.1093]
Very Hard Study Effort                                                      0.2507
                                                                            [0.1080]
Sometimes Drink                                                            -0.2185
                                                                            [0.0697]
Frequently Drink                                                             -0.1052
                                                                             [0.0937]
Sometimes Hang with Friends                                                   0.0906
                                                                             [0.1284]
Frequently Hang with Friends                                                0.3397
                                                                            [0.1323]
IQ (W1)                                          0.0032                       0.0032
                                                [0.0030]                     [0.0029]
Extrovert (W2)                                  0.1370                      0.1396
                                                [0.0705]                    [0.0687]
Observations                                      7597                         7346
R2                                               0.0727                       0.0777
Source: Add Health restricted-use data. W1 stands for Wave I, etc. Includes school fixed effects.
Sample size is smaller than main estimation sample due to missing effort values. Individual controls
include age, years at school, household income, mother's education, height, weight, physical
development, and indicators for whether the student is white, female, father is present in the
HH, and food stamp recipient. Cohort level controls include mean extrovert, mean IQ, mean age,
mean years at school, mean HH income, mean mother's schooling, fraction female, fraction live with
father, and fraction food stamp recipients. Standard errors are clustered at the school level.
 p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01




                                                41
                          Table 4: First Stage Estimates for Friendship Nominations
                                             (1)             (2)            (3)                                  (4)
                                             All             F-F           M-M                                   F-M
Pairwise White Distance                     -0.00754              -0.0118         -0.00801                  -0.00516
                                             [0.00131]             [0.00190]       [0.00150]                 [0.000947]
Pairwise Female Distance                    -0.00625                   0                 0                         0
                                             [0.000876]               [.]               [.]                       [.]
Pairwise Age Distance                       -0.00237             -0.00367         -0.00300                  -0.00143
                                             [0.000360]           [0.000587]       [0.000506]                [0.000237]
Pairwise Years-at-School Distance           -0.00261             -0.00409         -0.00338                  -0.00153
                                             [0.000261]           [0.000452]       [0.000397]                [0.000165]
White-Teacher Distance Receiver              0.00382              0.00633           0.00361                  0.00253
                                             [0.00148]            [0.00260]         [0.00184]                [0.000856]
Total Live with Father Distance              0.00000361           0.00000739       0.00000752               0.000000711
                                            [0.00000312]         [0.00000449]     [0.00000481]              [0.00000385]
Total Mother's Edu Distance                 0.000000210          -9.62e-08        0.000000258               0.000000224
                                           [0.000000139]      [0.000000342]      [0.000000304]             [0.000000193]
Total Physical Maturity Distance           0.000000713        -0.000000634        0.000000455               0.00000128
                                           [0.000000401]      [0.000000875]      [0.000000665]             [0.000000735]
Grade Cohort Size                          -0.0000197         -0.0000327          -0.0000236                 -0.0000114
                                           [0.00000775]        [0.0000108]        [0.00000932]              [0.00000697]
N                                            3,519,584             907,608           867,662                  1,744,314
F stat of Instruments                          14.88                15.92             16.23                     16.23
P-value                                       0.0000               0.0000            0.0000                    0.0000
Source: Add Health restricted-use data. Includes school fixed effects. Estimation sample includes all of the pairwise combinations
of students in the in-home survey with all students in the cohort. Pairwise distance variables are constructed by taking the
absolute value of the distance between student i (sender) and student j (receiver). Total distance measures sum up the pairwise
distances over the receiver (j). Additional controls include receiver covariates (IQ, extraversion, age, white, physical maturity
, father in HH, mother's edu,) and peer means of these measures. Sender covariates are not included because nominations from
students who were not included in the in-home survey have missing covariates. Standard errors are clustered at the school level.
 p < .1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01




                                                            42
                       Table 5: First Stage Estimates for Schooling
                                            (1)                      (2)
                                         Schooling                  GPA
IQ                                           0.0334                      0.0109
                                               [13.86]                     [11.47]
Extrovert                                    0.000574                      -0.0188
                                                 [0.01]                     [-1.11]
Total Female Distance                       0.00304                      -0.000148
                                                 [3.38]                     [-0.21]
Total White Distance                         -0.000156                    0.000145
                                                [-0.35]                      [0.94]
Total Yrs at School Distance                -0.0000980                  -0.0000194
                                                [-1.05]                     [-0.36]
Total Age Distance                         -0.000900                    -0.0000440
                                                [-4.47]                     [-0.45]
Total Mother's Edu Distance                -0.000166                    -0.0000364
                                                [-2.69]                     [-1.59]
Total Father in HH Distance                 -0.00108                     -0.000160
                                                [-2.66]                     [-0.53]
Total Physical Maturity Distance           -0.000977                   -0.000320
                                                [-5.34]                     [-2.79]
White-Teacher Distance                          -0.175                   -0.217
                                                [-1.52]                     [-5.08]
Grade Cohort Size                            0.000279                   -0.0000963
                                                 [0.40]                     [-0.11]
Mean Extroverted                               -0.0370                      0.0167
                                                [-0.25]                      [0.13]
Mean IQ                                       0.00292                     0.00392
                                                 [0.29]                      [0.71]
Fraction White                                 -0.884                     -0.00407
                                                [-1.81]                     [-0.02]
Fraction Female                                -0.793                      -0.0926
                                                [-1.68]                     [-0.37]
Mean Age                                      0.582                       0.105
                                                 [9.57]                      [3.63]
Mean Yrs at School                             -0.0255                     -0.0311
                                                [-0.50]                     [-0.95]
Fraction Food Stamp Recipient                 -0.773                        -0.289
                                                [-2.22]                     [-1.34]
Mean HH Income                               0.000553                    -0.000773
                                                 [0.41]                     [-0.84]
Fraction Father Present                          0.304                      -0.159
                                                 [0.58]                     [-0.56]
Mean Mother's Education                       0.215                         0.0194
                                                 [3.02]                      [0.40]
Mean Physical Development                      -0.0217                    -0.153
                                                [-0.21]                     [-2.26]
Mean of Dep. Var.                               14.80                       2.84
R-squared                                        0.19                        0.11
N                                               9,148                       6,297
F stat of Instruments                            9.83                        6.42
P-value                                         0.000                       0.000
Source: Add Health restricted-use data. Includes school fixed effects. Individual controls include
age, years at school, household income, mother's education, height, weight, physical development,
and indicators for whether the student is white, female, and father is present in the household.
Standard errors are clustered at the school level.
 p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01




                                                43
                       Table 6: Wage Equation Estimates on Social Capital Measures
                                              (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)                     (5)
                                             OLS         OLS        OLS         OLS                     OLS
Years of schooling                           0.0997          0.0991      0.0981        0.0979        0.0991
                                              [0.0064]        [0.0064]    [0.0064]      [0.0065]      [0.0063]
Network Size                                 0.0111
                                              [0.0025]
In Degree                                                    0.0174
                                                              [0.0031]
Out-Degree                                                   -0.0014
                                                             [0.0034]
In-Degree (grade)                                                        0.0218
                                                                          [0.0036]
In Degree (outside grade)                                                  0.0007
                                                                          [0.0071]
In-Degree (grade): opposite gender                                                      0.0113
                                                                                        [0.0058]
In-Degree (grade): same gender                                                         0.0325
                                                                                        [0.0053]
In-Degree (grade): low engagement                                                                     0.0110
                                                                                                      [0.0043]
In-Degree (grade): high engagement                                                                   0.0332
                                                                                                      [0.0073]
IQ                                            -0.0001        -0.0001      -0.0001       -0.0001       -0.0000
                                              [0.0008]       [0.0008]     [0.0008]      [0.0008]      [0.0008]
Extrovert                                      0.0328         0.0304       0.0307        0.0326        0.0295
                                              [0.0218]       [0.0216]     [0.0216]      [0.0217]      [0.0215]
Observations                                    9148           9148         9148          9148          9148
R2                                             0.0973         0.0988       0.0994        0.0999        0.0993
Source: Add Health restricted-use data. Includes school fixed effects. Individual controls include age, years
at school, household income, mother's education, height, weight, physical development, and indicators for
whether the student is white, female, father is present in the HH, and food stamp recipient.Cohort level
controls include mean extrovert, mean IQ, mean age, mean years at school, mean HH income, mean mother's
schooling, fraction female, fraction live with father, and fraction food stamp recipients. Standard errors
are clustered at the school level.
   p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01




                                                        44
                     Table 7: Earnings on Social and Study Effort
                                             (1)                  (2)
                                       Log Wages (W4)       Log Wages (W4)
Years of schooling                                                    0.1040
                                                                       [0.0064]
IQ                                         0.0035                      -0.0001
                                            [0.0008]                   [0.0008]
Extrovert                                   0.0549                    0.0509
                                            [0.0229]                  [0.0227]
Some Study Effort                           0.0728                      0.0235
                                            [0.0300]                   [0.0298]
Very Hard Study Effort                      0.0791                      0.0063
                                            [0.0359]                   [0.0354]
Sometimes Drink                             -0.0245                    -0.0033
                                            [0.0229]                   [0.0219]
Frequently Drink                            -0.0295                     0.0074
                                            [0.0331]                   [0.0313]
Sometimes Hang with Friends                 0.0919                     0.0797
                                            [0.0415]                   [0.0404]
Frequently Hang with Friends                0.0854                    0.0964
                                            [0.0448]                  [0.0448]
Observations                                  8870                       8870
R2                                           0.0636                     0.0977
Source: Add Health restricted-use data. Includes school fixed effects. Sample size is
smaller than main estimation sample due to missing effort values. Individual controls
include age, years at school, household income, mother's education, height, weight,
physical development, and indicators for whether the student is white, female, father
is present in the HH, and food stamp recipient. Cohort level controls include mean
extrovert, mean IQ, mean age, mean years at school, mean HH income, mean mother's
schooling, fraction female, fraction live withfather, and fraction food stamp recipients.
Standard errors are clustered at the school level.
   p < .1 ,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01




                                           45
                                    Table 8: Wage Equation GMM-IV Estimates
                           (1)            (2)       (3)       (4)         (5)                        (6)           (7)               (8)
                           OLS        IV-GMM IV-GMM IV-GMM             IV-GMM                     IV-GMM        IV-GMM               OLS
Years of schooling      0.0981          0.1221       0.0812         0.1776         0.0898          0.1716       0.0910
                         [0.0064]       [0.0678]      [0.0121]       [0.0425]       [0.0072]       [0.0691]      [0.0096]
In-Degree (grade)       0.0219         0.0964         0.1052         0.0417        0.0585           0.0411       0.0568
                         [0.0036]      [0.0465]       [0.0423]       [0.0227]       [0.0211]       [0.0351]      [0.0307]
IQ                       -0.0001        -0.0015       -0.0002       -0.0038         -0.0004        -0.0028       -0.0002       0.0034
                         [0.0008]       [0.0023]      [0.0008]       [0.0017]       [0.0007]       [0.0023]      [0.0008]       [0.0008]
Extrovert                 0.0308        -0.0014       -0.0050         0.0268         0.0169         0.0221        0.0157        0.0404
                         [0.0216]       [0.0286]      [0.0273]       [0.0232]       [0.0223]       [0.0256]      [0.0247]       [0.0225]
First Stage                            Pairwise      Pairwise      Aggregate       Aggregate      Pairwise       Pairwise
                                        OLS           OLS                                          Probit         Probit
Edu Endog?                   N            Y             N               Y               N            Y              N              N
N                          9,148        9,111         9,111           9,147           9,147        9,111          9,111          9,148
Source: Add Health restricted-use data. Includes school fixed effects. Individual controls include age, years at school, household
income, mother's education, height, weight, physical development, and indicators for whether the student is white, female, father
is present in the HH, and food stamp recipient.Cohort level controls include mean extrovert, mean IQ, mean age, mean years at school,
mean HH income, mean mother's schooling, fraction female, fraction live with father, and fraction food stamp recipients. Standard
errors are clustered at the school level.
 p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01




                                                             46
                              Table 9: Social and Study Effort on Endowments
                           (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)                         (5)                (6)
                        Some Study High Study Some Drink Frequent Drink                         Some Hang        Frequent Hang
IQ                          0.0002         -0.0006           0.0002            -0.0005           0.0015            -0.0018
                           [0.0004]        [0.0004]         [0.0004]           [0.0003]           [0.0004]          [0.0004]
Extrovert                 0.0245          -0.0371          0.0372             0.0321             -0.0450            0.0569
                          [0.0120]         [0.0121]         [0.0099]           [0.0102]           [0.0112]           [0.0112]
Mean IQ                     0.0034         -0.0027           0.0015             0.0019             0.0015            -0.0011
                           [0.0023]        [0.0021]         [0.0026]           [0.0023]           [0.0027]           [0.0026]
Mean Extroverted            0.0451         -0.0798          -0.0714            -0.0095             0.0372            -0.0055
                           [0.0446]        [0.0466]         [0.0460]           [0.0437]           [0.0587]           [0.0545]
Observations                8852             8852             9133               9133               9147              9147
R2                         0.0125           0.0327           0.0183             0.0427             0.0078            0.0123
Source: Add Health restricted-use data. W1 stands for Wave I, etc. Includes school fixed effects. Sample size is smaller than main
estimation sample due to missing effort values. Individual controls include age, years at school, household income, mother's
education, height, weight, physical development, and indicators for whether the student is white, female, father is present in the
HH, and food stamp recipient. Cohort level controls include mean extrovert, mean IQ, mean age, mean years at school, mean HH
income, mean mother's schooling, fraction female, fraction live with father, and fraction food stamp recipients. Standard errors
are clustered at the school level.
 p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01




                                                           47
                                                 Table 10: Social and Education Production by Endowments
                                                   (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)       (5)      (6)                   (7)            (8)
                                                 School      School     School      School    Net Size Net Size              Net Size       Net Size
     Some Study Effort                           0.546      0.340       0.289        0.647         0.678         0.249        0.144         0.813
                                                  (6.68)     (3.47)      (2.33)       (7.33)        (4.05)       (1.28)       (0.48)         (4.41)
     Very Hard Study Effort                      0.904      0.430      0.488         0.938         0.640         0.161        0.134         0.766
                                                 (10.26)     (3.57)     (3.54)        (8.47)        (3.82)       (0.74)       (0.41)         (4.23)
     Sometimes Drink                             -0.327     -0.0410    -0.254         -0.114        0.354       0.426        0.399           0.414
                                                  (-5.06)   (-0.57)     (-2.53)       (-1.68)        (2.60)      (2.98)       (2.12)          (2.55)
     Frequently Drink                            -0.443     -0.247     -0.464        -0.363        0.569         0.410        0.389         0.693
                                                  (-5.12)    (-2.63)    (-3.93)       (-4.25)       (3.18)       (1.85)       (1.59)         (3.70)
     Sometimes Hang with Friends                 0.201      -0.0139     -0.152         0.207       0.983         0.369       -0.00359       0.847
                                                  (2.45)    (-0.13)     (-1.10)        (1.95)       (5.27)       (1.34)       (-0.01)        (3.28)
     Frequently Hang with Friends                 0.0178    -0.263      -0.246        -0.119       1.485        0.603        0.636          1.127
                                                  (0.19)     (-2.34)    (-1.62)       (-1.09)       (6.95)       (2.54)       (2.25)         (4.21)




48
     IQ                                          0.0375     0.0249     0.0346        0.0368        -0.00555     0.00877      0.00940        0.0158
                                                   (8.98)     (6.65)    (11.31)       (13.86)       (-0.66)      (0.90)       (1.74)          (2.66)
     Extrovert                                    0.0570    0.00927         0             0        0.809        0.393            0               0
                                                  (1.02)     (0.13)        (.)           (.)        (5.78)       (2.22)         (.)             (.)
     Mean IQ                                     -0.00500    0.0212     0.00891       0.00762      0.00800       -0.0206      0.0374         -0.0121
                                                  (-0.48)    (1.32)      (0.41)        (0.56)       (0.23)       (-0.53)      (0.83)         (-0.34)
     Mean Extroverted                             0.0907     -0.248     -0.247       -0.00720       0.718        1.200        0.815          -0.357
                                                  (0.49)     (-0.74)    (-0.58)       (-0.02)       (1.39)       (1.94)       (0.90)         (-0.44)
     Sample                                       Hi IQ     Low IQ       Shy         Extrovert      Hi IQ       Low IQ         Shy          Extrovert
     R-squared                                    0.1782    0.1458      0.1953        0.2125        0.0707      0.0791        0.0774         0.0700
     N                                            4,848      3,989      2,311          4,254        4,848        3,989        2,311           4,254
     Source: Add Health restricted-use data. W1 stands for Wave I, etc. Includes school fixed effects. Sample size is smaller than main estimation sample
     due to missing effort values. Individual controls include age, years at school, household income, mother's education, height, weight, physical
     development, and indicators for whether the student is white, female, father is present in the HH, and food stamp recipient.Cohort level controls
     include mean extrovert, mean IQ, mean age, mean years at school, mean HH income, mean mother's schooling, fraction female, fraction live with
     father, and fraction food stamp recipients. Standard errors are clustered at the school level.
        p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01
Appendix




           49
                                                Figure A.1: Education on In Degree

                                                                                                       1
                       15.5




                                                                                                      .5
                                                                        Years of Schooling Residual




                        15
  Years of Schooling




                                                                                                       0




                       14.5

                                                                                                      -.5




                        14                                                                            -1
                              0   5                    10     15                                            -10   -5         0              5   10
                                      In Degree (W1)                                                                   In Degree Residual

Data: Add Health restricted-use data




                                                                   50
         Table A.1: First Stage Estimates for Friendship Nomination cont'd (Receiver Controls)
                                             (1)                 (2)              (3)                          (4)
                                             All                 F-F              M-M                          F-M
IQ (W1) Receiver                        0.0000327          0.0000378            0.0000188                 0.0000340
                                        [0.00000854]       [0.0000160]         [0.0000146]                [0.00000887]
Extrovert Receiver                       0.00144             0.000822            0.000435                  0.00229
                                         [0.000378]         [0.000516]          [0.000410]                 [0.000470]
Age (W2) Receiver                       -0.000636           -0.00111          -0.000941                    -0.000370
                                         [0.000171]          [0.000298]        [0.000300]                  [0.000195]
Female Receiver                         0.000968                  0                  0                     -0.000448
                                         [0.000330]              [.]                [.]                    [0.000390]
White Receiver                            0.00163            0.00265             0.00162                   0.00102
                                         [0.000888]          [0.00158]          [0.00114]                  [0.000497]
Height Receiver                         0.0000879            0.0000936          0.0000934                  0.0000777
                                        [0.0000343]         [0.0000649]        [0.0000596]                 [0.0000429]
Weight Receiver                        -0.0000456         -0.0000558         -0.0000286                  -0.0000518
                                        [0.00000750]       [0.00000828]       [0.00000658]                [0.0000102]
Physical Maturity Receiver              0.000883            0.000531           0.000657                    0.00114
                                         [0.000218]         [0.000209]          [0.000194]                 [0.000286]
Years at School Receiver                 0.00217            0.00262            0.00298                     0.00140
                                         [0.000263]         [0.000420]         [0.000394]                  [0.000221]
HH Income receiver                      0.0000207          0.0000189          0.0000221                   0.0000213
                                        [0.00000349]       [0.00000680]       [0.00000512]                [0.00000364]
Food Stamp Recipient receiver           -0.00191            -0.00224           -0.00163                    -0.00182
                                         [0.000489]          [0.000661]        [0.000738]                   [0.000514]
Father in HH receiver                     0.00117            0.00167            0.00249                     0.000441
                                         [0.000646]         [0.000948]          [0.00105]                  [0.000828]
Mother in HH Receiver                     0.00106           -0.0000609          0.00217                     0.000761
                                         [0.000572]          [0.00121]          [0.00107]                  [0.000609]
Mother's Educ                             0.0000210         -0.0000185          0.0000610                   0.0000224
                                         [0.0000475]        [0.0000667]        [0.0000637]                 [0.0000601]
HH size receiver                        -0.000211           -0.000303          -0.000309                   -0.000166
                                        [0.0000959]         [0.000177]         [0.000171]                  [0.000104]
N                                         3,519,584           907,608            867,662                    1,744,314
F stat of Instruments                       14.88              15.92              16.23                       16.23
P-value                                    0.0000             0.0000             0.0000                      0.0000
Source: Add Health restricted-use data. Includes school fixed effects. Estimation sample includes all of the pairwise combinations
of students in the in-home survey with all students in the cohort. Pairwise distance variables are constructed by taking the
absolute value of the distance between student i (sender) and student j (receiver). Total distance measures sum up the pairwise
distances over the receiver (j). Additional controls include receiver covariates (IQ, extraversion, age, white, physical maturity
, father in HH, mother's edu,) and peer means of these measures. Sender covariates are not included because nominations from
students who were not included in the in-home survey have missing covariates. Standard errors are clustered at the school level.
 p < .1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01




                                                            51
             Table A.2: First Stage Estimates for Friendship Nomination cont'd (Peer Means)
                                             (1)            (2)             (3)                            (4)
                                             All            F-F             M-M                            F-M
Mean IQ                                   0.000152        0.000148       0.000230                        0.000134
                                         [0.000113]      [0.000171]      [0.000138]                     [0.000114]
Mean Extroverted                          0.00184          0.00138         0.00238                       0.00154
                                         [0.00176]        [0.00295]       [0.00191]                     [0.00171]
Fraction White                            0.0150          0.00781         0.0248                          0.0146
                                         [0.00967]        [0.0124]        [0.0117]                      [0.00974]
Fraction Female                          -0.00433        -0.0431          0.0320                         -0.00287
                                         [0.00899]        [0.0141]         [0.0103]                      [0.0100]
Mean Age                                 -0.000811       -0.000564        -0.00171                      -0.000450
                                         [0.00120]       [0.00206]        [0.00140]                     [0.00112]
Mean Yrs at School                       -0.000143      -0.0000907       -0.000441                      0.0000686
                                         [0.00120]       [0.00238]       [0.00142]                      [0.00112]
Fraction Food Stamp Recipient             0.00272         -0.00129         0.00399                       0.00368
                                         [0.00409]        [0.00674]       [0.00566]                     [0.00348]
Mean HH Income                          0.0000243        0.0000380       0.0000213                      0.0000180
                                        [0.0000133]     [0.0000354]     [0.0000200]                    [0.0000112]
Fraction Father Present                   -0.0102         -0.00654        -0.0145                       -0.00988
                                         [0.00881]        [0.0131]        [0.0119]                      [0.00895]
Mean Mother's Education                   0.00110          0.00159        0.000527                       0.00112
                                         [0.00120]        [0.00193]       [0.00141]                     [0.00126]
Mean Physical Development                -0.00136          0.00179       -0.00325                       -0.00189
                                         [0.00113]        [0.00195]       [0.00152]                     [0.00123]
N                                        3,519,584        907,608          867,662                      1,744,314
F stat of Instruments                      14.88           15.92            16.23                         16.23
P-value                                   0.0000          0.0000           0.0000                        0.0000
Source: Add Health restricted-use data. Includes school fixed effects. Estimation sample includes all of the pairwise combinations
of students in the in-home survey with all students in the cohort. Pairwise distance variables are constructed by taking the
absolute value of the distance between student i (sender) and student j (receiver). Total distance measures sum up the pairwise
distances over the receiver (j). Additional controls include receiver covariates (IQ, extraversion, age, white, physical maturity
, father in HH, mother's edu,) and peer means of these measures. Sender covariates are not included because nominations from
students who were not included in the in-home survey have missing covariates. Standard errors are clustered at the school level.
 p < .1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01




                                                            52
                         Table A.3: Test for Coordination in Friendship Formation
                                                       (1)                       (2)
                                                 School Sample             In Home Sample
Pairwise White Distance                             -0.00881                        -0.00948
                                                     [0.00107]                       [0.00168]
Pairwise Female Distance                            -0.00565                        -0.00616
                                                     [0.000484]                      [0.000866]
Pairwise Age Distance                               -0.00205                        -0.00263
                                                     [0.000198]                      [0.000342]
Pairwise Years-at-School Distance                   -0.00294                        -0.00352
                                                     [0.000245]                      [0.000361]
Total White Distance (Sender)                      0.0000181                        0.0000167
                                                   [0.00000338]                     [0.00000431]
Total Female Distance (Sender)                     -0.0000267                      -0.0000340
                                                    [0.00000517]                    [0.00000711]
Total Age Distance (Sender)                        0.00000210                      0.00000344
                                                   [0.000000547]                   [0.000000865]
Total Yrs at School Distance (Sender)              0.00000243                      0.00000275
                                                   [0.000000595]                   [0.000000846]
Total White Distance (Receiver)                    0.0000180                        0.0000166
                                                   [0.00000338]                     [0.00000458]
Total Female Distance (Receiver)                   -0.0000107                        -0.0000114
                                                   [0.00000476]                     [0.00000692]
Total Age Distance (Receiver)                      0.00000188                      0.00000415
                                                   [0.000000564]                   [0.000000961]
Total Yrs at School Distance (Receiver)            0.00000190                      0.00000213
                                                   [0.000000604]                   [0.000000844]
N                                                    21,944,154                       3,524,859
F stat of Sender Homophily                              18.51                           13.82
P-value                                                0.0000                          0.0000
Source: Add Health restricted-use data. Includes school fixed effects. The estimation sample in Column 1
consists of all of the pairwise combinations of students within a given cohort, which is derived from the school
survey of all students. The in school sample is larger than our main analytic sample (Column 2) because
because not all students surveyed in school were selected for the in home survey, which included additional
survey questions. To make estimates comparable, we limit covariates to variables that can be
constructed from questions in the school survey. Controls include sender and receiver covariates (female, age,
white, yrs at school, and peer means of these measures. Pairwise distance variables are constructed by
taking the absolute value of the distance between student i (sender) and student j (receiver). Variables
labeled as total distance (receiver) sum up the pairwise distances over the receiver (j). Variables labeled
as total distance (sender) sum up the pairwise distances over the sender (i)
Standard errors are clustered at the school level.
   p < .1 ,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01




                                                      53
                             Table A.4: First Stage Estimates
                                           (1)         (2)                  (3)         (4)
                                        Schooling     GPA                 In-deg     In-grade
IQ                                           0.033         0.011            0.004    0.007
                                              [0.002]       [0.001]       [0.003]      [0.002]
Extrovert                                       0.001       -0.019      0.582        0.434
                                              [0.044]       [0.017]       [0.091]      [0.081]
Total Female Distance                        0.003          -0.000       0.008       0.008
                                              [0.001]       [0.001]       [0.002]      [0.002]
Total White Distance                           -0.000        0.000      -0.002       -0.001
                                              [0.000]       [0.000]       [0.000]      [0.000]
Total Yrs at School Distance                   -0.000       -0.000      -0.001       -0.001
                                              [0.000]       [0.000]       [0.000]      [0.000]
Total Age Distance                          -0.001          -0.000        -0.001      -0.001
                                              [0.000]       [0.000]       [0.000]      [0.000]
Total Mother's Edu Distance                 -0.000          -0.000          0.000        0.000
                                              [0.000]       [0.000]       [0.000]      [0.000]
Total Father in HH Distance                 -0.001          -0.000       -0.002        -0.002
                                              [0.000]       [0.000]       [0.001]      [0.001]
Total Physical Maturity Distance            -0.001        -0.000            0.000        0.000
                                              [0.000]       [0.000]       [0.000]      [0.000]
White-Teacher Distance                         -0.175     -0.217           -0.139      -0.251
                                              [0.115]       [0.043]       [0.155]      [0.138]
Grade Cohort Size                               0.000       -0.000         -0.002       -0.002
                                              [0.001]       [0.001]       [0.002]      [0.002]
Mean Extroverted                               -0.037        0.017        0.682          0.471
                                              [0.147]       [0.124]       [0.347]      [0.316]
Mean IQ                                         0.003        0.004          0.019        0.017
                                              [0.010]       [0.005]       [0.017]      [0.015]
Fraction White                                -0.884        -0.004          0.541       -0.105
                                              [0.488]       [0.259]       [1.065]      [0.992]
Fraction Female                               -0.793        -0.093          0.548       1.384
                                              [0.471]       [0.251]       [0.893]      [0.811]
Mean Age                                     0.582         0.105        0.311            0.051
                                              [0.061]       [0.029]       [0.111]      [0.097]
Mean Yrs at School                             -0.025       -0.031         -0.079       -0.077
                                              [0.051]       [0.033]       [0.124]      [0.110]
Fraction Food Stamp Recipient                -0.773         -0.289          1.086        0.491
                                              [0.348]       [0.216]       [0.861]      [0.777]
Mean HH Income                                  0.001       -0.001          0.001        0.001
                                              [0.001]       [0.001]       [0.002]      [0.002]
Fraction Father Present                         0.304       -0.159         -1.066       -0.762
                                              [0.524]       [0.285]       [1.251]      [1.043]
Mean Mother's Education                     0.215            0.019          0.089        0.169
                                              [0.071]       [0.049]       [0.158]      [0.138]
Mean Physical Development                      -0.022      -0.153          -0.076       -0.310
                                              [0.105]       [0.068]       [0.263]      [0.250]
Mean of Dep. Var.                             14.80         2.84          4.47         3.45
N                                             9,148         6,297         9,148        9,148
F stat of Instruments                          9.83          6.42         14.68        17.30
P-value                                       0.000         0.000         0.000        0.000
Source: Add Health restricted-use data. W1 stands for Wave I, etc. Includes school fixed effects.
Individual controls include age, years at school, household income, mother's education, height,
weight, physical development, and indicators for whether the student is white, female, and father
                                               54
is present in the household. Standard errors are clustered at the school level.
 p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01
                     Table A.5: Variance Covariance Matrix of Network Measures
                                               In Degree     In Degree         High Engagement
                                                          (within-grade)         Nominations
                                                                                (within-grade)

                  In Degree                         11.60
          In Degree (within-grade)                   8.99         8.28
High Engagement Nominations (within-grade)          3.16          2.33                      1.94
Note: This table presents the variance covariance matrix of residualized in-degree, in-degree (within grade),
and within grade in degree (restricting to high engagement nominations).




                                                   55
                                Table A.6: Adult Social Capital on In Degree
                                (1)              (2)             (3)         (4)                              (5)
                         Extraversion(W4) Friends(W4) Depress(W4) Ever Marry(W4)                           Work(W4)
Years of schooling             0.0319               0.1744            -0.1453                 0.0021       0.0117
                               [0.0180]              [0.0197]           [0.0170]             [0.0028]       [0.0017]
In Degree                     0.0804                0.0494               0.0059               0.0025         0.0010
                               [0.0089]              [0.0093]           [0.0070]             [0.0015]       [0.0007]
IQ                            -0.0090               0.0051             -0.0052              -0.0010          0.0002
                               [0.0037]              [0.0025]           [0.0020]             [0.0004]       [0.0002]
Extrovert                     1.3863                 0.1165            -0.1640                0.0205        -0.0067
                               [0.0760]              [0.0664]           [0.0696]             [0.0134]       [0.0058]
Mean of Dep. Var.                13.26                4.76               2.47                 0.50           0.93
R-squared                         0.06                 0.05               0.04                 0.04           0.03
N                                9,141                9,037              9,148                9,143          9,823
Source: Add Health restricted-use data. Includes school fixed effects. Extraversion and the CESD
Depression scores are variables constructed by ADD Health. Adult Friendships refers to the number of
reported friends in Wave 4. Additional controls include age, years at school, household income, mother's
education, height, weight, physical development, and indicators for whether the student is white,
female, and father is present in the household. Cohort level controls include mean extrovert,
mean IQ, mean age, mean years at school, mean HH income, mean mother's schooling, fraction
female, fraction live withfather, and fraction food stamp recipients. Standard errors are clustered
at the school level.
 p < .1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01




                                                            56
Appendix 1: Equilibrium
There may be multiple equilibria in (11), but if we can show that (11) is a contraction
mapping, then there is a unique equilibrium. In particular, suppose the function gs takes a
partial linear form
                               Q                                                             R
                                                      ÿ
                            gs are ai (X )  rs                pji (X ) E [ Sj | X ] , Xi , ,i b
                                                      j "=i
                                             ÿ
                       = re ai (X )  rs              pji (X ) E [ Sj | X ] + u (Xi ) + ,i
                                             j "=i


Define the n  n matrix p (X ) by
                                     S                                                   T
                                            0     p21 (X )             · · · pn1 (X )
                                     W                                                   X
                                     W
                                     W   p12 (X )    0                 · · · pn2 (X )    X
                                                                                         X
                          p (X ) =   W
                                             .        .                ..        .       X
                                     W
                                     W       .
                                             .        .
                                                      .                    .     .
                                                                                 .
                                                                                         X
                                                                                         X
                                     U                                                   V
                                         p1n (X ) p2n (X )             ···      0

Assume |rs /max (p (X ))| < 1, where /max (p (X )) is the largest eigenvalue of the matrix p (X ).
Then (11) has a unique equilibrium.


Appendix 2: Empirical Implications
Proof of Proposition 1 (individual characteristics)

Proof. Part (1): We first examine the e ect of Xi on socializing and in-degree. Recall that
in equilibrium the optimal socializing Siú satisfies the first-order condition

                      ^ Vs ú                                ÿ               Ë - È
                                                                              ú-
                           (Si , Xi , ,i ) = re ai (X )  rs       pji (X ) E Sj -X                            (15)
                      ^ Si                                  j "=i


Take the derivative of both sides with respect to Xi

                 ^ 2 Vs ú             ^ Siú   ^ 2 Vs
                       (S , X  , ,  )       +        (S ú , Xi , ,i )
                 ^ Si2 i
                             i    i
                                      ^ Xi ^ S i ^ Xi i
                                                                                                  Ë   -   È
                                                                                                      -
                    ^ ai             ÿ  ^ pji                 Ë
                                                                   ú-
                                                                     - È     ÿ               ^ E Sj
                                                                                                  ú
                                                                                                    -X
             = re        (X )  rs             (X ) E              Sj - X  rs   pji (X )
                    ^ Xi          j "=i ^ Xi                                   j "=i              ^ Xi




                                                         57
from which we can derive
                               A                         B1 A
             ^ Siú    ^ 2 Vs ú                                            ^ 2 Vs                        ^ ai
                   =        (S , Xi , ,i )                          ·              (Siú , Xi , ,i )  re      (X )
             ^ Xi     ^ Si2 i                                           ^ S i ^ Xi                      ^ Xi
                                                                                                             Ë    -    ÈR
                                                                                                                  -
                                         ÿ       ^ pji          Ë
                                                                     ú-
                                                                       - È      ÿ                    ^ E Sj
                                                                                                          ú
                                                                                                            -X
                                   +rs                 (X ) E       Sj - X + rs   pji (X )                             b
                                         j "=i   ^ Xi                                  j "=i                 ^ Xi

                   ^ 2 Vs
                                                                              ú
By assumption               (Siú , Xi , ,i ) < 0, so the sign of                  is given by the sign of
                                                                           ^ Si
                   ^ Si 2                                                  ^ Xi

                                                                                                                            Ë   -   È
      2                                                                                                                         -
     ^ Vs                          ^ ai                 ÿ
                                                        ^ pji                     Ë
                                                                                       ú-
                                                                                         - È      ÿ                    ^ E Sj
                                                                                                                            ú
                                                                                                                              -X
              (Siú , Xi , ,i )  re      (X ) + rs             (X ) E                  Sj - X + rs   pji (X )
   ^ S i ^ Xi                      ^ Xi           j "=i ^ Xi                                         j "=i                  ^ Xi

                                                                ^Sú
In other words, this means that the sign of ^ Xii will depend on how Xi a ects the marginal
                           ^ 2 Vs
enjoyment of socializing ^ S i ^ Xi
                                    (Siú , Xi , ,i ), the marginal productivity of studying
                                                                                        -
                                                                                                  ^ ai
                                                                                               re ^ Xi
                                                                                                       (X ),
                                                                      q             Ë      È
                                                                                       ú-
the marginal productivity of time spent socializing rs j "=i ^ Xi (X ) E Sj - X , and any equi-
                                                                          ^ pji

                                      q                 ^ E [ Sj | ]
                                                               ú X
librium changes in socializing rs j "=i pji (X ) ^ X             i
                                                                     . Without further assumptions, we do
                                                                                                 ^Sú
not know the signs of these terms, nor their relative magnitude, so the sign of ^ Xii is in
general ambiguous: we have no clear prediction about how the optimal socializing changes
in Xi .
    For the e ect of Xi on in-degree Di , by (4) Di satisfies
                                                                                  ÿ
                              E ( Di | Hj , Hi , Sj , Si , X, ,i , ÷i ) =                 pji (X ) Sj
                                                                                                    ú ú
                                                                                                      Si                            (16)
                                                                                  j "=i


Taking the derivative with respect to Xi we get

^ E ( Di | Hj , Hi , Sj , Si , X, ,i , ÷i )   ÿ ^ pji                 ÿ             ^Sú      ÿ                    ú
                                                                                                             ú ^ Si
                                            =            (X ) Sj Si +
                                                               ú ú
                                                                            pji (X ) j Siú +       pji (X ) Sj
                 ^ Xi                         j "=i ^ Xi              j "=i         ^ Xi     j "=i             ^ Xi

In other words, the e ect of Xi on the expected in-degree will depend on how Xi a ects
                                                         q
the the marginal productivity of time spent socializing ( j "=i ^ pji
                                                                ^ Xi
                                                                      (X ) Sj Si ) and the optimal
                                                                            ú ú
                                    q                      ^Sú                                 q                 ^Sú
socializing decisions of i ( j "=i pji (X ) Sj
                                             ú i
                                               ^ Xi
                                                    ) and others ( j "=i pji (X ) ^ Xji Siú ). From the
                                                  ^Sú
discussion above, we don't know the sign of ^ Xii . The e ects of Xi on pji (X ) and Sj        ú
                                                                                                 are also
ambiguous. We conclude that the e ect of Xi on the expected in-degree is ambiguous.
    Part (2): Similarly, we can examine the e ect of Xi on studying and education. Because
the optimal studying is given by Hiú = 1  Siú  Lú          i , we only need to consider the e ect
of Xi on the optimal leisure Li . Recall that the optimal leisure Lú
                                 ú
                                                                           i satisfies the first-order




                                                                58
condition in (6)
                                          ^ Vl ú
                                              (L , Xi , ÷i ) = re ai (X )                                 (17)
                                          ^ Li i
Take the first derivative of both sides with respect to Xi

                       ^ 2 Vl ú              ^ Lú   ^ 2 Vl                        ^ ai
                            2
                              (L i , X ,
                                      i i÷ )    i
                                                  +          (Lú
                                                               i , Xi , ÷i ) = re      (X )
                       ^ Li                  ^ Xi ^ L i ^ Xi                      ^ Xi

from which we derive
                              A                     B1 A                                           B
              ^ Lú    ^ 2 Vl ú                                ^ 2 Vl                       ^ ai
                 i
                   =         (Li , Xi , ÷i )                           (Lú
                                                                         i , Xi , ÷i )  re      (X )
              ^ Xi    ^ L2 i                                ^ L i ^ Xi                     ^ Xi

          ^ 2 Vl                                                         ^ Lú
Because   ^ L2
                   (Lú
                     i , Xi , ÷i ) < 0 by assumption, the sign of
                                                                            i
                                                                         ^ Xi
                                                                                is given by the sign of
               i



                                        ^ 2 Vl                       ^ ai
                                                 (Lú
                                                   i , Xi , ÷i )  re      (X )
                                      ^ L i ^ Xi                     ^ Xi

Without further assumptions, we do not know how Xi a ects the marginal enjoyment of
          ^ 2 Vl
leisure ^ Li ^ Xi
                  (Lú
                    i , Xi , ÷i ), nor the marginal productivity of studying re ^ Xi (X ). so the e ect
                                                                                ^ ai

of Xi on the optimal leisure is ambiguous. Combining with the ambiguous e ect of Xi on
the optimal socializing Siú , we conclude that the e ect of Xi on the optimal studying Hiú is
ambiguous as well.
    For the e ect of Xi on education Ei , by (3) Ei satisfies

                                     E [ Ei | Hi , Si , X, ,i , ÷i ] = ai (X ) Hiú                        (18)

Take the derivative with respect to Xi

                         ^ E [ Ei | Hi , Si , X, ,i , ÷i ]   ^ ai                    ^ Hiú
                                                           =      (X ) Hiú + ai (X )
                                     ^ Xi                    ^ Xi                    ^ Xi

This implies that the e ect of Xi on the expected education will depend on how Xi af-
fects the marginal productivity of studying ^    ^ ai
                                                  Xi
                                                      (X ) Hiú and the optimal amount of studying
            ú
ai (X ) ^ Xii . Because the latter e ect is ambiguous, we have no clear prediction how Xi a ects
        ^H


the expected education. The proof is complete.

   Discussion: the e ects of IQ and extroversion on socializing, studying, and
their outcomes in-degree and education.
   (1) The e ects of IQ and extroversion on socializing and in-degree. With
some additional assumptions, we can speculate on the roles of IQ and extroversion on so-


                                                          59
                                                                                                q                  ^ E [ Sj | ]
                                                                                                                          ú X
cializing. For simplicity, suppose that the equilibrium e ect rs j "=i pji (X ) ^ X                                         i
                                                                                                                                    is rel-
atively small compared with the other e ects of Xi . For IQ, it is reasonable to assume
that ^    ^ ai
            Xi
                (X ) > 0 i.e., higher IQ students are more e cient in studying relative to lower
IQ students. If we assume that intelligence has no e ect on the marginal enjoyment of so-
                  ^ 2 Vs
cializing ( ^ S     i ^ Xi
                            (Siú , Xi , ,i ) = 0  ) and no e ect on the marginal productivity of time spent
                   q                        Ë - È
                                                -
socializing ( j "=i ^ Xi (X ) E Sj
                             ^ pji            ú
                                                - X = 0), then time spent socializing would be decreasing in
intelligence. This negative e ect would be reinforced if we were to assume that higher IQ
                                                                           ^ 2 Vs
individuals derive less enjoyment from -socializing ( ^ S                    i ^ Xi
                                                                                     (Siú , Xi , ,i ) < 0) or are less produc-
                                q                    Ë      È
                                                        ú-
tive in socializing ( j "=i ^            pji
                                        ^ Xi
                                             (X ) E Sj   - X < 0). This would be consistent with the idea of
the "nerdy" students who are not popular and prefer to spend their time studying.
      However, socializing could be increasing in intelligence if either the marginal enjoyment of
socializing or the marginal productivity of socializing is increasing in intelligence (for example
                                                                                    ^Sú
high IQ is attractive trait in friendships). The sign of ^ Xii would then depend on the                                               rela-
                                                                                                  q                        Ë - È
                                                                  ^ 2 Vs                                                          -
tive e ciency in studying vs socializing. If ^ Si ^ Xi (Siú , Xi , ,i ) + rs j "=i ^ Xi (X ) E Sj         ^  pji                ú
                                                                                                                                  -X >
re ^ Xi (X ), i.e., the student is more productive in socializing, then socializing would be in-
    ^ ai

creasing in intelligence.
      The e ect of extroversion on socializing is less ambiguous. To evaluate the e ect of
being an extrovert on socializing, we can assume that an individual's level of extroversion
does not a ect their studying productivity ( ^                      ^ ai
                                                                      Xi
                                                                         (X ) = 0). On the other hand, being an
                                                                                                        ^ 2 Vs
extrovert is likely to increase the marginal enjoyment of                         -
                                                                                     socializing ( ^ S    i ^ Xi
                                                                                                                 (Siú , Xi , ,i ) > 0)
                                                       q                   Ë          È
                                                                                ú-
and the productivity of socializing ( j "=i ^                 pji
                                                            ^ Xi
                                                                  (X ) E Sj       - X > 0). Socializing would then be
unambiguously increasing in extroversion.
      To further speculate on the e ects of IQ and extroversion on in-degree, we assume
that the spillover e ects of i's IQ and extroversion on the socializing decisions of others
q                        ú
               (  )
                     ^ Sj
   j "=i  p ji  X    ^ Xi i
                           S ú are relatively small compared to the other e ects. If we assume that in-
                                                                                                     q
telligence has no e ect on the marginal productivity of socializing ( j "=i ^                                  pji
                                                                                                              ^ Xi
                                                                                                                   (X ) Sj     Si = 0),
                                                                                                                              ú ú

then whether the expected in-degree is increasing in intelligence or not is determiend by
                                                                                                     ^Sú
whether the optimal socializing is increasing in intelligence or not ( ^ Xii ).
      For extroversion, we can assume that being extrovert increases the productivity of so-
                 q
cializing ( j "=i ^        pji
                          ^ Xi
                                (X ) Sj   Si > 0). Under the previous assumptions, the optimal socializing
                                        ú ú

is unambiguously increasing in extroversion, so the expected in-degree is also increasing in
extroversion.
      (2) The e ects of IQ and extroversion on studying and education. To investigate
the e ects of IQ and extroversion on studying, we first investigate their e ects on leisure. For
IQ, we can assume that individuals' level of intelligence increases their studying productivity
                                                                                                       ^ 2 Vl
(^^ ai
   Xi
         (X ) > 0), but does not a ect their marginal utility from leisure ( ^ L                         i ^ Xi
                                                                                                                 (Lúi , Xi , ÷i ) = 0).



                                                                   60
Leisure would then be decreasing in intelligence: smarter students spend less time on leisure
             ^ Lú
activities ( ^ Xii > 0).
    For extroversion, it is reasonable to assume that the level of extroversion does not a ect
                                                                                ^ 2 Vl
studying productivity ( ^  ^ ai
                            Xi
                                (X ) = 0) nor marginal utility from leisure ( ^ Li ^ Xi
                                                                                         (Lú
                                                                                           i , Xi , ÷i ) =
                                                                                       ú
0), so extrovert students have the same level of leisure as other students ( ^ Xi = 0). extro-
                                                                                    ^ Li


version has no e ect on the leisure decision.
    Combining the e ects of IQ and extroversion on socializing and leisure, we can infer
their e ects on studying. For the e ect of IQ on studying, smarter students spend less time
on leisure, but whether they study more depend on how their socializing decisions change
in intelligence. If socializing is decreasing in intelligence, then smarter students definitely
spend more time studying. On the contrary, if socializing is increasing in intelligence, whether
smarter students reduce the time spent studying depends on whether the increase in their
time spent socializing is large enough so that it exceeds the reduction in leisure time.
    For the e ect of extroversion on studying, because extrovert students socialize more while
they have the same amount of leisure as other students, they spend less time on studying.
    Lastly, we consider the e ects of IQ and extroversion on education. For IQ, we can
assume that the studying productivity increases in intelligence ( ^  ^ ai
                                                                      Xi
                                                                          (X ) > 0). If the optimal
                                                    ú
studying is also increasing in intelligence ( ^ Xi > 0), then smarter students generally have
                                                 ^ Hi


higher level of education. On the other hand, if the optimal studying is decreasing in
                ^H ú
intelligence ( ^ Xii < 0) because smarter students are relatively more productive in socializing
than studying, then the level of education could increase more slowly in intelligence or even
decrease in intelligence.
    For the e ect of extroversion on education, if we assume that extroversion has no e ect
on the studying productivity ( ^    ^ ai
                                     Xi
                                         (X ) = 0), then more extrovert students have lower level
                                                          ^H ú
of education because they spend less time studying ( ^ Xii < 0).
    To sum up, the predictions for extrovert students are clearer: they spend more time
socializing and less time studying. Consequently, they have more social capital and less
education. The e ects of IQ is more ambiguous. Smarter students could study more and
socialize less, or study less and socialize more, depending on their relative productivity in
studying and socializing. But they always have less leisure. Smarter students in general have
higher level of education, but this is not always true. They also have more social capital if
they socialize more and less social capital if they socialize less.




                                                   61
Proof of Proposition 2 (homophily measures)

Proof. Part (1): First we examine the e ect of homophily measures on socializing and in-
degree. From (12) the optimal socializing is given by
                                Q                                                              R
                                                     ÿ                    Ë      - È
                                                                               ú-
                      Siú = gs are ai (X )  rs               pji (X ) E       Sj - X , Xi , ,i b ,        (19)
                                                     j "=i


where gs is decreasing in the first argument. Let dji = |Xj  Xi | be the social distance
between j and i. It is reasonable to assume that the productivity of socializing is decreasing in
social distance ( ^
                  ^ pji
                    dji
                        (X ) < 0) due to the homophily e ect. For simplicity, we also assume that
pji (X ) depends on X only through the social distance dji and the receiver i's characteristics
Xi .
     We consider the e ect on i's socializing decision when we change her social distance to
another student j via changing j 's characteristics Xj . For any j "= i, take the derivative of
both sides of (19) with respective to dji , assuming that Xi is fixed while Xj varies
                                Q                                                            R
              ^ Siú                         ÿ               Ë - È
                                                              ú-
                    = ^1 gs are ai (X )  rs       pji (X ) E Sj - X , Xi , ,i b
              ^ dji                         j "=i
                          A
                                ^ ai           ^ pji       Ë - È
                                                             ú-
                         · re         (X )  rs       (X ) E Sj -X
                                ^ dji          ^ dji
                                                 Ë       -     È                                     R
                                                         -
                                              ^ E Sj                                   ^ E [ Sk | X]b
                                                   ú
                                                     -X                   ÿ                   ú
                                rs pji (X )                         rs        pki (X )                ,
                                                 ^ dji                 k"=i,j              ^ dji

where ^1 gs is the derivative of gs with respect to the first argument. Here we have used
the assumption that changing the social distance between j and i (by varying Xj ) has no
e ect on the socializing productivity of k and i ( ^ pki
                                                   ^ dji
                                                         (X ) = 0). Because ^1 gs (·, Xi , ,i ) < 0
                                    ú
by assumption, the sign of              is determined by the sign of
                                ^ Si
                                ^ dji

                                                                    Ë     -     È
                                                            ú-
    ^ ai            ^ pji       Ë - È
                                  ú-
                                                      ^ E Sj -X       ÿ              ^ E [ Sk
                                                                                            ú
                                                                                              | X]
 re       (X ) + rs       (X ) E Sj - X + rs pji (X )           + rs        pki (X )               (20)
    ^ dji           ^ dji                                ^ dji       k"=i,j              ^ dji

We can see that the e ect of dji on Siú depends on how dji a ects the studying          productivity
                                                                               Ë - È
                                                                                 ú-
of i (re ^ dji (X )), the socializing productivity of j and i (rs ^ dji (X ) E Sj - X ), and the ex-
         ^ ai                                                      ^ pji

                                                    ^ E[ S ú |X ]             q            ^ E[ S ú |X ]
pected amounts of socializing of j (rs pji (X ) ^ djji ) and others (rs k"=i,j pki (X ) ^ dk      ji
                                                                                                         )
in equilibrium.
                                        ú
    To speculate on the sign of ^ dji     , we need to impose further assumptions about the terms
                                     ^ Si




                                                         62
in (20). While the social distance between j and i may a ect the studying productivity of i,
because this change occurs through a varying Xj we can assume that the e ect is negligible
(^^ ai
   dji
       (X ) = 0). Recall that the socializing productivity of j and i is decreasing in their social
distance ( ^^ pji
              dji
                  (X ) < 0). Without taking into account the equilibrium e ects (the last two
terms in (20)), the first two terms in (20) tend to suggest that the time i spends socializing
                                                ú
is decreasing in her social distance to j ( ^ dji < 0).
                                            ^ Si


    Next we investigate the equilibrium e ects. From (19) the expected time j spends so-
cializing is
                                        S    Q                                                R- T
                    Ë      - È                                     ÿ                           -
                         ú-
                                                                                               -
                E       Sj -X    =    E gs re aj (X )  rs
                                       U  a                    pkj (X ) E [ Sk | X ] , Xj , ,j -
                                                                             ú                b
                                                                                               -X
                                                                                                  V
                                                          k"=j                                 -


Take the derivative with respect to dji (assuming that Xj varies and Xi is fixed)
       Ë    -   È             S          Q                                                 R- T
            -                                                                               -
   ^ E Sj
        ú
          -X                                                ÿ                               -
                        =   E U ^1 gs are aj (X )  rs      pkj (X ) E [ Sk | X ] , Xj , ,j b-
                                                                          ú
                                                                                            -X
                                                                                               V
        ^ dji                                         k"=j                                  -
                              Q                                                                                  R
                                  ^ a             ÿ ^ p                             ÿ            ^ E [ S ú
                                                                                                           | X ]
                                        (X )  rs           (X ) E [ S ú | X ]  rs       pkj (X )
                                      j                 kj                                               k
                            · are                                       k
                                                                                                                 b
                                     ^ dji          k"=j   ^ dji                    k"=j               ^ dji
                                  S          Q                                          R- T
                                                                                         -
                                                    ÿ                                    -             ^ Xj
                            +E ^2 gs re aj (X )  rs
                              U     a                    pkj (X ) E [ Sk | X ] , Xj , ,j -
                                                                       ú                b  V
                                                                                         -X ·
                                                    k"=j                                 -             ^ dji

where ^2 gs is the derivative           of gs with respect to the second argument. We can see that the
                         Ë - È
                             ú-
e ect of dji on E Sj - X is in general ambiguous because if we change the distance dji by
changing j 's characteristics Xj , then this will a ect j 's studying productivity ( ^                  ^ aj
                                                                                                         dji
                                                                                                             (X ) "= 0)
and socializing preference (^2 gs "= 0) in addition to the e ects on j 's socializing produc-
                                q
tivity with others (rs k"=j ^ dkj            (X ) E [ Sk | X ]) and the equilibrium socializing decisions of
                                       ^p              ú
                                          ji
            q                   ^ E[ S |X ]
                                      ú
others (rs k"=j pkj (X ) ^ dk         ji
                                            ). Note that the former two e ects are first order and cannot
be neglected. These e ects are also ambiguous because they depend on which individual
characteristic in Xj we shift when changing the distance dji . It is also hard to predict the
e ect of the social distance between j and i on the socializing productivity between k and
j ( ^ dkj (X )) because when we change the characteristics of j it is unclear how the social
    ^p
       ji

distance between k and j will change accordingly: it will depend on the characteristics of k .
Without further information about these e ects, the e ect of dji on j 's expected time spent
               ^ E[ S ú |X ]
socializing ( ^ djji ) is ambiguous.
                                                                                 ^ E[ S ú |X ]
    The e ect of dji on another student k 's expected socializing ( ^ dk                ji
                                                                                               ) is also ambiguous.



                                                              63
This is because for any k "= i, j , E [ Sk
                                         ú
                                           | X ] is given by
                               S       Q                                                  R- T
                                                                                           -
                                                      ÿ                                    -
             E [ Sk
                  ú
                    | X] =   E U gs are ak (X )  rs      plk (X ) E [ Slú | X ] , Xk , ,k b- V
                                                                                           -X .
                                                    l"=k                                   -


Take the derivative with respect to dji (assuming again that Xj varies and Xi is fixed)
                                   S       Q                                              R-      T
                                                                                           -
          ^ E [ Sk
                 ú
                   | X]                             ÿ                                      -
                        = E U ^1 gs are ak (X )  rs      plk (X ) E [ Slú | X ] , Xk , ,k b-
                                                                                           -X
                                                                                              V
              ^ dji                                 l"=k                                   -
                               Q                                                            R
                                    ^ pjk       Ë - È
                                                  ú-
                                                            ÿ             ^ E [ Slú | X ] b
                              · ars       (X ) E Sj - X  rs      plk (X )
                                    ^ dji                   l"=k              ^ dji

Here we have used the assumptions that the social distance between j and i has no e ect on
the studying productivity of k ( ^   ^ ak
                                      dji
                                           (X ) = 0) and no e ect on the socializing productivity of
l and k ( ^ dji (X ) = 0) for all l "= j , k . Note that the distance dji can a ect the socializing
          ^ plk

productivity of j and k , and this e ect is ambiguous because we don't know how the social
distance between j and k will change accordingly. There are also equilibrium e ects on
                                             q            ^ E[ S ú |X ]
the socializing decisions of others (rs l"=k plk (X ) ^ dlji ), whose signs are hard to predict.
Therefore, the e ect of dji on E [ Sk    ú
                                           | X ] is ambiguous.
    In sum, if we ignore the equilibrium e ects, we can expect that i's socializing is decreasing
in her social distance to j . In fact, this result can be extended to a more general setting where
we change the characteristics of several other students. Without the equilibrium e ects, i
will choose to socialize more if her overall social distance -to other students decreases so that
                                               q               Ë        È
                                                                    ú-
her overall socializing productivity (rs j "=i pji (X ) E Sj         - X ) becomes higher.
    However, we can't conclude that if we put i in a new group of students who are socially
closer to her then i will socialize more. A group of students with di erent characteristics
in general have di erent productivity in studying and socializing and di erent utility pref-
erence for socializing, thereby leading to an equilibrium with di erent amounts of optimal
socializing. As a result of coordination, these equilibrium e ects will a ect i's socializing
decision. The direction of these e ects is ambiguous.
    As for the e ect of social distance on in-degree, take the derivative of (16) with respect
to dji

^ E ( Di | Hj , Hi , Sj , Si , X, ,i , ÷i )   ^ pji              ÿ
                                                                                ú ^ Si
                                                                                      ú   ÿ          ^Sú
                                            =       (X ) Sj Si +
                                                          ú ú
                                                                      pki (X ) Sk       +    pki (X ) k Siú
                 ^ dji                        ^ dji              k"=i             ^ dji k"=i         ^ dji

where we have used the assumption that ^     pki
                                            ^ dji
                                                  (X ) = 0 for all k "= i, j . This shows that
the e ect of the social distance dji on i's expected in-degree depends on how dji a ects

                                                     64
the the socializing productivity of j and i ( ^         pji
                                                       ^ Xi
                                                            (X ) Sj Si ), the socializing decision of i
                                                                  ú ú
 q                     ú                                                q                ú
( k"=i pki (X ) Sk       ), and the socializing decisions of others ( k"=i pki (X ) ^ dji  Siú ). Note that
                 ú ^ S i                                                             ^ Sk
                   ^ dji
the third e ect comes from the fact that friendship formation requires coordination. By
assumption, the socializing productivity is decreasing in social distance ( ^        ^ pji
                                                                                       dji
                                                                                           (X ) < 0). The
                                                      ^Sú
e ect of social distance dji on i's socializing ( ^ dji
                                                     i
                                                        ) can be ambiguous if we take into account
the equilibrium e ects. The e ects of dji on others' socializing decisions are also ambiguous.
Therefore, even if we ignore the equilibrium e ects in i's socializing and believe that that i
socializes more if her social distance to j decreases, the e ect of dji on i's expected in-degree
is still ambiguous, unless there is no coordination.
    Part (2): Next we examine the e ect of homophily measures on studying and education.
Similarly to part (1), we start with the simple case where we change i's social distance to
another student j (dji ) by changing the characteristics of j (Xj ). From (8) and (10), the
optimal studying is given by

                                         Hiú = 1  Siú  Lú
                                                        i


where Lú
       i is the optimal leisure



                                       i = gl (re ai (X ) , Xi , ÷i ) .
                                      Lú                                                              (21)

Given the results in part (1), it is enough to consider how the optimal leisure of i changes
in her social distance to j . Take the derivative of both sides of (21) with respect to dji

                           ^ Lú                                       ^ ai
                               i
                                 = ^1 gl (re ai (X ) , Xi , ÷i ) · re       (X ) ,
                           ^ dji                                      ^ dji

where ^1 gl is the derivative of gl with respect to the first argument. Similarly to part (1),
we assume that changing the social distance between i and j by changing j 's characteristics
has no e ect on the studying productivity of i ( ^ ^ ai
                                                    dji
                                                        (X ) = 0). This implies that the social
                                                                ^ Lú
distance dji has no e ect on the optimal leisure of i ( ^ dji
                                                            i
                                                              = 0).
    Therefore, the e ect of the social distance dji on studying is the opposite of the e ect on
socializing
                                         ^ Hiú      ^ Siú
                                               =
                                         ^ dji     ^ dji
From part (1), if we ignore the equilibrium e ects, i's socializing is decreasing in the social
distance dji , so her studying is increasing in dji . With the equilibrium e ects, however, the
e ect of dji on socializing becomes ambiguous, so does the e ect on studying.
    As for the e ect of the social distance dji on i's education, take the derivative of (18)

                                                     65
with respect to dji

                             ^ E [ Ei | Hi , Si , X, ,i , ÷i ]   ^ ai                    ^ Hiú
                                                               =       (X ) Hi + ai (X )
                                                                             ú
                                         ^ dji                   ^ dji                   ^ dji

By assumption        ^ ai
                     ^ dji
                             (X ) = 0, so the e ect of dji on i's expected education depends only on
                                                            ^H ú
how dji a ects the time i spends studying ( ^ djii
                                                   ).46 If we ignore the equilibrium e ects in
socializing, studying is increasing in the social distance dji , so is the expected education.
With the equilibrium e ects, however, the e ects of dji on studying and expected education
are ambiguous. The proof is complete.

Proof of Proposition 3 (coordination)

Proof. Without coordination, the probability that j nominates i as a friends is

                                     Pr ( Dji = 1| X ) = p (Xj , Xi ) E [ Siú | X ]              (22)

Under our specification, the utility from socializing Vs (Si , Xi , ,i ) and thus the function
gs (·, Xi , ,i ) do not directly depend on the homophily measures of students other than i
(e.g. |Xj  Xk | for all j, k "= i). If coordination does not matter, the optimal socializing Siú
will not depend on the homophily measures of other students. Hence, the link probability
Pr ( Dji = 1| X ) in (22) will not depend on the homophily measures of the sender j with
respect to other students. By examining whether Pr( Dji = 1| X ) depends on the homophily
measures of the sender j , we can test whether there is coordination in the social capital
production. The proof is complete.

Proof of Proposition 4 (OLS bias)

Proof. Write the log earnings equation as

                                              ln Yi = rÕ Ki + -- Õ Xi + Ái                       (23)

where Ki = (Ei , Di )Õ represents the vector of education and in-degree, r = (re , rs )Õ represents
the vector of returns to education and in-degree, Xi represents the vector of exogenous
covariates, and Ái represents the error term. Assume that E (Ái ) = 0. The endogeneity of Ki
and exogeneity of Xi mean that E (Ki Ái ) "= 0 and E (Xi Ái ) = 0.
  46
       Unlike friendship formation, there is no coordination in the production of education.




                                                            66
      The OLS estimator of r is given by
                                                A n               B1 n
                                                 ÿ                  ÿ
                                           ^=
                                           r            ~ i KiÕ
                                                        K                     ~ i ln Yi
                                                                              K
                                                  i=1                   i=1


      ~ i = Ki  ( n Ki X Õ ) ( n Xi X Õ )1 Xi is the residual of Ki after partialing out Xi .
where K
                        q                  q
                       i=1    i    i=1   i
        q
Because n      ~ i X Õ = 0 we can derive
               K
           i=1      i

                                                    A n                 B1 n
                                                     ÿ                    ÿ
                                           ^ r =
                                           r                  ~ i KiÕ
                                                              K                     ~ i Ái
                                                                                    K
                                                        i=1                   i=1


By the Law of Large Numbers and the exogeneity of Xi (E (Xi Ái ) = 0), we obtain
                                1                                                             21
                                                                               1
                  ^  r æ E (Ki KiÕ )  E (Ki XiÕ ) E (Xi XiÕ )                       E (Xi KiÕ )    E (Ki Ái )
                            p
                  r

as n æ OE. Because E (Ki Ái ) "= 0 due to the endogeneity of Ki , the right-hand side is
nonzero. It gives the asymptotic bias in the OLS estimator of r.
   The bias in r ^ depends on both the correlation between Ki and Ái (E (Ki Ái )) and the
inverse of the matrix

                                                                                1
                                    E (Ki KiÕ )  E (Ki XiÕ ) E (Xi XiÕ )             E (Xi KiÕ )                (24)

Notice that this matrix is positive definite,47 so is its inverse. Unlike the case with a single
endogenous variable, unless the matrix (24) is diagonal, the OLS bias in the returns to in-
degree does not necessarily have the same sign as the correlation between in-degree and the
error term Ái , and the same for education. Without knowledge about the matrix (24), even
if the correlations between education, in-degree and Ái are known, the OLS biases in the
returns to education and in-degree can be ambiguous. The proof is complete.

    Discussion: OLS bias in our sample
    Observe that the matrix (24) involves the observables Ki and Xi only. In a given data
set, this matrix can be estimated. Hence, we can predict the OLS bias if we can speculate
on the correlation between Ki and Ái .
    Note that the o -diagonal elements in the matrix (24) are determined by the correlation
 47
      This is because
                                                              1
                    E (Ki Ki
                           Õ
                             )  E (Ki Xi Õ
                                           ) E (Xi XiÕ
                                                       ) E (Xi Ki
                                                                Õ
                                                                  )
                      31                                  21                          2Õ 4
                                                   Õ 1                         Õ 1
                  = E    Ki  E (Ki Xi Õ
                                        ) E (Xi Xi  ) Xi Ki  E (Ki Xi
                                                                    Õ
                                                                      ) E (Xi Xi ) Xi      .




                                                               67
between education and in-degree. If conditional on other covariates, education and in-degree
are positively (resp. negatively) correlated, then we expect the o -diagonal elements in the
inverse of the matrix (24) to be negative (resp. positive). In our Add Health data, we find
that education and in-degree are positively correlated, controlling for other covariates, and
the o -diagonal elements in the inverse of the matrix (24) are indeed negative. However, we
also find that these o -diagonal elements are relatively small compared with the diagonal
elements in the inverse matrix. This suggests that the OLS biases in the returns to edu-
cation and in-degree are mostly determined by their correlations with Ái . In particular, a
positive (resp. negative) correlation between in-degree and Ái will lead to an upward (resp.
downward) bias in the returns to in-degree.
    In-degree can be correlated with Ái for a number of reasons. For example, individual social
capital could be poorly measured by in-degree. Alternatively, because in-degree depends on
socializing and socializing depends on the unobserved preference for socializing ,i , if ,i is
correlated with Ái , so is in-degree.
    To speculate on the direction of the correlation between in-degree and Ái through ,i ,
we first show in a lemma that socializing is increasing in the unobserved preference for
socializing.

Lemma 6. If the marginal utility from socializing ^ Vs
                                                   ^ Si
                                                        (Si , Xi , ,i ) is increasing in ,i , i.e.,
students with higher ,i enjoy more utility from each unit of socializing, then the optimal
amount of socializing Siú is increasing in ,i .

Proof. Suppose that the change of ,i does not trigger any change in the equilibrium (e.g.
                                           ^ E [ Sj | ]
                                                  ú X
through di erent equilibrium selection) so      ^,i
                                                        = 0. Taking the derivative of both sides
of (15) with respect to ,i , we obtain

                       ^ 2 Vs ú             ^ Siú    ^ 2 Vs
                             (S , X  , ,  )       +         (S ú , Xi , ,i ) = 0
                       ^ Si2 i
                                   i    i
                                            ^,i     ^ Si ^,i i
                   2                             ^ 2 Vs
                                                                                                 ú
By assumption ^     2 (Si , Xi , ,i ) < 0 and              (Siú , Xi , ,i ) > 0, so we have          > 0. The
                   Vs   ú                                                                     ^ Si
                ^ Si                            ^ Si ^,i                                      ^,i
proof is complete.

    Next we investigate the correlation between in-degree and Ái because in-degree is increas-
ing in the time spent socializing. From the lemma, socializing is increasing in ,i . Therefore,
we expect that in-degree is positively (resp. negatively) correlated with Ái if ,i and Ái are
positively (resp. negatively) correlated.
    For example, unobserved communication skills in ,i may contribute to higher social
capital and better labor market performance, resulting in a positive correlation between in-
degree and Ái . This will yield an upward bias in the social returns. On the other hand, if

                                                    68
unobserved tastes for socializing in ,i are in favor of leisure and anti-productive on the labor
market, then we expect a negative correlation between in-degree and Ái , yielding a downward
bias in the social returns. Overall, the OLS bias in the social returns can be ambiguous,
depending on whether the positive or negative correlation dominates.

Proof of Proposition 5 (returns to socializing)

Proof. If there are no social returns (rs = 0), then the expected log earnings of i becomes

         E [ ln Y | Hi , Si , X, ,i , ÷i ] = re ai (X ) Hi + -- Õ Xi + E [ Ái | X, ,i , ÷i ]
                                         = re ai (X ) (1  Si  Li ) + -- Õ Xi + E [ Ái | X, ,i , ÷i ]

Note that the coe cient of Si is negative

                              ^ E [ ln Y | Hi , Si , X, ,i , ÷i ]
                                                                  = re ai (X ) < 0
                                            ^ Si

In other words, for two students with the same amount of leisure, because there are no
returns to socializing, if one socializes more, then her expected log earnings will be lower
because she will attain a lower level of education due to less time spent studying. The proof
is complete.




                                                       69
