                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




CONCENTRATION AND AGGLOMERATION OF IT INNOVATION AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP:
                      EVIDENCE FROM PATENTING

                                            Chris Forman
                                            Avi Goldfarb

                                        Working Paper 27338
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w27338


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2020




  We thank Mike Andrews, Erik Brynjolfsson, Ronnie Chatterji, Scott Stern, and participants at the
  conference for helpful comments and suggestions. We thank David Balter and Xiaomeng Chen
  for outstanding research assistance. All opinions and errors are ours alone. The views expressed
  herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
  Economic Research.

  At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
  research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27338.ack

  NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
  peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
  official NBER publications.

  © 2020 by Chris Forman and Avi Goldfarb. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
  exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
  including © notice, is given to the source.
Concentration and Agglomeration of IT Innovation and Entrepreneurship: Evidence from
Patenting
Chris Forman and Avi Goldfarb
NBER Working Paper No. 27338
June 2020
JEL No. L22,L26,M13,M15,O31,O32,O33,O34,R12

                                          ABSTRACT

Information technology (IT) matters to prosperity. The top patenters are increasingly IT
companies. We use data on US patents to document four trends in IT patenting. First, firm-level
concentration in IT patenting is increasing over time. Second, geographic concentration in IT
patenting is increasing over time. Third, most technology classes experienced a decline in new
patenters from 1980 to 2000. This was not true of new IT patents. Since 2000, the trend in new IT
patenters looks like other classes and is declining over time. Fourth, there is increased geographic
concentration of new IT patenters. We do not identify the reasons behind these trends nor
whether they are related to overall changes in industry concentration, agglomeration, or
prosperity.


Chris Forman
Charles H. Dyson School of
Applied Economics and Management
Warren Hall
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853-6201
chris.forman@cornell.edu

Avi Goldfarb
Rotman School of Management
University of Toronto
105 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3E6
CANADA
and NBER
agoldfarb@rotman.utoronto.ca
        "We wanted flying cars, instead we got 140 characters."--Peter Thiel 

This  volume  is  partly  motivated  by  Peter  Thiel's  criticism  of  recent  innovation.  Thiel's  business 
success came in the field of information technology. The product he criticized as not sufficiently 
exciting--Twitter's  140  characters--is  information  technology.  The  product  he  emphasizes  as 
something to aspire to--flying cars--will depend on information technology if it is to appear.  

Information  technology  (IT)  is  at  the  center  of  much  innovation  over  the  past  fifty  years.  As 
Brynjolfsson  and  McAfee  (2014)  have  emphasized,  IT  matters  to  prosperity.  Many  of  the  most 
prominent companies and emerging industries either produce IT, use IT as a critical input, and/or 
produce  digital  goods  and  services.  For  example,  of  the  top  ten  companies  in  market 
capitalization  in  May  2019  seven  are  primarily  IT  companies  (Statista  2019).  The  most  valued 
startups (for example, as measured by billiondollar valuations) are overwhelmingly IT (Evans and 
Gawer  2016).  Recently  there  have  been  significant  technological  advances  in  IT,  most 
prominently related to artificial intelligence and cloud computing.  

IT  is  central  to  innovation,  and  this  centrality  has  been  increasing  over  time.  Much  of  this 
innovation is focused on software (Arora, Branstetter, and Drev 2013). Manufacturing firms that 
are  more  softwareintensive  have  been  shown  to  have  more  patents  per  R&D  dollar,  and  their 
investments in R&D are more highly valued in equity markets (Branstetter, Drev, and Kwon 2019). 
More recently, Cockburn, Henderson, and Stern (2019) argue that advances in machine learning 
are  primarily  valuable  because  they  make  innovation  more  efficient.  To  the  extent  that  recent 
advances in machine learning represent advances toward artificial intelligence, innovation would 
accelerate more. Demis Hassabis of Google DeepMind asserted, "Our goal is to solve intelligence, 
and then use that to solve the other problems in the world.  In that way, Erik Brynjolfsson, in his 
discussion  of  this  chapter  at  the  conference,  argued  that  artificial  intelligence--a  field  of  IT--is 
"The most G of all GPTs".  

Furthermore, IT is an input into other industries. Jorgenson, Ho, and Stiroh (2005) examine how 
IT  impacted  productivity  in  the  1990s.  They  examine  differences  between  ITproducing  and  IT
using  industries.  They  document  a  large  increase  in  the  productivity  of  ITproducing  industries. 
This increased productivity then led to a substantial reduction in the (qualityadjusted) cost of IT. 
This,  in  turn,  led  to  a  productivity  increase  downstream.  ITusing  industries  produced  more 
efficiently with the same inputs because the inputs became much less expensive. This role of IT 
as a key input into other industries continues today, though effective adoption of IT depends on 
complementary  innovation  by  the  using  firm  (Bresnahan  and  Greenstein  1996;  Bresnahan  and 
Yin 2017). 

Table 1 shows the top ten patenters in US patent data by half decade since 1976. It is suggestive 
of  the  increasing  importance  of  innovation  in  IT  to  the  broader  economy.  Between  1976  and 
1980,  just  four  of  the  top  ten  patenters  were  also  top  patenters  in  IT,  as  defined  by  the 
"Computers and Communications" patent category. Those include RCA and the Navy, neither of 
which  was  an  ITfocused  company.  By  20062010,  seven  of  the  ten  were  top  patenters  in  that 
category, and one of the remaining three, Micron, makes computer memory products. 

Table 1: Top ten patenters by fiveyear period 


197680             198185            198690             199195         199600      200105           200610 
GE                 GE                GE                 IBM            IBM         IBM              IBM 
AT&T               IBM               GM                 Motorola       Micron      HP               Microsoft 
IBM                AT&T              Kodak              GE             Lucent      Microsoft        Qualcomm 
Westinghouse       Westinghouse  IBM                    Kodak          Intel       Intel            GE  
RCA                Dow Chemical  Dow Chemical           GM             HP          Micron           AT&T 
USA/Sec. Navy  DuPont                DuPont             AT&T           Motorola  GE                 Intel 
DuPont             GM                AT&T               Xerox          GE          Texas I          HP 
GM                 Mobil             Motorola           Texas I        Kodak       Cisco            Honeywell 
Dow Chemical       RCA               Westinghouse       3M             AMD         Honeywell        Apple 
Phillips Petro.    Allied Chemical  Allied Signal       DuPont         Xerox       Broadcom         Micron  
 

Despite  this  evidence  of  continuing  innovation  in  IT  and  its  implications  for  innovation  and 
productivity  in  ITusing  industries,  there  is  simultaneously  evidence  of  a  productivity  slowdown 
in  the  US  and  in  other  OECD  countries  (e.g.,  Syverson  2017;  Brynjolfsson,  Rock,  and  Syverson 
2019).  A  variety  of  reasons  have  been  given  for  this  recent  productivity  slowdown,  including 
mismeasurement,  lags  in  benefits  due  to  need  for  costly  implementation  and  complementary 
adjustments,  as  well  as  market  concentration  that  may  dissipate  the  benefits  of  productivity 
improvements  (Brynjolfsson,  Rock,  and  Syverson  2019).  Moreover,  there  is  evidence  that  the 
benefits of increasing innovation in, and pervasiveness of, IT has not been shared equally across 
firms, individuals, and regions (Forman, Goldfarb, and Greenstein 2012; Brynjolfsson and McAfee 
2014; Autor et al 2020). 

Given the centrality of IT to innovation and recent concerns that the benefits of IT innovation are 
being captured by a subset of the economy, we study the concentration of innovation in IT over 
time. By studying trends in US patenting, we provide evidence that is suggestive of an increase in 
concentration in inventive activity in IT innovation. We measure concentration in two ways: firm
level  and  locationlevel.  Specifically,  we  document  trends  in  patenting  concentration  over  time 
and  across  patent  categories.  We  calculate  Gini  coefficients  by  firm  and  by  location,  annually 
from 1976 to 2010. We document trends in the fraction and geographic concentration of patents 
by first time inventing firms and by individual inventors. Some trends are general, but the focus 
of our argument is on those specific to IT.  

Our  empirical  results  depend  on  our  definition  of  IT  and  the  data  we  have  available.  The 
dictionary definition of IT is, "The technology involving the development, maintenance, and use 
of  computer  systems,  software,  and  networks  for  the  processing  and  distribution  of  data" 
(MerriamWebster 2020). The Handbook of the Economics of Information Systems (Hendershott 
2006)  defines  it  as  "the  hardware  and  software  used  in  the  processing  and  communication  of 
information."  Our  focus  on  innovation  and  inventive  activity  in  IT  focuses  but  also  narrows  our 
analysis in several ways. In particular, we measure inventive output using patents. Identifying IT 
inventions  in  the  patent  data  is  difficult,  as  highlighted  by  Graham  and  Mowery  (2003),  Bessen 
and  Hunt  (2007),  Hall  and  MacGarvie  (2010),  and  others.  We  define  innovations  in  IT  using  the 
classification systems initially developed and described in Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg (2001). We 
think are our results are suggestive of a broad and important phenomenon that requires further 
exploration. We discuss the limitations of this definition in detail below. 

Firm  concentration  in  patenting  could  arise  for  several  reasons.  One  is  due  to  concentration  in 
output  markets.  A  large  and  stillgrowing  literature  has  documented  an  increase  in  market 
concentration over the past few decades and its implications, in some  cases highlighting trends 
in  ITintensive  industries.  De  Loecker,  Eeckhout,  and  Unger  (2019)  document  a  rise  in  markups 
and  an  increase  in  market  share  across  a  wide  range  of  US  industries.  Eggertsson,  Robbins,  and 
Wold (2018) take a macroeconomic perspective and argue that increased market power and high 
profits have caused a decline in labor share. Autor et al (2017, 2020) demonstrate a connection 
between a rise in superstar firms and a decline in the labor share. Superstar firms are able to take 
advantage of globalization and technological change facilitated by IT, and increasingly dominate 
their  industries.  The  documented  increase  in  market  concentration  has  therefore  been  blamed 
for  the  recent  rise  of  inequality  in  the  US  and  elsewhere  (Furman  and  Orszag  2015)  and  for  a 
decline  in  investment  in  real  and  intangible  assets  (Gutierrez  and  Philippon  2017).  Andrews, 
Criscuolo, and Gal (2019) identify a divergence in productivity between the most productive firms 
and the rest of the distribution, and that this trend is strongest within ICT services. Both Gutierrez 
and  Philippon  (2017)  and  Andres,  Criscuolo,  and  Gal  (2019)  review  a  broad  literature  that 
documents this increase in concentration. 

While  the  line  of  work  above  has  documented  increased  concentration  across  the  economy, 
there may be features that are specific to IT that lead to increases in concentration. Shapiro and 
Varian  (1998)  highlighted  a  different  set  of  forces  leading  to  concentration  in  the  IT  industry. 
Emphasizing software, they note that "information is costly to produce but cheap to reproduce" 
(p. 21). High fixed costs and low marginal costs lead to concentration. Furthermore, they highlight 
the  role  of  positive  feedback  loops  or  network  externalities.  They  note  that  "Positive  feedback 
makes the strong grow stronger" (p. 174). This positive feedback loop is particularly prevalent in 
many  IT  contexts,  particularly  for  digital  marketplaces.  A  rich  literature  (e.g.  Einav,  Farronato, 
Levin  2016;  Jullien  and  Pavan  2019)  has  emphasized  a  potential  connection  between  market 
power  and  the  rise  of  online  marketplaces  in  advertising  (Google,  Facebook),  goods  (Amazon, 
Ebay), and services (Uber, Airbnb, Upwork). The Stigler Committee on Digital Platforms produced 
a report that summarized many of these issues (Stigler Center 2019). This documentation of an 
increase  in  concentration  in  IT  contexts  has  led  to  regulatory  attention  to  the  largest  IT  firms, 
including  Google,  Facebook,  and  Amazon;  however,  it  is  important  to  recognize  that  antitrust 
attention  to  IT  has  existed  for  decades,  for  example  in  the  1970s  IBM  case  and  the  1990s 
Microsoft case. 

The  use  of  IT  as  an  input  to  production  in  other  industries  can  also  lead  to  concentration. 
Investments  in  IT  are  often  accompanied  to  complementary  innovation  and  organizational 
change  (e.g.  Bresnahan  and  Greenstein  1996;  Bresnahan,  Brynjolfsson,  and  Hitt  2002;  Aral, 
Brynjolfsson, and Wu 2012). Historically these investments have required substantial fixed costs 
and  have  been  shown  to  have  the  highest  payoff  in  large  organizations  (Tambe  and  Hitt  2012; 
however for a recent counterexample see Jin and McElheran 2018). These investments lead to a 
stock  of  intangible  capital  (Tambe,  Hitt,  Rock,  and  Brynjolfsson  2019).  Industries  that  are 
characterized by large investments in IT have seen growth in market concentration (Brynjolfsson 
et al 2008; McAfee and Brynjolfsson 2008).  

Sutton  (1998)  highlighted  how  technology  can  lead  to  concentrated  market  structure  through 
endogenous  sunk  costs.  Specifically,  as  firms  compete  by  investing  in  research  &  development 
(R&D), it becomes harder and harder for new firms to enter. The investment required to achieve 
the same quality as the leading firms is too high. As a consequence, a relatively small number of 
firms  can  dominate  the  market.  Information  technology  is  an  R&Dintensive  industry.  This  is 
especially true in hardware, but also in some aspects of software. Therefore, we expect the forces 
Sutton highlighted to lead to concentration in ITproducing industries. 

Characteristics  specifically  related  to  information  technology  may  either  facilitate  or  inhibit 
concentration. On the one hand, IT products are often composed of subsystems of components 
that  interact  with  one  another  through  interfaces  that  are  defined  by  standards.  In  this 
environment,  industry  firms  will  compete  to  define  standards  through  which  products  and 
technologies work together and also compete in product markets. This can lead to a circumstance 
of divided technical leadership, in which multiple firms compete to provide key technologies and 
products (Bresnahan and Greenstein 1999).  
However,  the  changing  nature  of  innovation  in  IT  can  also  lead  to  increases  in  concentration. 
Innovation in IT has become increasingly software intensive (Andreesen 2011; Arora, Branstetter, 
Drev  2013;  Branstetter,  Drev,  and  Kuan  2019).  However,  the  strength  of  formal  measures  of 
intellectual property protection such as patents are weaker in software than in other fields of IT 
innovation  such  as  IT  hardware  (Cohen,  Nelson,  and  Walsh  2000;  Graham,  Merges,  Samuelson, 
and  Sichelman  2009).  Changes  in  the  strength  of  patents  can  create  uncertainty  for  market 
participants  and  inhibit  wellfunctioning  markets  for  technology.  For  example,  increases  in  the 
strength  of  software  patents  and  software  patenting  can  give  rise  to  packet  thickets  that  could 
lead to declines in de novo entry (Cockburn and MacGarvie 2011).  

For geographic concentration, there are many reasons why we expect invention to agglomerate. 
Carlino  and  Kerr  (2015)  summarize  many  of  these,  emphasizing  the  role  of  input  sharing,  labor 
market  matching,  and  knowledge  spillovers,  among  others.  1   There  is  recent  evidence  that  the 
productivity of inventors is higher in technology clusters (Moretti 2019). In prior work (Forman, 
Goldfarb,  and  Greenstein  2016),  we  documented  a  sharp  rise  in  the  share  of  US  patenting  in  a 
small number of cities, and particularly in the San Francisco Bay Area. A similar phenomenon has 
been  documented  in  medical  devices  (Foroughi  and  Stern  2018).  These  types  of  agglomeration 
economies can give rise to superstar cities (Gyourko, Mayer, and Sinai 2013). A small number of 
cities have comprised an increasing share of US (and global) output.  

Before we proceed with the paper, we want to emphasize that this exercise is entirely descriptive. 
We will not identify why this is happening, whether the trends are robust to other definitions of 
innovation,  or  whether  the  trends  in  IT  explain  the  overall  changes  in  market  concentration, 
location concentration, labor share, or productivity.  

Data 

We  use  patents  granted  by  the  US  Patent  and  Trademark  Office  (USPTO)  as  our  measure  of 
invention.  Because  of  the  delay  between  patent  application  and  grant  date,  we  date  patents 
using  the  year  of  application.  Our  starting  point  is  the  data  provided  by  the  UPSTO  through  the 
PatentsView program (www.patentsview.org). We have data on patents granted between 1976 
and  2018,  and  our  analysis  data  set  includes  patents  with  application  dates  between  1976  and 
2010.  

In  order  to  assess  trends  on  IT  patents  compared  to  other  patents,  we  use  the  six  patent 
categories defined in Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg (2001): Chemical, Computers & Communication, 
Drugs  &  Medical,  Electrical  &  Electronic,  Mechanical,  and  Other.  We  consider  the  Computers  & 

1
  There is a large literature examining the competing effects of convergence and agglomeration. We will not attempt
to survey it here. For some examples of how agglomeration can impact regional economic performance, see Glaeser
et al. (1992), Henderson et al. (1995), and Delgado et al. (2014).
Communication category to represent IT. For some analysis, we look at subcategories related to 
IT,  specifically  Communications,  Computer  hardware  &  software,  Computer  peripherals, 
Information storage, Electronic business methods & software, and Semiconductor devices.  

The  Hall,  Jaffe,  and  Trajtenberg  (HJT)  approach  is  a  widely  used  means  to  categorize  patents 
based upon technology. However, because of recent changes to the patent data it imposes some 
limitations  on  our  ability  to  observe  recent  trends  in  our  data.  The  HJT  categorization  is  based 
upon  the  US  Patent  Classification  (USPC)  system.  Beginning  in  2010  the  European  Patent  Office 
and  USPTO  initiated  the  Cooperative  Patent  Classification  System  (CPC),  and  patents  granted 
after 2015 may no longer have a USPC class, and so similarly have no HJT category. Given the lag 
between the patent application and patent grant dates, we end our sample with patents applied 
for  in  2010  to  mitigate  truncation  bias  arising  from  patents  that  were  applied  for  and  granted 
after 2010 but were not assigned a USPC class. Even with this sample end date, a small fraction 
of patents within our sample do not receive a USPC class because of a lengthy applicationgrant 
delay.  

We  focus  on  patents  because  they  are  available  in  a  consistent  form  over  time  and  across 
categories. Patents have been shown to provide a useful measure of a firm's intangible stock of 
knowledge  (Hall  et  al.  2005).  Their  limitations  are  well  known.  Not  all  patents  meet  the  USPTO 
criteria for patentability (Jaffe and Trajtenberg 2001). Not all inventors seek to patent, and many 
use alternative means to appropriate value from their inventions. In particular for our purposes, 
the  propensity  to  patent  innovations  related  to  IT  is  thought  to  be  different  from  other 
technology sectors. Cohen et al (2000) note that IT hardware firms (such as semiconductor and 
communications equipment) report that patenting was effective at protecting about one quarter 
of their product innovations in comparison to secrecy which was effective at protecting one half 
of product innovations. There is evidence this may have changed over time however. In a more 
recent  survey  focused  on  entrepreneurial  firms,  Graham  et  al  (2010)  note  that  venturebacked 
IT  hardware  firms  report  that  patenting  is  at  least  as  important  as  secrecy.  However,  the  same 
survey  notes  that  among  software  startups  patenting  was  the  least  important  among  all 
appropriability strategies (Graham et al 2010).  

Further the propensity to patent has changed over time during our sample (e.g., Hall and Ziedonis 
2001),  this  was  particularly  the  case  for  patents  related  to  software  which  grew  rapidly  toward 
the end of our sample period due to legal changes which strengthened the legal rights of patents 
in  this  area  (e.g.,  Graham  and  Mowery  2003,  Hall  and  MacGarvie  2010).  It  was  only  after  our 
sample ends that the Bilski and Alice cases led to a decrease in the propensity to patent software 
and business processes.  Our approach will lead to bias in our results if large firms are more likely 
to patent relative to others over time in IT relative to other industries.   
We map patents to firms based on several sources. First, we map patents to the CRSP "permco" 
list of publicly traded firms using a mapping generously provided to us by the authors of Kogan, 
Papanikolaou,  Seru,  and  Stoffman  (2017)  and  Stoffman,  Woeppel,  and  Yavuz  (2019).  Further 
details  on  the  construction  of  that  data  is  provided  in  these  papers.  The  method  provides  a 
consistent measure of patenting within publicly traded firms over time. For the remaining patents 
we grouped patents into organizations based upon names provided in the PatentsView data. Our 
starting  point  is  the  disambiguated  Assignee  names  in  those  data.  Then,  following  procedures 
detailed in Kogan et al. (2017) we compared assignee names by calculating the Levenshtein edit 
distance  between  them.  If  one  assignee  name  is  close  to  another  that  is  associated  with  many 
more  patents,  then  the  more  common  assignee  name  is  substituted  for  the  less  common  one. 
This  procedure  will  lead  to  biased  estimates  of  the  number  of  patents  assigned  to  firms  when, 
for example, patents are assigned to subdivisions of firms with different names and when firms 
change  their  names  over  time.  They  will  influence  our  results  if  these  events  are 
disproportionately likely to happen in firms that produce IT patents relative to those that patent 
in other technological areas.  

Our  primary  means  of  mapping  patents  to  counties  is  based  on  the  mapping  provided  in  the 
PatentsView.org  data.  In  cases  where  this  mapping  is  unavailable,  we  used  the  longitude  and 
latitude  provided  by  the  PTO  and  the  Stata  program  GEOINPOLY  (Picard  2015)  to  map  the 
locations to counties.  

For most of the analysis that follows, we do not weight by citations. For multiauthor patents, we 
divide  by  the  number  of  authors.  For  example,  if  a  patent  has  1  author  in  the  Bay  Area  and  2 
authors in Boston, it would count as 1/3 of a patent in the Bay Area and 2/3 of a patent in Boston. 
Our  results  are  generally  robust,  and  often  stronger,  using  three  year  and  five  year  citation
weighted measures. In the few instances where the citationweighted results differ qualitatively 
from the counts, we show both. Otherwise, we focus on the counts. 

Our  data  contain  a  total  of  2,448,280  patents.  In  1976,  there  were  41,122  new  patents  issued 
from the PTO. At the peak of our data in 2007, there were 107,744 patents.   

We  present  our  results  at  the  year  level,  as  aggregated  values  over  the  35  years  from  1976  to 
2010  inclusive.  This  is  therefore  a  descriptive  exercise  that  tests  whether  the  results  are 
consistent  with  increasing  concentration  of  patents  within  larger  firms  over  time,  in  patents 
related  to  IT  compared  to  other  technological  areas.  We  have  not  determined  the  primary 
cause(s) of the observed patterns. 

We measure concentration using Gini coefficients. The Gini coefficient is a measure of statistical 
dispersion.  While  typically  used  to  measure  economic  inequality,  it  is  also  a  useful  measure  of 
concentration (Giorgi 2020). Unlike the HirschmanHerfindahl index, the Gini coefficient captures 
whether  there  are  a  large  number  of  observations  that  have  very  little  share.  A  value  of  zero 
means  perfect  dispersion,  and  a  value  of  1  means  perfectly  concentrated.  In  general,  a  higher 
Gini coefficient means higher concentration.  

One  weakness  of  the  Gini  coefficient  as  we  use  it  in  the  context  of  patenting  is  that  it  will  not 
capture  firms  with  zero  patents.  In  other  words,  our  measures  condition  on  patenting.  This  will 
bias  our  results  if  the  increase  in  the  number  of  firms  patenting  over  time  systematically 
decreases  the  Gini  coefficient.  This  is  not  the  case  in  our  data  as  the  top  handful  of  firms  and 
counties  represent  an  increasing  share  of  patenting,  even  as  the  number  of  firms  and  counties 
with at least one patent increases over time. 

Overall,  this  data  gives  us  a  sense  of  the  general  patterns  in  the  concentration  of  patenting  by 
firm and location over time. 

Results 

We present five key results. We compare patenting in Computers and Communications to other 
HJT  categories.  In  some  cases,  for  brevity  we  will  refer  to  patenting  in  Computers  and 
Communications  as  "IT  patenting."  We  first  show  that  firm  concentration  in  IT  patenting  is 
increasing  over  time,  then  show  that  geographic  concentration  in  IT  patenting  has  similarly 
grown. We then turn to  an analysis  of first time  patenters, showing that the percent of patents 
coming from new firms has declined over time, and show that there has been an increase in the 
geographic  concentration  of  IT  patenters.  Last,  we  further  probe  our  earlier  results  by  showing 
the increases in firm and location concentration are robust across subcategories of IT patents.  

Firm  concentration  in  IT  patenting  is  increasing  over  time.  In  Figure  1  we  find  that  the  Gini 
coefficient  for  patents  in  the  Computers  &  Communications  patent  category  fell  from  0.66  to 
0.59 from 1983 to 1987, an 11% fall. This coincided with the diffusion of decentralized computing 
devices like personal computers. The Gini has been almost continually rising since then, though 
the  rate  of  growth  has  slowed  in  recent  years:  the  Gini  rose  to  0.77  in  2010.  The  Electrical  & 
Electronic  category  has  followed  a  similar  pattern,  though  the  decline  in  the  1980s  was  not  as 
pronounced and the subsequent rise not as great. Other categories of invention have increased 
over the same time period. In particular, Drugs & Medical rose from 0.45 to 0.63 between 1988 
and  2010.  However,  what  is  unique  about  Computers  &  Communications  was  the  pronounced 
fall  followed  by  significant  rise  observed  over  our  sample  period.  This  rise  was  largest  in  the 
1990s.  
Figure 1: Firm level concentration in IT patenting  




                                                                                           

Figures  2a  and  3a  shows  that  the  total  number  of  patents  and  patenters  (patenting  firms)  in 
Computers  &  Communications  is  growing,  even  as  concentration  also  increases.  Based  on  total 
patents  Computers  &  Communications  became  the  largest  patent  category  in  the  1990s,  and  it 
is  now  by  far  the  largest  category.  Some  of  this  is  driven  by  an  increasing  propensity  to  patent, 
as  highlighted  by  Hall  and  Ziedonis  (2001).  Figured  2b  and  3b  show  these  values  weighted  by 
citations  over  the  three  years  following  the  application.  These  citationweights  are  a  proxy  for 
quality (Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg 2005). Comparing Figures 2a and 2b, until 2000 the patterns 
for  the  citationweighted  data  in  Computers  &  Communications  look  similar  to  noncitation
weighted,  with  the  number  of  patents  in  both  categories  increasing  over  time.  After  2000  they 
diverge,  however.  While  the  total  number  of  citationweighted  patents  decline  after  2000,  the 
number of citationweighted patents in Computers & Communications experiences the sharpest 
absolute  and  relative  declines  over  time.  Nevertheless,  the  difference  between  IT  patents  and 
other  patents  remains.  IT  patents  continued  the  represent  the  largest  share  of  patenting, 
whether citationweighted or not.2  

We  further  note  that  in  Figures  2a  and  2b  some  patents  have  no  technology  category.  This  is 
because  of  the  transition  from  USPC  to  CPC  codes  mentioned  in  the  Data  section.  We  provide 
these  results  to  demonstrate  how  this  transition  influences  our  data.  Because  our  analysis 

2
 The other figures in this chapter show similar trends for counts and for citation-weighted measures. Therefore, we
only show the counts in order to keep the paper streamlined.
requires comparing patents across technology categories, in other Figures we drop these patents 
from our sample.  

Figure 2a: Total patents 




                                                                   

 

Figure 2b: Total patents, weighted by 3 year forward citations 




                                                                       
Figure 3a: Number of patenters 




                                                                               

Figure 3b: Number of patenters, weighted by 3 year forward citations 




                                                                           

Geographic  concentration  of  IT  patenting  has  grown.  Figure  4  shows  the  increasing  Gini  by 
location  over  time.  Location  is  defined  by  county,  and  so  there  has  been  a  large  increase  in 
location  concentration  in  Computers  &  Communication  since  1985.  This  increase  is  particularly 
pronounced in the 1990s. This result is similar to Forman, Goldfarb, and Greenstein (2016) who 
found a large increase in IT patenting in the San Francisco Bay Area in particular. As was the case 
with firm concentration, we see similar but more muted patterns in Electrical & Electronic and a 
similarly  strong  trend  of  increases  in  concentration  among  Drugs  &  Medical.  Of  course,  if 
invention is increasingly concentrated in fewer firms then firm concentration could contribute to 
geographic  concentration  if  firms  have  a  limited  number  of  geographic  centers  of  invention 
(Ellison and Glaeser 1997). We explore this possibility in further detail below.  

Figure 4: Locationlevel concentration in IT patenting over time 




                                                                                          

Examination of new patenters 

Decline in new patenters 20002010. We now explore changes in the number of new (first time) 
patenters. Figure 5 shows a steady decline in new patenters over time. It compares the share of 
new  patents  that  are  coming  from  new  firms  for  each  year.  Since  our  data  begin  in  1976,  all 
patenters  in  1976  are  new  and  the  subsequent  decline  across  all  categories  of  invention 
subsequently  is  in  part  mechanical.  Figure  5a  shows  all  patenters  and  figure  5b  excludes 
individual patenters and focuses on firms only. Figure 5c shows the individual patenters only. All 
three figures reveal similar patterns. 

The  share  of  patenters  from  new  firms  in  Computers  &  Communications  remained  fairly  stable 
between  1980  and  2000.  After  that  it  declined  sharply.  Beginning  in  the  late  1990s  a  series  of 
court  decisions  and  action  by  the  USPTO  changed  perceptions  about  the  patentability  of 
software3.  As  a  result,  the  sharp  decline  post2000  could  be  shaped  by  changes  in  the 
composition of patenting in Computers & Communications during this time period. However, the 
percentage of new patenters continued to fall until the end of our sample period. Put differently, 
the surprise here is that IT didn't fall 19802000, rather that IT did fall after. 

Figure 5a: New patenters over time 




                                                                             

Figure 5b: New patenting firms over time 




                                                                             


3
    See Hall and MacGarvie (2010) and Cockburn and MacGarvie (2009) for further details.
Figure 5c: Individual patenters over time 




                                                                     

Increased  geographic  concentration  of  new  IT  patenters.  Figure  6  shows  that  the  geographic 
concentration of new IT patenters has grown over time. In other words, the increasing geographic 
concentration  of patenting shown in Figure 4 is not mechanically a result of the increased firm
level  concentration  of  patenting.  New  firms  are  also  geographically  concentrated.  Figure  6a 
shows all first time patenters. Figure 6b shows firms only.  

 
Figure 6a: Geographic concentration of first time patenters over time 




                                                                            

Figure 6b: Geographic concentration of first time firm patenters over time 




                                                                           

Similar  results  across  IT  subcategories.  Figure  7  shows  that  the  general  trends  in  concentration 
by firm and concentration by location are robust across the different categories of Computers & 
Communications:  Communications,  Computer  hardware  &  software,  Computer  peripherals, 
Information storage, Semiconductor devices, and Electronic business methods & software.  
Figure 7a shows firm concentration. For electronic business methods & software, results prior to 
the  late  1990s  are  difficult  to  interpret  because  of  the  uncertainty  of  the  patentability  of 
software,  however  between  2000  and  2010  this  category  shows  the  fastest  rate  of  growth  in 
concentration,  from  0.53  in  2000  to  0.60  in  2010.  Semiconductor  devices  has  the  highest  Gini 
throughout most of the sample, but this declines between 2000 and 2010. Figure 7b shows that 
the increases in Gini by location hold across all subcategories of IT.  

Figure 7a: Firmlevel concentration over time by IT subclass 




                                                                     

Figure 7b: Locationlevel concentration over time by IT subclass 




                                                                     
Figure  8  provides  context,  showing  the  trend  in  total  patents  over  time  for  each  subclass.  It 
suggests that business methods & software grow from effectively zero in mid 1990s to comprise 
a meaningful share of all IT patents.  

Figure 8: Total patents over time by IT subclass 




                                                                        

Hypotheses on the rise of concentration 

The above analysis presents a puzzle. We have documented that the firmlevel and locationlevel 
concentration  of  IT  patenting  have  risen  over  time,  particularly  since  1990.  Here,  we  present  a 
number of hypotheses that could explain this rise. In this chapter, we will not test between these 
hypotheses. We leave that for future work.  

Why is firmlevel concentration rising? 

We identify ten possible (sometimes overlapping) reasons why we measure an increase in firm
level concentration in IT patenting over time: 

    1) Network  externalities  in  IT:  Network  externalities  are  important  for  a  variety  of  IT 
       applications (Shapiro and Varian 1998). If the value of a technology rises with the number 
       of  users,  either  directly  as  in  a  communication  technology  or  indirectly  as  in  online 
       platforms,  then  this  can  lead  to  an  increase  in  industry  concentration  (e.g.,  Katz  and 
       Shapiro  1985;  Armstrong  2006).  If  these  network  externalities  have  been  increasingly 
       important to IT over time (or if interoperability and common standards have become less 
       important),  then  this  could  lead  to  a  concentration  of  the  industry  overall  and  there  a 
       concentration in firmlevel IT patenting.  
      
2)   Superstar  effects  in  demand  for  IT:  Information  technology  has  lowered  the  cost  of 
     searching for information (Shapiro and Varian 1998; Goldfarb and Tucker 2019). This has 
     made comparison across products easier. Combined with low marginal costs, this can lead 
     to a superstar effect, in which a small number of firms that offer superior quality dominate 
     (Rosen 1981; Bar Isaac et al 2012).  
      
3)   High fixed costs: In addition to superstar effects, industries with high fixed costs and low 
     marginal costs have barriers to entry and a minimum efficient scale. As Shapiro and Varian 
     (1998) emphasize, information goods are high fixed cost and low marginal cost. Many IT 
     products  are  information  goods.  Furthermore,  high  fixed cost  and  low  marginal  cost are 
     also  characteristics  of  IT  hardware.  Generally,  this  will  lead  to  a  barrier  to  entry  and  a 
     relatively small number of firms. To the extent that fixed costs have risen over time, this 
     could explain the increased concentration. 
      
4)   Endogenous sunk costs: Sutton (1998) emphasized that the cost structure of an industry 
     is endogenous. As leading firms compete with each other in R&D, it requires an increasing 
     amount  of  resources  for  a  new  entrant  to  compete.  These  endogenous  sunk  costs 
     increase concentration of an industry over time. As the leading IT firms invest in R&D, it 
     may  have  become  harder  for  new entrants  to  join  the  industry.  In  this  way,  competitive 
     pressure  between  the  leading  firms  can  lead  to  the  concentration  of  an  industry  over 
     time. 
      
5)   Intangible  capital:  There  has  been  a  sustained  increase  in  the  importance  of  intangible 
     capital over time. This increase in the role of management practices, business processes, 
     and  firmspecific  employee  skills  is  not  captured  in  standard  measures  of  investment 
     (Corrado, Hulten, and Sichel 2009). This growth is particularly pronounced among IT using 
     firms (Brynjolfsson et al 2008; Tambe et al 2019). Intangible capital represents a fixed cost 
     (and perhaps an endogenous sunk cost). It is also difficult to imitate; there is not an easy 
     strategy  for  a  new  entrant  to  invest  in  generating  the  intangible  capital  needed  to 
     compete. Intangible can therefore lead to firmlevel concentration among IT using firms. 
     These  IT  using  firms  may  also  create  patents  that  use  IT  as  a  critical  input  (Branstetter, 
     Drev, and Kwon 2019).  
      
6)   The  burden  of  knowledge:  Jones  (2009)  demonstrated  that  innovation  has  been  getting 
     harder  over  time.  Similarly,  Bloom  et  al  (2020)  demonstrated  that  the  productivity  of 
     innovation  is  falling.  New  ideas  are  getting  harder  to  find.  While  these  ideas  have  not 
    been  shown  to  be  specific  to  the  IT  industry,  they  would  increase  the  costs  associated 
    with patenting, and might therefore benefit large firms over small. 
      
7) Anticompetitive  behavior:  The  Stigler  Report  (Stigler  Center  2019)  emphasized  the 
    increasing  concentration  of  many  aspects  of  the  IT  industry.  More  generally,  the  IT 
    industry  has  been  the  subject  of  antitrust  scrutiny  for  decades,  with  cases  against  IBM, 
    AT&T,  and  Microsoft.  If  antitrust  scrutiny  and  merger  control  has  become  more  lenient 
    over time in the IT industry (e.g. Gutierrez and Philippon 2017; Valletti and Zenger 2019), 
    then  this  would  lead  to  increased  concentration  of  the  industry  generally  and  therefore 
    increased firmlevel concentration of patenting behavior.  
     
8) Maturity of the industry: Our data begin in 1976. At this time, the IT industry was relatively 
    new. In the early stages of an industry, it is not unusual for a large number of competitors 
    to  enter  and  then  for  a  few  firms  to  dominate  over  time  (Klepper  and  Graddy  1990; 
    Klepper  2002).  While  there  is  evidence  that  recent  IT  innovations  have  reduced  barriers 
    to entry for small firms (Jin and McElheran 2018), these forces may be dominated by the 
    increasing maturity of the industry.  
     
9) Uncertainty  and  changes  in  intellectual  property  protection:  The  strength  of  patents  has 
    historically been weaker among some inventions based on IT, particularly those based on 
    business methods and software. As we note above, strengthening of intellectual property 
    protection  in  software  was  coincident  with  an  increase  of  patenting  in  these  categories. 
    This increase in patenting may have made it more difficult for de novo startups to receive 
    financing  and  enter  into  markets  (Cockburn  and  MacGarvie  2009,  2011).  Conversely, 
    uncertainty  about  the  strength  of  patents  can  lead  to  concerns  about  expropriation  of 
    intellectual  property  assets  when  startups  contract  with  established  firms,  making  it 
    more difficult for markets for specialized suppliers to develop (Gans and Stern 2003; Gans, 
    Hsu, and Stern 2002).  
     
10) Bias in our analysis: The result may be driven by our use of patent data. If the largest firms 
    have become increasingly likely to patent their innovations (however marginal) over time, 
    then  this  will  lead  to  an  increase  in  measured  concentration  of  patenting  without  a 
    meaningful increase in the underlying concentration of innovation. This is related to the 
    prior point in that both are based upon changes in the patent system. However, the earlier 
    point  is  about  changes  in  equilibrium  outcomes  brought  about  by  these  changes, rather 
    than  mismeasurement  of  invention  caused  by  our  use  of  patents.  Many  of  our  other 
    empirical choices may lead to results that are not robust to other measures of innovation 
    and other measures of patenting. While we have examined robustness to some of these 
        choices, such as citationweighting, our goal has not been a comprehensive emphasis on 
        robustness.  Instead,  we  have  focused  on  identifying  a  puzzle  that  warrants  further 
        examination. 
         
The above hypotheses are not mutually exclusive. Furthermore, many build on the same idea of 
fixed costs leading to concentration. Overall, the relationship between concentration and welfare 
depends  on  the  relative  importance  of  these  hypotheses.  For  example,  given  fixed  costs  to 
innovation,  increased  concentration  of  innovation  may  be  efficient.  Other  hypotheses  such  as 
the  burden  of  knowledge  imply  that  increased  concentration  and  a  reduced  growth  rate  for 
welfare  are  consequences  of  other  forces.  Clearly,  if  increased  concentration  is  driven  by  an 
increase in anticompetitive behavior then it is welfarereducing.  

 

Why is locationlevel concentration rising? 

While  there  is  a  significant  body  of  work  on  locationlevel  concentration  in  invention,4  there  is 
less literature that might explain why we see differences in trends in locationlevel concentration 
in IT relative to other types of technologies.  Therefore, our hypotheses mostly draw upon work 
that  has  highlighted  the  reasons  for  location  level  concentration  more  generally,  and  leave 
understanding for why the benefits of concentration might be different in IT for future work. We 
identify four possible reasons: 

      1) Productivity  of  inventors  in  hightech  clusters:  Forman,  Goldfarb,  and  Greenstein  (2016) 
         find a general increase in innovation in the San Francisco Bay Area over time, and across 
         all  patent  classes.  They  suggest  this  might  be  due  to  agglomeration  economies  in 
         invention.  Moretti (2019) provides direct evidence of this,  demonstrating that inventors 
         are  increasingly  productive  in  hightech  clusters.  This  could  explain  the  increased 
         locationlevel  concentration  of  patenting  in  IT.  As  a  hightech  industry,  invention  has 
         increased  in  those  clusters,  either  because  investors  move  to  those  clusters  to  be  more 
         productive  or  because  the  inventors  in  the  clusters  become  more  productive  over  time 
         (or both).  
          
      2) Agglomeration  economies:  More  generally,  there  may  be  increased  agglomeration 
         economies  in  the  IT  industry,  independent  of  the  productivity  of  inventors.  Forman, 
         Goldfarb, and Greenstein (2012) and Dranove et al (2014) show that IT adoption is more 
         effective  in  cities.  Outside  of  IT,  the  increased  importance  of  agglomeration  economies 
         between 1980 and 2010 is welldocumented in the urban economics literature (Duranton 

4
    See, for example, Carlino and Kerr (2015), Audretsch and Feldman (2004), and Feldman and Kogler (2010).
       and  Puga  2004;  Glaeser  2012;  Helsley  and  Strange  2014).  If  industrial  activity  is 
       increasingly  concentrated  in  a  few  locations  and  effective  application  of  IT  in  using 
       industries  is  increasingly  concentrated  in  those  locations,  then  IT  innovation  will  be 
       increasingly concentrated. 
        
    3) Firmlevel concentration: For the most part, the hypotheses on the increase in firmlevel 
       concentration  are  unrelated  to  those  on  locationlevel  concentration.  This  hypothesis  is 
       an  important  exception.  An  increase  in  firmlevel  concentration  could  mechanically 
       increase  locationlevel  concentration.  If  a  small  number  of  firms  increasingly  dominate 
       patenting, and if each firm focuses its patenting in a small number of locations, then the 
       increase  in  firmlevel  concentration  directly  leads  to  an  increase  in  locationlevel 
       concentration. If this is the primary reason for increased locationlevel concentration, the 
       locationlevel concentration is relatively uninteresting in itself. 
        
    4) Bias  in  our  analysis:  The  result  may  be  driven  by  our  use  of  patent  data.  As  with  our 
       analysis  of  firmlevel  concentration,  to  the  extent  that  our  measures  of  increased 
       concentration in patenting are attempts to measure concentration in innovation then we 
       are limited by what can be learned from patent data. If there is an increased propensity 
       to patent in certain locations over time (particularly in IT), then this could drive our result 
       and it might have little to do with innovation generally.   

Conclusions 

We document a change in concentration in patenting at both the firm level and the location level. 
We also document a decline in the fraction of new patenters from 2000 to 2010, especially in IT. 
We  further  find  that  patenting  has  increasingly  concentrated  across  a  smaller  number  of 
locations.  These  patterns  are  found  across  different  categories  of  IT,  though  there  is  some 
evidence that the patterns may be stronger in Electronic Business Methods and Software. These 
findings complement other recent evidence, found elsewhere, that the effects and incidence of 
technological change in IT are not shared equally across industries, firms, locations, and people.  

These  findings  are  important  because  many  prominent  companies  and  emerging  industries  use 
IT  as  a  critical  input  or  are  inherently  digital.  Furthermore,  IT  is  an  input  into  other  inventions. 
There is rising concentration across firms both in IT and outside of IT. There are reasons to expect 
IT  to  lead  to  concentration.  Therefore,  maybe  IT  is  to  blame.  As  noted  in  the  introduction,  this 
possibility has recently been more prominently raised in industries that are most easily digitized 
and who have been affected by digital platforms (Stigler Center 2019). However, there is a long 
run trend in increasing use of IT and software in other industries like manufacturing (Branstetter, 
Drev, and Kwon 2019) which may accelerate with the increasing diffusion of artificial intelligence 
(e.g., Cockburn, Henderson, and Stern 2019).  

The  increasing  concentration  of  software  innovation  in  a  smaller  number  of  locations  is  also 
important.  The  tendency  for  innovation  to  agglomerate  within  and  across  industries,  the 
increasing  concentration  of  innovation  in  IT,  and  IT's  increasing  using  as  an  input  in  innovation 
may  encourage  the  development  of  superstar  cities  documented  elsewhere  (Gyourko,  Mayer, 
and Sinai 2013). 

Our  research  is  subject  to  several  limitations.  For  one,  we  use  patents  as  our  measure  of 
invention.  Patents  are  a  useful  way  to  study  concentration  in  innovation,  particularly  because 
they  provide  a  consistent  measure that  are  available  over  a  long  period  of  time.  However,  they 
are  less  frequently  used  as  a  measure  of  intellectual  property  protection  than  in  other 
technologies  and  settings  discussed  in  this  book,  and  their  strength  has  varied  over  time,  both 
inside and outside our sample period. As a result, it is well known that the propensity to patent 
has varied over time, particularly in software, and so as a result our results must be viewed with 
some care. Further, our results end with patents applied for in 2010. As a result, our results miss 
recent  developments  that  may  arise  as  a  result  of  changes  in  digitization,  artificial  intelligence, 
and  cloud  computing,  among  others.  It  is  an  open  question  whether  the  results  are  stronger  or 
persist to the present day. Finally, our results are preliminary in the sense that we do not seek to 
explain why they are happening and what are their implications, if any. In particular, we do not 
show  whether  technological  trends  in  IT  explain  the  overall  changes  in  market  concentration, 
location concentration, labor share, or productivity. 

Despite these limitations, our contribution is to document a new pattern in the time trends in IT 
patenting.  Both  firmlevel  concentration  and  locationlevel  concentration  have  increased  over 
time.  

 

References 

Andreessen, Marc. "Why Software is Eating the World," The Wall Street Journal, Aug. 20, 2011.   

Andrews, Dan, Chiara Criscuolo, and Peter N. Gal. 2019. "The Best Versus the Rest: Divergence 
Across Firms During the Global Productivity Slowdown." Centre for Economic Performance.  

Aral, Sinan, Erik Brynjolfsson, and Lynn Wu. 2012. "ThreeWay Complementarities: 
Performance Pay, Human Resource Analytics, and Information Technology." Management 
Science 58(5): 913931. 
Armstrong, Mark. 2006. "Competition in TowSided Markets." The RAND Journal of Economics 
37(3): 668691.  

Arora, Ashish, Andrea Fosfuri, and Alfonso Gambardella. 2004. Markets for Technology: The 
Economics of Innovation and Corporate Strategy. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press. 

Arora, Ashish, Lee G. Branstetter, and Matej Drev. 2013. "Going Soft: How the Rise of Software
Based Innovation Led to the Decline of Japan's IT Industry and the Resurgence of Silicon Valley." 
Review of Economics and Statistics 95(3): 757775. 

Audretsch, David, and Maryann Feldman. 2004. "Knowledge Spillovers and the Geography of 
Innovation." Chapter 61. In J. Vernon Henderson and JacquesFrançois Thisse, eds. Handbook of 
Regional and Urban Economics. Elsevier Volume 4: 27132739. 

Autor, David, David Dorn, Lawrence F. Katz, Christina Patterson, and John Van Reenen. 2017. 
"Concentrating on the Fall of the Labor Share." American Economic Review 107(5): 180185. 

Autor, David, David Dorn, Lawrence F. Katz, Christina Patterson, and John Van Reenen. 2020. 
"The Fall of the Labor Share and the Rise of Superstar Firms." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 
Forthcoming.  

BarIsaac, Heski, Guillermo Caruana, and Vicente Cuñat. 2012. "Search, Design, and Market 
Structure." The American Economic Review 102(2): 11401160. 

Berry, Steven, Martin Gaynor, and Fiona Scott Morton. 2019. "Do Increasing Markups Matter? 
Lessons from Empirical Industrial Organization." Journal of Economic Perspectives 33(3): 4468. 

Bessen, James, and Robert M. Hunt. 2007. "An Empirical Look at Software Patents." Journal of 
Economics and Management Strategy 16(1): 157189. 

Bloom, Nicholas, Charles I. Jones, John Van Reenen, and Michael Webb. 2020. "Are Ideas 
Getting Harder to Find?" American Economic Review 110(4): 11041144. 

Branstetter, Lee G., Matej Drev, and Namho Kwon. 2019. "Get with the Program: Software
Driven Innovation in Traditional Manufacturing." Management Science 65(2): 459954. 

Bresnahan, Timothy, and PaiLing Yin. 2017. "Adoption of New Information and 
Communications Technologies in the Workplace Today." Innovation Policy and the Economy 17: 
95124. 

Bresnahan, Timothy, and Shane Greenstein. 1996. "Technical Progress and CoInvention in 
Computing and in the Uses of Computers." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: 
Microeconomoics 27: 183. 
Bresnahan, Timothy, and Shane Greenstein. 1999. "Technological Competition and the 
Structure of the Computer Industry." Journal of Industrial Economics 47(1): 140. 

Bresnahan, Timothy F., Eric Brynjolfsson, and Lorin M. Hitt. 2002. "Information Technology, 
Workplace Organization, and the Demand for Skilled Labor: FirmLevel Evidence." The Quarterly 
Journal of Economics 117(1): 339376. 

Brynjolfsson, Erik, and Andrew McAfee. 2014. The Second Machine Age: Work, Progress, and 
Prosperity in a Time of Brilliant Technologies. New York, NY: W.W, Norton & Company. 

Brynjolfsson, Erik, Andrew McAfee, Michael Sorell, and Feng Zhu. 2008. "Scale Without Mass: 
Business Process Replication and Industry Dynamics. Unit Research Paper no. 07016, Harvard 
University. 

Brynjolfsson, Erik, Daniel Rock, and Chad Syverson. 2019. "The Productivity JCurve: How 
Intangibles Complement General Purpose Technologies." American Economic Journal: 
Macroeconomics. Forthcoming.  

Carlino, Gerald A., and William Kerr. 2015. "Agglomeration and Innovation." In Gilles Duranton, 
J.V. Henderson, and William Strange, Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics. Volume 5, 
349404.  

Cockburn, Iain, and Megan MacGarvie. 2009. "Patents, Thickets and the Financing of Early
Stage Firms: Evidence from the Software Industry", Journal of Economics and Management 
Strategy, 18(3), 729773. 

Cockburn, Iain, and Megan MacGarvie. 2011. "Entry and Patenting in the Software Industry", 
Management Science, 57(5), 915933. 

Cockburn, Iain M., Rebecca Henderson, and Scott Stern. "The Impact of Artificial Intelligence on 
Innovation: An Exploratory Analysis." Chap. 4 in The Economics of Artificial Intelligence, edited 
by Ajay K. Agrawal, Joshua Gans, and Avi Goldfarb. University of Chicago Press, 2019.  

Cohen, Wesley M., Richard R. Nelson, and John P. Walsh. 2000. "Protecting Their Intellectual 
Assets: Appropriability Conditions and Why U.S. Manufacturing Firms Patent (or Not)." NBER 
Working Paper no. 7552, Cambridge MA.  

Corrado, Carol, Charles Hulten, and Daniel Sichel. 2009. "Intangible Capital and U.S. Economic 
Growth." The Review of Income and Wealth 55(3): 661685. 

De Loecker, Jan, Jan Eeckhout, and Gabriel Unger. 2020. "The Rise of Market Power and the 
Macroeconomic Implications." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 135(2): 561644. 
Dranove, David, Craig Garthwaite, and Christopher Ody. 2014. "Health Spending Slowdown is 
Mostly Due to Economic Factors, Not Structural Change in the Health Care Sector." Health 
Affairs 33(8): 13991406. 

Duranton, Giles, and Diego Puga. 2004. "MicroFoundations of Urban Agglomeration 
Economies." Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics 4: 20632117. 

Eggertsson, Gauti B., Jacob A. Robbins, and Ella Getz Wold. 2018. "Kaldor and Piketty's Facts: 
The Rise of Monopoly Power in the United States." NBER Working Paper no. 24287, Cambridge, 
MA.  

Einav, Liran, Chiara Farronato, and Jonathan Levin. 2016. "PeertoPeer Markets." Annual 
Review of Economics 8(1): 615635. 

Ellison, Glenn, and Edward Glaeser. 1997. "Geographic Concentration in U.S. Manufacturing 
Industries: A Dartboard Approach." Journal of Political Economy 105(5): 889927. 

Evans, Peter C. and Annabelle Gawer. 2016. The Rise of the Platform Enterprise: A Global 
Survey. The Center for Global Enterprise. Available at 
https://www.thecge.net/app/uploads/2016/01/PDFWEBPlatformSurvey_01_12.pdf.  

Feldman, Maryann P. and Dieter Kogler. 2010. "Stylized Facts in the Geography of Innovation", 
Chapter 8 in Bronwyn Hall and Nathan Rosenberg Eds, Handbook of the Economics of 
Innovation, 381410, Elsevier. 

FernándezDelgado, Manuel, Eva Cernadas, Senén Barro, and Dinani Amorim. 2014. "Do We 
Need Hundreds of Classifiers to Solve Real World Classification Problems?" Journal of Machine 
Learning Research 15(90): 31333181.  

Forman, Chris, Avi Goldfarb, and Shane Greenstein. 2012. "The Internet and Local Wages: A 
Puzzle." The American Economic Review 102(1): 556575. 

Forman, Chris, Avi Goldfarb, and Shane Greenstein. 2016. "Agglomeration of Invention in the 
Bay Area: Not Just ICT." American Economic Review Papers & Proceedings 106(5): 146151.  

Foroughi, Cirrus, and Ariel Dora Stern. 2018. "Digital Innovation with High Costs of Entry: 
Evidence from SoftwareDriven Medical Devices." Working Paper, Harvard Business School.  

Furman, Jason, and Peter Orszag. 2015. "A FirmLevel Perspective on the Role of Rents in the 
Rise in Inequality." Presentation at "A Just Society" Centennial Event in Honor of Joseph Stiglitz, 
Columbia University. 

Gans, Joshua S. and Scott Stern. 2003. "The Product Market and the Market for "Ideas": 
Commercialization Strategies for Technology Entrepreneurs." Research Policy, 32, 333350. 
Gans, Joshua S., David H. Hsu, and Scott Stern. 2002. "When Does StartUp Innovation Spur the 
Gale of Creative Destruction?" The RAND Journal of Economics 33(4): 771586. 

Giorgi, Giovanni M. 2019. "Gini Coefficient." In SAGE Research Methods Foundations, edited by 
Paul Atkinson, Sara Delamont, Alexandru Cernat, Joseph W. Sakshaug, and Richard A. Williams. 

Glaeser, Edward. 2012. Triumph of the City: How Our Greatest Invention Makes Us Richer, 
Smarter, Greener, Healthier, and Happier. London, England: Penguin Books. 

Glaeser, Edward L., Hedi D. Kallal, José A. Scheinkman, and Andrei Shleifer. 1992. "Growth in 
Cities." Journal of Political Economy 100(6): 11261152. 

Goldfarb, Avi, and Catherine Tucker. 2019. "Digital Economics." Journal of Economic Literature 
57(1): 343. 

Graham, Stuart J.H., and David C. Mowrey. 2003. "Submarines in Software? Continuaitons in US 
software patenting in the 1980s and 1990s." Economics of Innovation and New Technology 
13(5): 443456. 

Graham, Stuart J.H., Marco Ceccagnoli, Matthew J. Higgins, and Jeongsik Lee. 2010. 
"Productivity and the Role of Complementary Assets in Firms' Demand for Technology 
Innovations." Industrial and Corporate Change 19(3): 839869. 

Graham, Stuart J.H., Robert P. Merges, Pam Samuelson, and Ted M. Sichelman. 2009. "High 
Technology Entrepreneurs and the Patent System: Results of the 2008 Berkley Patent Survey." 
Berkley Technology Law Journal 24(4): 12751328. 

Gutiérrez, Germán, and Thomas Philippon. 2017. "Declining Competition and Investment in the 
U.S." NBER Working Paper no. 23583, Cambridge, MA.  

Gyourko, Joseph, Christopher Mayer, and Todd Sinai. 2013. "Superstar Cities." American 
Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 5(4): 16799. 

Hall, Bronwyn H., Adam B. Jaffe, and Manuel Trajtenberg. 2001. "The NBER Patent Citations 
Data File: Lessons, Insights and Methodological Tools." NBER Working Paper no. 8498, 
Cambridge, MA.  

Hall, Bronwyn H., Adam Jaffe, and Manuel Trajtenberg. 2005. "Market Value and Patent 
Citations." The RAND Journal of Economics 36(1): 1638.  

Hall, Bronwyn H., and Megan MacGarvie. 2010. "The Private Value of Software Patents." 
Research Policy 39(7), 9941009.  
Hall, Bronwyn H., and Rosemarie Ham Ziedonis. 2001. "The Patent Paradox Revisited: An 
Empirical Study of Patenting in the U.S. Semiconductor Industry, 19791995." The RAND Journal 
of Economics 32(1): 101128. 

Helsley, Robert W., and William C. Strange. 2014. "Coagglomeration, Clusters, and the Scale and 
Composition of Cities." Journal of Political Economy 122(5): 10641093. 

Hendershott, Terrence, and Jie Zhang. 2006. "A Model of Direct and Intermediated Sales." 
Journal of Economics and Management Strategy 15(2): 279316. 

Henderson, J. Vernon, Ari Kuncoro, and Matthew Turner. 1995. "Industrial Development in 
Cities." Journal of Political Economy 103(5): 10671090.  

Huang, Peng, Marco Ceccagnoli, Chris Forman, and D.J. Wu. 2013. "Appropriability Mechanisms 
and the Platform Partnership Decision: Evidence from Enterprise Software." Management 
Science 59(1): 102121.  

Jin, Wang, and Kristina McElheran. 2018. "Economies Before Scale: Survival and Performance of 
Young Plants in the Age of Cloud Computing." Working paper, Rotman School of Management.  

Jones, Benjamin F. 2009. "The Burden of Knowledge and the `Death of the Renaissance Man': Is 
Innovation Getting Harder?" The Review of Economic Studies 76(1): 283317. 

Jorgenson, Dale W., Mun S. Ho, and Kevin Stiroh. 2005. Productivity, Volume 3: Information 
Technology and the American Growth Resurgence, vol 3. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press. 

Jullien, Bruno, and Alessandro Pavan. 2019. "Information Management and Pricing in Platform 
Markets." The Review of Economic Studies 86(4):16661703. 

Katz, Michael L., and Carl Shapiro. 1985. "Network Externalities, Competition, and 
Compatibility." The American Economic Review 75(3): 424440. 

Klepper, Steven. 2002. "Firm Survival and the Evolution of Oligopoly." The RAND Journal of 
Economics 33(1): 3761. 

Klepper, Steven, and Elizabeth Graddy. 1990. "The Evolution of New Industries and the 
Determinants of Market Structure." The RAND Journal of Economics 21(1): 2744. 

Kogan, Leonid, Dimitris Papanikolaou, Amit Seru, and Noah Stoffman. 2017. "Technological 
Innovation, Resource Allocation, and Growth." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 132(2): 665
712.  

McAfee Andrew, and Erik Brynjolfsson. "Investing in the IT That Makes a Competitive 
Difference." Harvard Business Review, JulyAugust 2008.  
MerriamWebster. 2020. https://www.merriamwebster.com/ 

Moretti, Enrico. 2019. "The Effect of HighTech Clusters on the Productivity of Top Inventors." 
NBER Working Paper no. 26270, Cambridge, MA.  

Picard, Robert. 2015. GEOINPOLY: Stata Module to Match Geographic Locations to Shapefile 
Polygons." Statistical Software Components, Boston College Department of Economics. 

Rosen, Sherwin. 1981. "The Economics of Superstars." The American Economic Review 71(5): 
845858. 

Rosenthal, Stuart, and William Strange. 2004. "Evidence on the Nature and Sources of 
Agglomeration Economies." Chapter 49. In J. Vernon Henderson and JacquesFrançois Thisse, 
eds. Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics. Elsevier Volume 4, p. 21192171. 

Shapiro, Carl, and Hal R. Varian. 1998. Information Rules: A Strategic Guide to the Network 
Economy. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business Press. 

Statista. 2019. The 100 largest companies in the world by market value in 2019. Available at 
https://www.statista.com/statistics/263264/topcompaniesintheworldbymarketvalue/.  

Stigler Center for the Study of the Economy and the State. 2019. "Stigler Committee on Digital 
Platforms: Report." Chicago: Chicago Booth.  

Stoffman, Noah, Michael Woeppel, and M. Deniz Yavuz. 2019. "Small Innovators: No Risk, No 
Return." Kelley School of Business Research Paper no. 195, Bloomington, IN.  

Sutton, Stephen. 1998. "Predicting and Explaining Intentions and Behavior: How Well Are We 
Doing?" Journal of Applied Social Psychology 28(15): 13171338. 

Syverson, Chad. 2017. "Challenges to Mismeasurement Explanations for the US Productivity 
Slowdown." Journal of Economic Perspectives 31(2): 165186. 

Tambe,  Prasanna,  and  Lorin  M.  Hitt.  2012.  "Now  IT's  Personal:  Offshoring  and  the  Shifting  Skill 
Composition  of  the  U.S.  Information  Technology  Workforce."  Management  Science  58(4):  678
695.  

Tambe, Prasanna, Lorin M. Hitt, Daniel Rock, and Erik Brynjolfsson. 2019. "IT, AI and the Growth 
of Intangible Capital." Working paper, Wharton.   

The Economist. 2018. "How to Tame the Tech Titans." Available at 
https://www.economist.com/leaders/2018/01/18/howtotamethetechtitans.  
Valleti, Tommaso M., and Hans Zenger. 2019. "Increasing Market Power and Merger Control." 
Competition Law & Policy Debate 5(1): 2635. 

 
