                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  DECIPHERING THE MACROECONOMIC EFFECTS OF INTERNAL DEVALUATIONS
                       IN A MONETARY UNION

                                            Javier Andrés
                                             Óscar Arce
                                     Jesús Fernández-Villaverde
                                           Samuel Hurtado

                                        Working Paper 27347
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w27347


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2020




The views expressed in this manuscript are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent
the views of the Eurosystem, the Bank of Spain, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27347.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Javier Andrés, Óscar Arce, Jesús Fernández-Villaverde, and Samuel Hurtado. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Deciphering the Macroeconomic Effects of Internal Devaluations in a Monetary Union
Javier Andrés, Óscar Arce, Jesús Fernández-Villaverde, and Samuel Hurtado
NBER Working Paper No. 27347
June 2020
JEL No. D42,E44,E63

                                          ABSTRACT

We study the macroeconomic effects of internal devaluations undertaken by a periphery of
countries belonging to a monetary union. We find that internal devaluations have large and
positive output effects in the long run. Through an expectations channel, most of these effects
carry over to the short run. Internal devaluations focused on goods markets reforms are generally
more powerful in stimulating growth than reforms aimed at moderating wages, but the latter are
less deflationary. For a monetary union with a periphery the size of the euro area's, the countries
at the periphery benefit from internal devaluations even at the zero lower bound (ZLB) of the
nominal interest rate. Nevertheless, when the ZLB binds, there is a case for a sequencing of
reforms that prioritizes labor policies over goods markets reforms.


Javier Andrés                                    Jesús Fernández-Villaverde
Universidad de Valencia                          Department of Economics
javier.andres@uv.es                              University of Pennsylvania
                                                 The Ronald O. Perelman Center
Óscar Arce                                        for Political Science and Economics
Banco de España                                  133 South 36th Street Suite 150
Calle de Alcalá, 48                              Philadelphia, PA 19104
Madrid 28014                                     and CEPR
Spain                                            and also NBER
o.arce@bde.es                                    jesusfv@econ.upenn.edu

                                                 Samuel Hurtado
                                                 Banco de España Alcalá 48, 28014
                                                 Madrid
                                                 Spain
                                                 samuel.hurtado@bde.es
1       Introduction
    Many policymakers and economists have read the European debt crisis of 2009-2014 as a call
to increase the competitiveness of the periphery of the euro area, mainly Italy, Spain, Portugal,
and Greece. For example, Draghi (2017) and the OECD (2015) have argued that such an increase
is vital to enhancing the growth prospects of these countries and reducing their dependency on
foreign savings. The economic fallout from the ongoing health crisis, which has hit Italy and
Spain particularly hard, is bound to revive this discussion over the next several years as these
countries struggle to rebuild their economies.
    Since nominal devaluations are impossible within a monetary union, Italy and Spain have
few short-run alternatives to restore competitiveness except through an internal devaluation.1
In those internal devaluations, a variety of policies push domestic prices and wages down in a
persistent manner.
    A straightforward policy to achieve this is to reduce production costs, for example, with lower
VAT or payroll taxes (Farhi et al., 2014). Unfortunately, the delicate budgetary conditions and
the high public debt to GDP ratios of the countries in the euro periphery impose tight limits
on this fiscal strategy.
    A more promising alternative is to implement structural reforms that reduce the mark-ups
in goods and labor markets. First, these structural reforms entail low budgetary costs. Second,
since at least Blanchard and Giavazzi (2003), economists have pointed out the many rigidities
existing in goods and labor markets in the periphery of the eurozone and, thus, the existence of
a "target-rich environment" for such reforms.
    However, internal devaluations that reduce the mark-ups in goods and labor markets bring
risks of their own. An internal devaluation begets, by its very nature, deflationary pressures. If
monetary policy does not accommodate these pressures, the economy undertaking a structural
reform experiences an increase in the domestic real interest rate. This increase may reverse the
gains from the internal devaluation.
    When might we lack monetary policy accommodation? First, when the devaluating country
is too small to affect the aggregate variables of the monetary union much. Take the case of
Malta, which accounts for around 0.1% of the euro area's GDP. No Maltese internal devaluation
will have any measurable effect on the euro area aggregates and, thus, on the nominal interest
rate of the eurozone. Second, when the monetary union is at the zero lower bound (ZLB) of the
nominal interest rate and further monetary easing is impossible. This last case has been singled
out by Eggertsson et al. (2014) as particularly dangerous for internal devaluations.
    1
     While gains in productivity are a less costly path than internal devaluations to restore growth, it may be
hard to gain much from them in the short run because of time-to-build lags in human capital and R&D. See,
nevertheless, Fern´
                  andez-Villaverde et al. (2012) for the importance of future improvements in productivity in
short-term outcomes. Lastly, notice that the European Union law prohibits the use of optimal capital controls
as those suggested by Farhi and Werning (2012) and tariffs.

                                                      2
    Deflationary pressures also bring a "Fisher effect": nominal debts increase their real value.
Debt deflation can be a daunting drag on the deleveraging process of households and firms in
countries with high private and public indebtedness (such as Italy and Spain in the 2010s).
Lastly, the improvement of domestic competitiveness may occur at the cost of harming trade
partners, generating negative spillovers for the rest of the monetary union.
    To analyze the macroeconomic effects of internal devaluations, we build a dynamic stochas-
tic general equilibrium model that incorporates the mechanisms we presented in our previous
discussion. First, we have a monetary union, with a common central bank that sets the nominal
policy interest rate using a Taylor rule, subject to a ZLB constraint. Second, the monetary union
is divided between a periphery region undertaking an internal devaluation and a core region that
receives spillovers from the internal devaluation. By making the size of the periphery arbitrarily
close to one, our model encompasses a closed economy. Conversely, by making the size of the
periphery arbitrarily close to zero, we encompass a small open periphery economy. We will
exploit this encompassing property in Section 4 to understand how our model operates. Third,
within each region, we have households and entrepreneurs, subject to borrowing constraints on
the long-term debt on which they rely to finance their investments in capital and real estate
(residential and commercial). Fourth, wages and prices are subject to monopoly power and
nominal rigidities.
    We employ our model to quantitatively measure the effects of internal devaluations imple-
mented through reductions in price and wage mark-ups. To make the internal devaluations
empirically relevant, we explore "marginal" reforms, where the mark-ups are permanently re-
duced by 1% (we also consider, as a robustness analysis, a reform that makes wages marginally
more flexible). Thus, we are not considering dramatic reforms, but policies that have a reason-
able chance of being feasible within the political-economic game of the periphery countries. In
addition, we gauge the effects of the internal devaluations under normal monetary conditions
and at the ZLB. To reflect the situation of the eurozone circa 2010, we engineer a spell at the
ZLB by hitting the economy with a large deleveraging shock (i.e., a tightening of the borrowing
constraint) and a negative demand shock (i.e., a substantial discount factor shock).
    Our first result is that internal devaluations stimulate output in the long run, with present
values of accumulated GDP gains in the periphery as high as 35%. While this number might
seem large, we are calibrating the model to replicate an environment with low real interest rates.
As emphasized by Blanchard (2019), in such an environment, any positive improvement in an
economy's efficiency has a large discounted value.
    In contrast to nominal devaluations, internal devaluations permanently reduce the incidence
of some real frictions and generate large long-run benefits. These long-run benefits help the core
because of the enhanced efficiency of the monetary union as a whole, an outcome that does not
occur with nominal devaluations, where the core usually loses. In our analysis, the supply-side


                                                3
effect is usually stronger than the demand channels that operate through the real exchange and
real interest rates.
    Our second result is that, in most cases of interest, the long-run positive effects of internal
devaluations carry over to the short run ­both in the periphery and the core­ whether or not the
ZLB binds. The mechanism is the expectations channel: higher long-run efficiency induces an
increase in investment today. A basic property of models with monopolistic competition is that,
when there is less market power, entrepreneurs want to produce more and at a lower price. For
that, they need more capital, even if the real rate increases at the ZLB. This result highlights
the importance of using models to assess internal devaluations that incorporate investment
and capital. Even in the presence of borrowing frictions, internal devaluations work mainly
through changes in the investment decisions of agents. This point was conjectured in Fern´   andez-
Villaverde (2014).
    Our third result is that labor market reforms bring smaller output effects and more muted
deflationary pressures than goods markets reforms. The reason, standard in new Keynesian
models, is that the cut in desired wage mark-ups has to overcome two layers of nominal rigidities
(wages and prices) to exert its effect on final goods prices. Hence, if the monetary union is at the
ZLB, labor market reforms are particularly attractive. In comparison, goods markets reforms
reduce output in the periphery only if we are at the ZLB and the size of the periphery is
above 55% of the GDP of the monetary union (at the ZLB, a goods markets reform in the
periphery always slightly lowers the output of the core through a standard terms of trade
channel). Fortunately, this 55% threshold is well above the size of the euro area's periphery.
    Our fourth result is a clear-cut implication concerning the optimal sequencing of reforms.
In the wake of a crisis hitting a monetary union that exhausts the monetary policy margins,
labor market reforms should be implemented as soon as possible, whereas it is advantageous to
postpone goods market reforms until nominal interest rates have lifted from the ZLB.
    We conclude that, once the general equilibrium effects of internal devaluations within a mon-
etary union are accounted for, the concerns about the undesired short-run effects of structural
reforms largely evaporate. While there are circumstances under which some goods markets re-
forms are counterproductive in the short run for the countries undertaking them, those cases
are not relevant given the actual size of the euro area's periphery. Nevertheless, when the
ZLB binds, there is a case for a sequencing of reforms that prioritizes labor policies over goods
markets reforms.
    Our paper contributes to the literature on the macroeconomic effects of structural reforms
in goods and labor markets prompted by the seminal work of Blanchard and Giavazzi (2003).
Following Andr´   es et al. (2017), Campagne and Poissonnier (2016), Eggertsson et al. (2014),
Fern´andez-Villaverde et al. (2012), Gal´ i and Monacelli (2016), and Gerali et al. (2015), among
others, we characterize the reforms as permanent reductions in price and wage mark-ups.


                                                 4
    Our main methodological contribution is that our model allows for a detailed analysis of the
different components of aggregate demand (consumption, investment, net exports) and supply
(employment, capital, real estate) in a monetary union environment where reforms trigger effects
on both the periphery and the core. Indeed, to show the importance of the spillover effects, we
will present a robustness analysis when we change the degree of economic integration between
the periphery and the core.
    In addition, and in contrast to the existing work, by placing the previous union-wide general
equilibrium channels at the heart of our analysis, we shed light on some of the most relevant
questions around the recent debate about the euro area, including i) the differential effects
within the union of internal devaluations; ii) how the size of the reforming region shapes the
aggregate effects of internal devaluations; iii) the optimal sequencing of implementing reforms;
and iv) the role of union-wide monetary conditions.
    Let us then start our analysis by presenting our model.


2    A core-periphery model of a monetary union
    We model a monetary union with two countries: periphery and core. Since we will rely on
the model to think about the policy choices that countries at the periphery face, we will employ
H (for home) to refer to the former and F (for foreign) to the latter.
    A fraction s of the total population in the monetary union (normalized to 1) lives in the
periphery. There are three types of representative consumers in each country: an unconstrained
household, a constrained household, and an entrepreneur. Households supply labor and obtain
utility from consumption and housing. The entrepreneur produces intermediate good varieties,
real estate for housing and commercial purposes, and equipment using labor, commercial real
estate, and equipment. In addition, the economy is populated by retailers, which transform
intermediate goods into final good varieties, and unions, which set wages. The prices of final
good varieties and wages are subject to nominal rigidities.
    The unconstrained household is a saver, while the constrained household and entrepreneur
are borrowers. Debt contracts between the saver and the borrowers are long term and subject to
real-estate collateral requirements because real estate is the only pledgeable asset in the economy.
If the value of their collateral is too low, borrowers may not take on new loans, and they repay
their outstanding debts at a fixed contractual rate. Otherwise, the constrained household and
entrepreneur borrow up to the limit posed by their collateral holdings.
    In terms of policy, each country has its fiscal authority, but both countries share a central
bank that sets the nominal policy interest rate using a Taylor rule, subject to a ZLB constraint.
Variables are defined in real per capita terms unless otherwise specified. The final consumption
goods basket of each country acts as the local numeraire.

                                                 5
    In terms of shocks and to analyze the effects of internal devaluations, we only need two
sources of uncertainty: first, a discount factor shock, which works as a demand shock; second,
a "loan-to-value" shock, which works as a deleveraging shock. In some of our quantitative
exercises, these two shocks will push the monetary union to the ZLB. Other standard shocks in
business cycle models ­productivity, monetary and fiscal policy, etc.­ are not powerful enough
in a plausible calibration to achieve such a goal (Fern´andez-Villaverde et al., 2015) and, hence,
are not required here.
    We now describe the model structure in the periphery country (the core country is analo-
gous). Further details of the model, which builds on Arce et al. (2016) and Andr´  es et al. (2017),
are laid out in the Appendix.


2.1     Households and the entrepreneur
   In country H , there is a representative unconstrained household, a representative constrained
household, and a representative entrepreneur, denoted respectively by superscripts u, c, and e.

2.1.1    Cost minimization

   The households and the entrepreneur, x = u, c, e, consume a basket of home and foreign
goods:
                                      (H -1)/H                                      (H -1)/H   H /(H -1)
                         1/H
               cx
                t = H          cx
                                H,t                + (1 - H )1/H cx
                                                                  F,t                                      ,        (1)

                                              p /(p -1)                                                 p /(p -1)
                                                                                                            

                                                                                      (z )(p -1)/p dz
                  1 x      (p -1)/p                                           1 x                
where   cx =
         H,t       c
                 0 H,t
                       (z )        dz          and      =       cx
                                                                 F,t           c
                                                                             0 F,t
                                                                                               aggre-
                              x                                         x
gate a continuum of home, cH,t (z ), and foreign final good varieties, cF,t (z ), with elasticities of
substitution p ,  p > 1.
   We use PH,t (z ) and PF,t (z ) to denote the prices of the home good variety z and the foreign
good variety z , respectively. Minimization of nominal consumption expenditure yields:
                                                                       -H
                                                            PH,t
                                          cx
                                           H,t    = H                       cx
                                                                             t
                                                             Pt
                                                                         -H
                                                                 PF,t
                                       cx
                                        F,t = (1 - H )                           cx
                                                                                  t
                                                                  Pt
                                                                        -p
                                                          PH,t (z )
                                       cx
                                        H,t    (z ) =                        cx
                                                                              H,t
                                                           PH,t
                                                                        -
                                                          PF,t (z )      p

                                       cx
                                        F,t   (z ) =                         cx
                                                                              F,t ,
                                                           PF,t

              1-H             1-H                  1/(1-H )
where Pt = H PH,t + (1 - H ) PF,t                               is the periphery's consumer price index (CPI),



                                                            6
                                    1/(1-p )
           1
PH,t =    0
               PH,t (z )1-p dz                 is the periphery's producer price index (PPI), and:

                                                         1                        1/(1-p)
                                                                       1-p
                                          PF,t =             PF,t (z )       dz
                                                     0


is a price index of foreign goods.
                                                                                 1
    Nominal spending on home and foreign goods equals PH,t cx                                 x
                                                                       H,t = 0 PH,t (z ) cH,t (z ) dz and
             1
PF,t cx                  x                                       x         x           x
      F,t = 0 PF,t (z ) cF,t (z ) dz , respectively, whereas Pt ct = PH,t cH,t + PF,t cF,t is total nominal
consumption spending.
    The home and foreign final good varieties are also used as inputs in the production of real
estate and equipment to be described below according to equation (1) and the aggregators for
cx         x
 H,t and cF,t . This symmetry assumption gives rise to demand functions by the entrepreneur
operating these technologies with the same form as the demand functions above.

2.1.2    The unconstrained household

   The unconstrained household maximizes:
                                                                                          1          1+
                                     u t                                                      nu
                                                                                               t (i)
                      E0         ( ) t          log (cu
                                                      t)     +    log (hu
                                                                        t)   -                          di ,
                           t=0                                                        0        1+

where t is a shock to the discount factor (common to all home agents in the model), hu   t are
                                                u
units of housing owned by the household, and nt (i) are labor services of type i  [0, 1]. The
discount factor shock will operate as a demand shock in our model.
    The budget constraint of this household is:
                                                                                                    1
                                                              Rt-1                                      Wt (i) u
         cu         h  u             u
          t + dt + pt ht - (1 - h ) ht-1 =                         dt-1 + (1 - w )                            nt (i) di - Tt ,
                                                               t                                0        Pt

where dt is the real value of net holdings of riskless loanable funds, ph
                                                                        t is the real price of housing,
h is the depreciation rate of housing, Rt is the gross nominal interest rate at which home agents
lend and borrow, t  Pt /Pt-1 is gross CPI inflation, w is a tax rate on labor income, Wt (i) is
the nominal wage for labor services of type i, and Tt are lump-sum taxes.

2.1.3    The constrained household

   The constrained household maximizes:
                                                                                      1          1+
                                      t                                                   nc
                                                                                           t (i)
                         E0          t         log (cc
                                                     t)   +  log (ht ) -                            di .
                              t=0                                                 0        1+



                                                                   7
These preferences are the same as those of the unconstrained household, except that  <  u ,
that is, the constrained household is more impatient. The higher impatience makes operative
the borrowing constraint (2) that we will describe momentarily.
   The constrained household faces the budget constraint:
                                                                           1
                                                Rt-1                           Wt (i) c
         cc    h
          t + pt [ht - (1 - h ) ht-1 ] = bt -        bt-1 + (1 - w )                 nt (i) di - Tt ,
                                                 t                     0        Pt

where bt is the real value of household debt outstanding at the end of period t.
    Unlike in most of the literature, which typically assumes short-term (one-period) debt, we
assume that debt contracts are long term, which generates a more realistic shape of the borrowing
constraint below. At the beginning of time t the household repays a fraction 1 -  of all nominal
debt outstanding at the end of t - 1, regardless of when that debt was issued (Woodford, 2001).
In real terms, the outstanding principal of household debt evolves as:

                                bt-1                  bt-1          bt-1
                         bt =        + bnew
                                        t   - (1 -  )      = bnew
                                                              t   +      ,
                                 t                     t             t

where bnew
         t    is gross new credit net of voluntary amortizations.
    Following Kiyotaki and Moore (1997) and Iacoviello (2005), bt cannot exceed a fraction mt of
                                                                            -1
the expected discounted value of the household's housing stock: bt  mt Rt      Et t+1 ph
                                                                                       t+1 ht . The
debt limit, however, is only effective as long as it exceeds bt-1 /t , which we will henceforth
refer to as the contractual amortization path. The "loan-to-value ratio" mt is a time-varying
exogenous stochastic process that induces cycles of leveraging and deleveraring. Thus, mt is the
second source of uncertainty in our model.
    Since lenders cannot force borrowers to pay back faster than the contractual amortization
rate (i.e., they cannot enforce bnew
                                   t  < 0), the following asymmetric borrowing constraint holds:

                           -1                        mt                    bt-1
                   bt     Rt  mt Et t+1 ph
                                         t+1 ht , if    Et t+1 pht+1 ht  
                                                     Rt                      t
                                                                                                        (2)
                           bt-1                      mt                   b t-1
                   bt           ,                 if    Et t+1 ph
                                                                t+1 ht <        .
                            t                        Rt                    t

This asymmetric borrowing constraint creates a double debt regime. In "normal times," in which
collateral values exceed the contractual amortization path, debt is restricted by the former. In
this regime, households can receive new credit against their housing collateral with the constraint
that such new credit does not exceed the gap between collateral values and the amortization
                                                        -1
path. Indeed, after some algebra, you get bnewt   mt Rt    Et t+1 ph
                                                                   t+1 ht - bt-1 /t .
    If collateral values become sufficiently low, the economy switches to an alternative regime,
in which there is no new credit and debt is restricted by the contractual amortization path.
Importantly, changes from one regime to the other occur endogenously, and may thus be affected

                                                    8
by the discount factor and "loan-to-value" shocks and policy.
   To understand the role of the borrowing constraint further, we can look at the condition
determining the optimal choice of housing:

                                    t                              mt
                         c  h
                         t pt =        +  Et c             h
                                             t+1 (1 - h ) pt+1 + t    Et t+1 ph
                                                                              t+1 ,                             (3)
                                    ht                             Rt

where x           x
        t = t /ct and t are the Lagrange multipliers associated with the budget constraint of
household type x = u, c and to the collateral constraint (2), respectively. Equation (3) illustrates
that, when the collateral constraint is binding (t > 0), the marginal value of housing is higher
than its utility service flows due to the possibility of borrowing against it.

2.1.4    The entrepreneur

      The entrepreneur operates three technologies under perfect competition. First, the en-
                                                                 e     k      e   h      1-k -h
trepreneur produces an intermediate good with technology yt        = kt -1 ht-1     (net)       , where
yt is output of the intermediate good, kt-1 is equipment, ht-1 is commercial real estate, and ne
  e                                                             e
                                                                                                        t
is a basket of labor services (to be defined below).
      The intermediate good is sold to retailers at a real (CPI-deflated) price mct (also the marginal
cost). We assume that the entrepreneur owns the equipment, with unit price qt and depreciation
rate k , and the commercial real estate, which has the same price, ph   t , and depreciation rate, h , as
housing. The basket of labor services is rented at wage Wt . Thus, the real cash flow from produc-
                                               Wt e
ing the intermediate good is r             e            h    e              e
                                 t = mct yt - Pt nt - pt ht - (1 - h ) ht-1 - qt [kt - (1 - k ) kt-1 ].
      Second, the entrepreneur operates a construction firm that produces new real estate units,
Ith , given the technology:

                                                                           2   1-
                                                       h        ih
                                                                 t
                              Ith   =   nh
                                         t     ih
                                                t   1-                -1            ,
                                                       2       ih
                                                                t-1


where nh                          h
         t is labor services and it is units of the basket of aggregated final good varieties according
to equation (1).2 The new real estate units can be used for residential (ht , hu      t ) or commercial
  e                                                            h    h h    Wt h     h
(ht ) purposes. The real cash flow from this activity is t = pt It - Pt nt - it .
    Third, the entrepreneur operates an equipment company that builds new equipment, It ,
given the technology:
                                                                  2
                                                  k      it
                                     It = it 1 -             -1     ,
                                                   2 it-1


   2
     We include labor services in the production function of construction firms to allow for long-run changes in
real estate prices. If  = 0, the real estate price in the steady state, pss , is one. In the more general case  = 0,
             -            -(1- )
ph
 ss = (wss )       (1 -  )       .

                                                         9
where it is units of the basket of aggregated final good varieties according to equation (1). The
real cash flow from this activity is k t = qt It - it .
             e
    Define bt as the real value of entrepreneurial debt outstanding at the end of period t and
r t as the profits of the retailer activity (to be described in the next subsection). Thus, the
entrepreneur maximizes:
                                                
                                           E0          t t log ce
                                                                t,
                                                t=0

subject to
                                         Rt-1 e
                             ce    e
                              t = bt -       b + e   h    k    r
                                                 t + t +  t +  t ,
                                          t t-1
and an asymmetric borrowing constraint analogous to the one on constrained households:
                                                                                   e
                          -1 e                           met                   e bt-1
                  be
                   t     Rt mt Et t+1 ph    e
                                       t+1 ht , if           Et t+1 ph  h
                                                                     t+1 t
                                                                          e
                                                                             
                                                         Rt                        t
                              e                                                   e               (4)
                           e bt-1                       me                      b
                                                                              e t-1
                  be
                   t                ,                 if t Et t+1 ph     e
                                                                    t+1 ht <         ,
                             t                          Rt                       t

where we allow for a different loan-to-value ratio (me                                           e
                                                      t ) and contractual amortization rate (1 -  )
for entrepreneurs. The entrepreneur has the same discount factor as the constrained household
and, therefore, she is also impatient.
    In the spirit of being a representative entrepreneur, the entrepreneur optimizes the activity
level of each of the three technologies individually, taking all prices parametrically.
    Again, it is instructive to analyze the optimality condition for commercial real estate:
                                             e
                                            yt +1                              me
                                                                                t
               e  h       e
               t pt =  Et t+1 mct+1 h             + (1 - h ) ph
                                                              t+1
                                                                           e
                                                                         + t      Et t+1 ph
                                                                                          t+1 ,   (5)
                                             het                               Rt
        e
where t   is the Lagrange multiplier associated with the constraint (4). As in equation (3), when
                                  e
the collateral constraint binds (t  > 0), the marginal value of commercial real estate is higher
than its production services, thanks to the possibility of borrowing against it.


2.2    Retailers
   Monopolistically competitive retailers (z  [0, 1]) purchase the intermediate inputs from
entrepreneurs at the real price mct , and transform them one for one into final good varieties.
Each retailer z faces a demand curve implied by the aggregator (1):
                                                       -p
                                         PH,t (z )               d
                             yt (z ) =                      yt  yt (PH,t (z )) ,
                                          PH,t

where yt is aggregate demand for the basket of home goods.


                                                       10
  Monopolistically competitive retailers are subject to nominal rigidities a  ` la Calvo (1983).
More concretely, a retailer that has the chance of setting its nominal price at time t solves:
                                   
                                                    e            PH,t (z )
                    max Et               (p )s      t+s
                                                      e
                                                        (1 - p )                    d
                                                                           - mct+s yt +s (PH,t (z )) ,
                    PH,t (z )
                                  s=0
                                                    t             Pt+s

where p is the probability of not adjusting the price and p is a tax rate on retailers' revenue.
The retailer uses the stochastic discount factor of the entrepreneur to value its profits since we
assume that these profits are transferred to the entrepreneur. Indeed, we could collapse the
entrepreneur and the retailer into a single agent at the cost of heavier algebra.
   If retailers were able to reset prices in every period (p = 0), they would set

                                                      ~H,t =        1     p
                                                      P                        Pt mct ,
                                                                  1 -  p p - 1

                                                                                                  1  p
where the desired price mark-up over nominal marginal cost,                                      1-p p -1
                                                                                                          ,     measures the degree of
monopolistic distortions in the goods markets.


2.3    Wage setting
    The entrepreneur, when operating the intermediate good and construction technologies, uses
                                                            s,c µs s,u 1-µs
a basket of labor services provided by households, nst = (nt ) (nt )        , where ns,x
                                                                                     t   are labor
services provided by a type-x household, x = u, c, to each technology s = e, h. We assume that
both labor services earn the same wage.
    The demand for the basket of labor service varieties from each household type is, for each
technology:
                                                            1                                w /(w -1)
                                                                             (w -1)/w
                                         ns,x
                                          t     =               ns,x
                                                                 t     (i)              di               ,
                                                        0
                                                    -w s,x                                                           1
    Cost minimization implies ns,x
                               t (i) = (Wt (i) /Wt )  nt , where Wt  ( 0 Wt (i)1-w di)1/(1-w )
is the nominal wage index. Total demand for each variety of labor services is thus:
                                                                                  -w
                                                                   Wt (i)
               nx
                t   (i)         ne,x
                                 t     (i) +   nh,x
                                                t     (i) =                             ne,x  h,x
                                                                                         t + nt    nd,x
                                                                                                    t (Wt (i)) .
                                                                    Wt

   As in Erceg et al. (2000), nominal wages are set a
                                                    ` la Calvo by a union representing all type-i
workers. When the union can reset the nominal wage at time t, it chooses Wt (i) to maximize:

                                                                                                                               1+
                                                                                                                                    
                    
                                               Wt (i) d,x                                                    nd,x
                                                                                                              t+s   (Wt (i))
                        ( x w )s xt+s (1 - w )         nt+s (Wt (i)) - t+s                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                    
               Et
       x=u,c        s=0
                                               P t + s                                                              1+



                                                                             11
where w is the probability of not adjusting the wage and  c =  . If workers were able to reset
wages in every period (w = 0), then they would charge a mark-up:

                                                     1    w
                                                                                                   (6)
                                                  1 -  w w - 1

over a weighted average of constrained and unconstrained households' marginal rates of sub-
stitution between consumption and labor. Thus, the desired wage mark-up (6) measures the
degree of monopolistic distortions in the labor market. The implied level of unemployment is
derived in the Appendix.


2.4    The fiscal authority
   The fiscal authority purchases an exogenously determined basket of home final good varieties

                                             1                        p /(p -1)
                                gt =             gt (z )(p -1)/p dz               ,
                                         0


which generates a demand for each home variety z equal to gt (z ) = (PH,t (z ) /PH,t )-p gt . We
assume full home bias in gt because we think about government consumption as mainly involving
home goods and services (i.e., a local police force or public schools).
   The fiscal authority balances its budget period-by-period by adjusting lump-sum taxes Tt :

                                Wt c              PH,t              PH,t
                            w      (nt + nu
                                          t ) + p      y t + 2 Tt =      gt .
                                Pt                 Pt                Pt

We have a 2 in front of Tt because each type of household pays the same lump-sum taxes.


2.5    The common central bank
                                                                               MU
    The common monetary authority sets the gross nominal policy interest rate Rt  according
to a simple inflation-based Taylor rule and subject to a ZLB constraint:

                                                                         
                                   MU
                                  Rt           ¯ M U M U
                                      = max 1, R                             ,
                                                     t


where  > 1, R    ¯ M U is the long-run target for the policy rate, and t    MU
                                                                                 = st + (1 - s) t  
                                                                                                     is
                                                                     
a measure of the union-wide gross CPI inflation rate, where t           Pt /Pt  -1 is the foreign CPI
inflation. Since we are dealing with a model with endogenous investment, once the central bank
picks a long-run target for the policy rate, it is also implicitly picking a long-run inflation target.




                                                        12
2.6     International linkages
                                                                                u
   The foreign agents demand baskets of the home good varieties cc       H,t , cH,t , etc., in the same
way as home agents. We assume that the law of one price holds for each home good variety,
                                                             
such that PH,t (z ) = PH,t (z ) for all z  [0, 1], implying PH,t = PH,t . Thus, export demand for
                                                        -p
each home good variety z is xt (z ) = (PH,t (z ) /PH,t ) xt , where real per capita exports equal:

                                                     -F
                          1-s                 PH,t               c     e         h
                     xt =     (1 - F )                    cu
                                                           t + c t + c t + it + it .
                           s                  Pt
        
with F    and F being the relative weight on foreign goods and the elasticity of substitution
between home and foreign goods, respectively, in foreign agents' consumption and investment
baskets. Pt is the core's CPI, and zt  
                                        , z = cu , cc , ce , i, ih , are per capita demand for home good
varieties by the different foreign agents.
    Home agents can lend to and borrow from foreigners and other domestic agents at a riskless
nominal rate Rt . The periphery's real (CPI-deflated) per capita net foreign asset position is
nf at  dt - bt - bet . To ensure stationarity of this net foreign asset position, we assume that Rt
is given by:
                                          MU                  Pt nf at
                                  Rt = Rt     exp -                       ,
                                                             PH,t gdpt
where  > 0 and gdpt is the real (PPI-deflated) per capita GDP (to be defined momentarily).


2.7     Aggregation and market clearing
                                                                           k     e            1-h -k
    Market clearing in the intermediate good market requires yt t = kt      -1 ht-1
                                                                                       h
                                                                                         (ne
                                                                                           t)        ,
                1              -p
where t  0 (PH,t (z ) /PH,t ) dz denotes relative price dispersion. Aggregate demand for
the basket of home good varieties is yt = cu      c      e             h
                                           H,t + cH,t + cH,t + iH,t + iH,t + gt + xt . Total demand
for real estate must equal total supply: hu           e    h                u              e
                                          t + ht + ht = It + (1 - h ) ht-1 + ht-1 + ht-1 . The
demand for equipment must equal supply: kt = It +(1 - k ) kt-1 . Labor market clearing requires
nu     c     e    h
  t + nt = nt + nt .
    We define real (PPI-deflated) per capita GDP as

                             Pt                  Pt
             gdpt  yt +         (qt It - it ) +       p h I h - ih
                           PH,t                 PH,t t t         t

                       Pt tot     Pt                               PF,t tot
                    =      ct +         qt It + ph  h
                                                 t It + xt -            cF,t + iF,t + ih
                                                                                       F,t      ,
                      PH,t       PH,t                              PH,t

                                                                 P
where in the second equality we used that zH,t = PP t
                                                   H,t
                                                             F,t
                                                       zt - PH,t zF,t for z = cu , cc , ce , i, ih , and where
ctot    u    c   e                                                        tot
 t  ct + ct + ct is total consumption (total consumption imports cF,t are defined analogously).
     Zero net supply of nominal international bonds requires sPt nf at +(1 - s) Pt nf a          t = 0, where



                                                     13
the core's real per capita net foreign asset position, nf at , is defined in the same way as nf at .
Then, we can combine all domestic market-clearing conditions and budget constraints to obtain
the periphery's current account identity:

                               Rt-1           PH,t      PF,t tot
                     nf at =        nf at-1 +      xt -      cF,t + iF,t + ih
                                                                            F,t .
                                t              Pt        Pt


3     Calibration
    Table 1 summarizes the calibration of our model to the eurozone using a quarter as a period.
First, we select union-wide parameter values. We define the periphery as Italy, Spain, Portugal,
and Greece (we do not consider Ireland part of the periphery because of its high GDP per capita
and already-flexible markets). Since these four countries constitute around 25% of the eurozone
GDP, we make s = 0.25. To allow for different choices of which countries to include in the
periphery, we will present robustness scenarios for this parameter value.
    The long-run inflation target   ¯ M U is set to 1, to be consistent with the tough stand of the
European Central Bank with respect to inflation during the 2000s. We follow Iacoviello (2005)
and set  , the discount factor of the impatient agents, to 0.98. Then, we pick  u = 0.994, the
discount factor of the patient household, to generate a R  ¯ M U = 1.021/4 , the observed nominal rate
at the start of 2007, right before the onset of the financial crisis in the eurozone, and roughly the
average of the previous decade. We assume a standard value of 1.5 for the Taylor rule coefficient
. The inverse labor supply elasticity is  = 4, consistent with a large body of micro evidence
suggesting low labor supply elasticities in the euro area. Finally, we set h = 0.01 (Iacoviello
and Neri, 2010) and k = 0.025.
    For transparency, we opt for selecting home-specific parameters using Spanish observations
for 2007, rather than building consolidated aggregates for the peripheral eurozone economies,
which involves complex issues of nonlinear weighting and comparability that would distract from
the focus of our analysis with little additional insight.
    In particular, we select  to replicate Spain's net foreign assets over GDP in 2007, nf ay     ss =
-79.3%. The parameter H is set to match gross exports over GDP in 2007 (26.9%). Based on
evidence for Spain in Garc´  ia et al. (2009), the price elasticity of exports and imports is set to
F = H = 1. The elasticities k = 0.11 and h = 0.21 are chosen to replicate the labor share
of GDP in 2007 (61.6%) and the share of equipment in the total stock of productive capital
(21.4%). The elasticity  matches the construction share of total employment in 2007 (13.4%).
The weight of utility from housing services, , helps to replicate gross household debt over
annual GDP (80.2%), and we set µh = µe  µ = 1/2. The adjustment costs, h and k , are
chosen such that the fall in construction and equipment investment in our baseline deleveraging
scenario resembles their behavior during the financial crisis that started in 2008. The Calvo


                                                  14
                                         Table 1: Calibration

           Parameter     Value                              Description
                s         0.25       size of periphery
           Preferences
             u ,  u      0.994       unconstrained household discount factor
             ,            0.98       constrained household discount factor
             ,              4        (inverse) labor supply elasticity
             ,            0.38       weight on housing utility
             p ,  p         7        elasticity of substitution across consumption varieties
             w ,  w       3.31       elasticity of substitution across labor varieties
                   
            H , F      0.72, 0.86    weight on domestic goods in consumption basket
             H , F          1        elast. of subst. between domestic and imported goods
           Technology
                  
             h , h        0.21       elasticity output w.r.t. real estate
                  
             k , k        0.11       elasticity output w.r.t equipment
             ,            0.43       elasticity construction w.r.t labor
                  
             h , h        0.01       depreciation real estate
                  
             k , k       0.025       depreciation equipment
             µ, µ         0.5        share of constrained households in labor baskets
            h ,    h      6.1        investment adjustment costs construction
            k ,    k      2.4        investment adjustment costs equipment
           Price/wage setting
                  
             p , p       0.67        fraction of non-adjusting prices
                  
            w , w        0.75        fraction of non-adjusting wages
           Debt constraints
            m,
             ¯ m ¯       0.70        household LTV ratio
            m e
            ¯ ,m ¯ e     0.64        entrepreneur LTV ratio
             ,           0.98        amortization rate household debt
             e ,  e        0.97      amortization rate entrepreneurial debt
           Monetary policy
            ,R¯M U    1.5, 1.021/4   Taylor rule coefficient, long-run policy rate



parameters are set to p = 2/3 and w = 3/4, consistent with survey evidence for the Spanish
economy (Druant et al., 2009).
     According to data from the Spanish Land Registry office, loan-to-value ratios for new mort-
gages prior to the crisis were slightly below 70%. We thus set m       ¯ = 0.70 for the household's
initial loan-to-value ratio. The entrepreneurial initial loan-to-value ratio ratio is chosen to match
the ratio of gross non-financial corporate debt to annual GDP (125.4% in 2007), which yields
m¯ e = 0.64. We calibrate the contractual amortization rates at 1 -  = 0.02 and 1 -  e = 0.03,
to replicate the average age of the stock of outstanding mortgage debt prior to the crisis.
     Finally, we can move to the parameter determining the degree of monopolistic distortions.
We set p = w = 0 because it allows us to isolate the effects of internal devaluations modeled as
changes to p and w from additional fiscal effects operating through changes in the lump-sum
taxes paid by the constrained households, Tt (see Andr´      es et al., 2017, for a discussion of the
effects of reforms implemented via reductions in p and w ). We set p = 7 to get an initial


                                                    15
price mark-up of (1 - p )-1 p /(p - 1) = 1.17, which is broadly consistent with estimates by
Montero and Urtasun (2014) based on Spanish firm-level data. For wage mark-ups, we follow
Gal´i (2011) and target an unemployment rate of 8.6% in 2007, which yields an initial wage
mark-up of (1 - w )-1 w /(w - 1) = 1.43, which we achieve by setting w = 3.31.
    Notice that since we will trace the deterministic effects of an internal devaluation under
certainty equivalence, we do not need to specify the details of the stochastic processes governing
the discount factor and the "loan-to-value" shocks beyond their initial values. In most cases,
we will look at the values of these shocks in the steady state.
                                                                                         
    For the core, we assume a fully symmetric calibration, with two exceptions. First, F   is set to
normalize the terms-of-trade in the initial steady state to 1. Unlike H , which was calibrated to
match an exports target for the home country (equivalently, an imports target, given the target
                                 
for the NFA-to-GDP ratio), F       cannot be targeted to the foreign country's exports because
they must equal the home country's imports in the model. Second, we allow for an additional
parameter in the interest rate premium of the core to deliver interest rates that are the same in
both countries in the initial steady state. This extra parameter allows us to match what we saw
in 2007, when country-specific risk premia within the eurozone were close to zero. In particular,
              
we assume Rt    = Rt MU
                         exp [-  (Pt nf a                                              
                                          t /PF,t gdpt ) + 0 ], with  =  , and set 0 such that
         
Rss = Rss .


4 Internal devaluations in closed and small open economies
    We are now ready to evaluate how internal devaluations work. To do so, we first simulate
two extreme cases that shed light on the main mechanisms at work: a closed economy and a
small open economy within a monetary union. Our model in Section 2 encompasses both cases
by setting the relative size of the periphery close to 1 (a closed economy that includes all of
the monetary union) and to 0 (a small open economy that does not affect the monetary union
policy; recall our example of Malta in the introduction). The rest of the parameter values are
those in Table 1.
    An internal devaluation in this environment can be achieved by reducing either the steady-
state price or the wage mark-ups. We can call the former a goods markets reform and the latter
a labor market reform. For concreteness, we gauge the consequences of a reduction in these
mark-ups by 1% in both cases. Fixing the same size for both exercises, plus the fact that the
two reforms have similar long-run impacts on GDP, makes the policies comparable.
    What internal devaluations have in common with traditional nominal exchange devaluations
is that both seek to improve external competitiveness. But in contrast to nominal devaluations,
internal devaluations have a permanent impact on output that depends on the interplay among
demand- and supply-side channels.

                                                16
    On the demand side, the effects on the terms of trade and the real interest rate of an internal
devaluation crucially depend on whether the central bank is constrained by the ZLB and the
inflationary impact of the reform. On the supply side, these reforms mitigate the inefficiency
caused by the presence of market power in the economy and they realign the relative price of
labor and capital (which, unless otherwise stated, we will consider from now on includes both
equipment, k , and commercial real estate, he ).
    A reduction in the wage mark-up increases the demand for labor and leads to higher aggregate
labor income and consumption for empirically plausible values of the labor demand elasticity.
Likewise, the moderation of price mark-ups mitigates the distortions in the price of consumption
goods relative to leisure caused by market power and nominal rigidities, thus increasing the
supply of labor.3 Importantly, supply and demand channels operate differently depending on
the nature of the reform implemented and, to a lesser extent, on the macroeconomic environment
in which they take place.
    Admittedly, governments have at their disposal more sophisticated policy measures to achieve
internal devaluations. Those include incentives to investment in R&D or fostering firm creation
(Bilbiie et al., 2012) and growth (Andr´   es and Burriel, 2014, 2018), and reforms in the labor
market that encourage firms to post more vacancies, that induce workers to intensify their
search effort, or that make the matching more efficient (Cacciatore and Fiori, 2016; Cacciatore
et al., 2016). Those policies have positive effects on the economy, some of which are missing
in our exercises, especially in the medium and long run. The choice of a more basic policy
framework helps to compare the effects of internal devaluations with those of nominal exchange
rate devaluations that operate through demand realignments caused by transitory movements
in the terms of trade. More targeted transformations in goods and labor markets would have
additional side effects that, in the interest of clarity, we prefer to skip.


4.1     The closed economy case
    Figure 1 plots the impact of goods and labor markets reforms on aggregate variables in a
closed economy. Thus, we can think about this case more as a policy-induced deflation than
as an internal devaluation. We initialize the economy at its steady state and implement a
marginal (i.e., 1%) permanent reduction in either prices (continuous lines) or wage mark-ups
(discontinuous lines). To compute the transitional dynamics between the original steady state
with the original mark-ups and the new steady state with lower mark-ups, we use a Newton
method to clear markets period by period given zero realized aggregate shocks. We will apply
the same approach to the other exercises in the rest of the paper unless noted.

   3
     In this case, there is an offsetting effect on employment caused by the income effect that pushes the labor
supply upward. When the mark-up reduction is temporary, this supply-side effect is much weaker or even absent,
so the beggar-thy-neighbor effects dominate in favor of the periphery and against the core.

                                                      17
            Marginal effects of structural reforms, in a closed economy with no other shocks
                                   GDP                                         Employment                                      Consumption
            1.2                                             1.5                                                1
              1                                                                                              0.8
            0.8                                              1                                               0.6
            0.6                                                                                              0.4
            0.4                                             0.5                                              0.2
            0.2                                                                                                0
              0                                              0                                              -0.2
                  1   2   3    4    5   6    7   8   9 10          1   2   3    4   5    6   7   8   9 10          1   2   3    4   5   6   7   8   9 10

                               Investment                                      Asset Prices                                 Terms of trade
            2.5                                              1.2                                            1.5

             2                                                 1
                                                             0.8                                              1
            1.5                                              0.6
             1                                               0.4
                                                             0.2                                            0.5
            0.5                                                0
             0                                              -0.2                                              0
                  1   2   3    4    5   6    7   8   9 10          1   2   3    4   5    6   7   8   9 10          1   2   3    4   5   6   7   8   9 10
                              Gross exports                                     Inflation                                  Real interest rate
            1.5                                              0.2                                            0.2
                                                             0.1
                                                                                                              0
              1                                                0
                                                            -0.1                                            -0.2
            0.5                                             -0.2
                                                                                                            -0.4
                                                            -0.3
                                                            -0.4                                            -0.6
              0
                                                                   1   2   3    4   5    6   7   8   9 10          1   2   3    4   5   6   7   8   9 10
                  1   2   3    4    5    6   7   8   9 10
                      Structural reforms in goods markets
                      Structural reforms in labor markets
           Deviations from the baseline scenario. Horizontal axis in years.
           Since the model is for a closed monetary union, we approximate this closed economy by setting the size of the periphery to 0.95.

                                   Figure 1: Internal devaluations in a closed economy.


    Both reforms have a similar effect on GDP and inflation over the long run, but their impact
on capital and labor is very different. The labor market reform increases long-run employment
as the labor supply shifts downward along a given labor demand schedule. Higher employment
leads to a rise in labor income and, with it, higher consumption and GDP.
    The boost to activity following the moderation of price mark-ups comes mostly through an
increase in investment and the capital-labor ratio. When the economy is away from the ZLB,
the deflationary impact of this reform leads to a negative overreaction of the nominal interest
rate (recall the Taylor rule coefficient  = 1.5) that reduces the real rate, increases Tobin's
q, and stimulates investment. Also, lower price mark-ups soften the distortion in the relative
price of leisure vs. consumption goods caused by market power and nominal rigidities. Lower
price mark-ups increase the demand for labor and capital. Since the labor supply is inelastic in
our calibration ( = 4), the effect on employment is small (Campagne and Poissonnier, 2016,
explore the role of the elasticity of labor supply in the impact of mark-up reforms). Wages and
the capital-labor ratio rise significantly. Interestingly, consumption does not increase in the long
run, which reflects the need to finance the persistently higher level of investment.
    The short-run responses of these two reforms are even more different. Following the goods
markets reform, the impact on GDP, consumption, investment, asset prices, and employment
overshoots the long-run level of all these variables, whereas, after the labor reform, most variables
undershoot their long-run level. The powerful short-run effect of cuts in price mark-ups stems

                                                                                    18
from the substantial decline in the real interest rate and the significant increase in asset prices.
These changes set in motion the expectations channel that raises current private spending.
Furthermore, these responses result in an improvement in the borrowing capacity of credit-
constrained agents: consumption and investment rise on impact and investment remains well
above its pre-reform levels in the medium run. On the other hand, the wage mark-up reform
has little effect on inflation in the short term, so the real interest rate hardly reacts, and asset
prices remain flat. Absent this financial channel, both consumption, and investment increase
gradually over time as employment gathers momentum.
    These differences can be better understood by looking at the entrepreneurs' demand for
labor to produce the intermediate goods:

                                                 k            h   1/(h +k )
                                                       e
                               mct (1 - h - k ) kt -1 ht-1
                        ne
                         t   =                                                .
                                            wt

As W increases, the labor market becomes more competitive, and the real wage falls. A similar
effect appears in the demand for labor by the construction firm. The direct impact of this reform
on output, marginal cost, investment, and housing demand is weak, so employment increases
along with lower real wages. The dynamics of employment and output are mostly driven by the
sluggish adjustment in nominal and real wages, with little action in other aggregate variables.
    Following an increase in p , firms face a more competitive market. This reduces their mark-
up and increases demand and production along an upward-sloping marginal cost curve. The rise
in the marginal cost for a given real wage increases the demand for labor on impact. The rise
in the marginal product of labor is further sustained by the increase in k and he , which react
promptly through the overshooting of asset prices. As time goes by, the increase in the demand
for labor along a highly inelastic supply of labor gives rise to a significant increase in real wages
that wipes out most of the short-run employment gains.


4.2    The open economy case
    Figure 2 reveals that the patterns described in the closed economy case still appear in the
small open economy case, even if now the monetary policy response is absent. Following a
price mark-up reform (continuous lines), the ensuing disinflation does not trigger a reaction
of the area-wide policy rate and raises the real rate on impact. Nevertheless, this absence
is compensated by the real depreciation triggered by price moderation. When we lower the
wage mark-up (discontinuous lines), the trade channel operates more slowly, and the short-
run reaction of GDP, employment, consumption, and investment is negative. However, the
recession is marginal and very short-lived: after three quarters, GDP and other variables enter
into positive territory and converge smoothly toward their positive long-run responses.


                                                 19
           Marginal effects of structural reforms, in a small open economy with no other shocks
                                                    GDP                                           Employment                                      Consumption
               1                                                                1.2                                            0.8
             0.8                                                                  1                                            0.6
             0.6                                                                0.8
                                                                                0.6                                            0.4
             0.4
                                                                                0.4                                            0.2
             0.2                                                                0.2
               0                                                                  0                                              0
            -0.2                                                               -0.2                                            -0.2
                       1       2       3     4      5       6   7   8   9 10          1   2   3    4   5    6   7   8   9 10          1   2   3    4   5   6   7   8   9 10

                                            Investment                                            Asset Prices                                 Terms of trade
            4                                                                     1                                            0.2
            3                                                                   0.8                                              0
                                                                                0.6
            2                                                                                                                  -0.2
                                                                                0.4
            1                                                                                                                  -0.4
                                                                                0.2
            0                                                                     0                                            -0.6
            -1                                                                 -0.2                                            -0.8
                   1       2       3        4       5       6   7   8   9 10          1   2   3    4   5    6   7   8   9 10          1   2   3    4   5   6   7   8   9 10

                                           Gross exports                                           Inflation                                  Real interest rate
             0.3                                                               0.2                                             0.3
            0.25                                                                                                               0.2
                                                                                 0
             0.2
                                                                                                                               0.1
            0.15                                                               -0.2
                                                                                                                                 0
             0.1
                                                                               -0.4                                            -0.1
            0.05
               0                                                               -0.6                                            -0.2
                       1       2       3        4       5   6   7   8   9 10          1   2   3    4   5    6   7   8   9 10          1   2   3    4   5   6   7   8   9 10

                      Structural reforms in goods markets
                      Structural reforms in labor markets
           Deviations from the baseline scenario. Horizontal axis in years.
           Since the model is for a closed monetary union, we approximate this small open economy by setting the size of the periphery to 0.01.


                                       Figure 2: Internal devaluation in a small open economy.


4.3    Taking stock
   Although goods and labor markets reforms have similar effects on long-term GDP, they
display essential differences regarding their dynamics, the channels through which they operate,
their impact on employment, and the composition of aggregate demand. In the long run,
wage moderations are more employment-friendly, but they hardly affect total investment. In
contrast, the rise in output after a reduction in price mark-ups is mostly driven by an increase in
investment and the capital/labor ratio. The most remarkable difference between both reforms
occurs in the short term, when the price mark-up reform shows an overshooting of GDP and
employment with respect to their long-run levels, whereas the labor reform has only a very
limited impact during the first 2 to 3 quarters after the reform. The next section will show how
these asymmetric long-run responses of the aggregate variables operate in a monetary union.


5     Internal devaluations in a monetary union
    We revisit now the goods and labor markets reforms, but in a monetary union where, since
the periphery has our calibrated weight of 25%, there are sizable bidirectional repercussions of
reforms between regions. In this context, dimensions other than the nature of the reform itself
matter when we evaluate the impact of such reforms. In particular, we vary, in the short and


                                                                                                       20
long run: i) the country we focus on (periphery vs. the core); ii) the macroeconomic scenario
(normal monetary conditions vs. ZLB is operative); iii) the size of the periphery undergoing
the reforms; iv) the degree of trade integration; v) the sequencing of the reforms; and vi) the
flexibility of wages.


5.1    Reforms in the periphery and their impact on the core
    Figure 3 displays the effect of a marginal (i.e., 1%) permanent reduction in price mark-ups
in the periphery (continuous lines) and its impact on the core (discontinuous lines).

          Marginal effects of structural reforms in goods markets
                                                 GDP                                         Employment                                       Consumption
             1                                                            1.5                                             0.8
           0.8                                                                                                            0.6
                                                                            1
           0.6
                                                                                                                          0.4
           0.4                                                            0.5
                                                                                                                          0.2
           0.2
                                                                            0                                               0
             0
          -0.2                                                            -0.5                                            -0.2
                       1       2       3     4   5     6   7   8   9 10          1   2   3    4   5    6   7   8   9 10           1   2   3    4    5   6   7   8   9 10

                                            Investment                                       Asset Prices                                  Terms of trade
           4                                                               1.2                                              1
           3                                                                 1
                                                                           0.8                                            0.5
           2                                                               0.6
                                                                                                                            0
           1                                                               0.4
                                                                           0.2                                            -0.5
           0                                                                 0
          -1                                                              -0.2                                             -1
                   1       2       3        4    5   6     7   8   9 10          1   2   3    4   5    6   7   8   9 10           1   2   3    4    5   6   7   8   9 10

                                           Gross exports                                      Inflation                                   Real interest rate
           0.8                                                            0.2                                              0.15
           0.6                                                                                                              0.1
                                                                            0                                              0.05
           0.4                                                                                                                0
                                                                          -0.2
           0.2                                                                                                            -0.05
                                                                          -0.4                                             -0.1
               0                                                                                                          -0.15
          -0.2                                                            -0.6                                             -0.2
                       1       2       3     4   5     6   7   8   9 10          1   2   3    4   5    6   7   8   9 10           1   2    3    4   5   6   7   8   9 10

                     Periphery
                     Core
          Deviations from a baseline scenario with no other shocks. Horizontal axis in years.

               Figure 3: Goods markets reform in the periphery of a monetary union.

    In the periphery, the effect of this reform is positive both in the short and medium run, with
the exception of employment, which goes back to its pre-reform value after a few quarters, and
consumption, which actually falls below its pre-reform value quickly. Lower price mark-ups push
the inflation rate down and trigger a real exchange rate depreciation and opposite movements
(on impact) of the real interest rate in the periphery and the core.
    This pattern of responses replicates those in Section 4. As in the small open economy case,
the real interest rate increases in the periphery, but the contractionary effects of this channel are
limited and overwhelmed by the expansionary forces of net exports and investment. Regarding
the latter, the permanent rise in capital causes, already in the short run, a sharp increase in
real estate prices and investment.

                                                                                                  21
    The effects in the core are small but positive. Despite the beggar-thy-neighbor nature of
internal devaluations, the core enjoys the positive effects of the reduction in the relative prices
of goods imported from the periphery, as well as an increase in foreign demand, due to the
boom in the periphery. These two effects compensate for the appreciation of the real rate. This
result is a key difference between internal and nominal devaluations: in the former case, the
core suffers a real appreciation of its currency, but still benefits from the enhanced efficiency of
markets in the monetary union as a whole.

          Marginal effects of structural reforms in labor markets
                                     GDP                                      Employment                                         Consumption
             0.2                                               0.25                                             0.15
           0.15                                                 0.2                                              0.1
                                                               0.15
             0.1                                                                                                0.05
                                                                0.1
           0.05                                                                                                    0
                                                               0.05
              0                                                   0                                             -0.05
           -0.05                                              -0.05                                              -0.1
                   1   2   3     4    5    6   7   8   9 10           1   2   3     4    5   6   7   8   9 10           1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9 10

                                Investment                                        Asset Prices                                   Terms of trade
           0.4                                                 0.04                                              0.1
           0.3                                                 0.02
                                                                                                                0.05
                                                                  0
           0.2
                                                              -0.02                                                0
           0.1
                                                              -0.04
             0                                                                                                  -0.05
                                                              -0.06
           -0.1                                               -0.08                                              -0.1
                   1   2   3     4   5     6   7   8   9 10           1   2   3     4    5   6   7   8   9 10           1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9 10

                               Gross exports                                       Inflation                                    Real interest rate
             0.2                                               0.02                                             0.03
            0.15                                               0.01
                                                                                                                0.02
             0.1                                                  0
            0.05                                              -0.01                                             0.01
               0                                              -0.02
                                                                                                                   0
           -0.05                                              -0.03
            -0.1                                              -0.04                                             -0.01
                   1   2   3     4    5    6   7   8   9 10           1   2   3     4    5   6   7   8   9 10           1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9 10

                     Periphery
                     Core
          Deviations from a baseline scenario with no other shocks. Horizontal axis in years.

                  Figure 4: Labor market reform in the periphery of a monetary union.

    Figure 4 shows the effects of a marginal (i.e., 1%) permanent reduction in wage mark-ups
in the periphery (continuous lines) and its impact on the core (discontinuous lines). The effects
are similar to the ones from a price mark-up reduction. The effects on inflation and the terms
of trade are around ten times smaller since the cut in desired wage mark-ups has to overcome
two layers of nominal rigidities (wages and prices) to exert its effect on final goods prices. Thus,
the gain in competitiveness is weak. Nevertheless, inflation in the core increases, along with the
area-wide nominal interest rate. This makes the real rate rise in the periphery, inducing a small
recession in the very short run. As time goes by, wages adjust sluggishly, and both the supply
and the competitiveness effects gain traction, turning the effects in the periphery into higher
GDP, employment, consumption, and investment.
    The effects in the core are again small but positive. The loss of competitiveness of the
core is of minor importance compared with the positive supply-side effect induced by a more

                                                                                        22
competitive labor market in a significant proportion of the monetary union.4 Unlike in the
periphery, consumption in the core also increases in the short run. At longer horizons, the
positive output and employment effects become weaker, as the loss of competitiveness against
the periphery becomes stronger, and a negative trade effect gradually shows up.


5.2     Internal devaluations at the ZLB
    What happens when we undertake an internal devaluation at the ZLB, and the nominal
interest rates do not react to further deflationary shocks? To generate a ZLB scenario that
resembles the state of the eurozone during the early 2010s, the worst years of the euro crisis, we
combine two shocks. First, we permanently lower the "loan-to-value" ratios by 7.5 percentage
points (m¯ goes from 0.70 to 0.625 and m  ¯ e from 0.64 to 0.565) to trigger a credit crunch and push
the periphery into a lengthy deleveraging. Second, the whole monetary union is hit by a large
negative demand shock (i.e., a transitory discount factor shock). Given a persistence of 0.9, we
calibrate the innovation of the demand shock such that, in combination with the permanent
"loan-to-value" shock, the monetary union is sent to the ZLB for four quarters.5
    Taking the scenario with these two shocks as our baseline benchmark, we consider permanent
goods and labor markets reforms similar to the ones described above. We modify our solution
algorithm to consider the endogenous exit from the ZLB in the economy as the transitory
demand shock dissipates.
    In the case of the goods markets reform (Figure 6), the response in the periphery is more
muted than outside the ZLB. Since the reform is strongly deflationary, we trigger an increase
in the real interest rate. The lack of new credit in the deleveraging regime hinders growth in
variables such as consumption, which is the only main variable that changes sign because of
the presence of a deleveraging shock. The kinks in the response are caused by the nonlinear
effects stemming from the fact that the reform brings forward the time at which the deleveraging
process in the periphery comes to an end. Gross exports also grow less in the ZLB case, since,
with no reaction by monetary policy, the spillover effect in the core is now negative. Because of
the deflationary effects coming from the periphery, GDP, employment, consumption, investment,
and asset prices all fall on impact in the core. In the periphery, a goods markets reform increases
output and employment at impact even at the ZLB.
    Due to their relatively small effect on prices, labor market reforms (Figure 6) have an impact
under the ZLB very similar impact to that outside the bound, both in the periphery and in the
core, with significant increases in output, employment, and consumption.
   4
     For the positive effect on the core's GDP to be significant, the reform must be permanent: a temporary
reduction in wage mark-ups (not shown here in the interest of space) has a much smaller effect.
   5
     Fern´
         andez-Villaverde et al. (2015) show it is hard to generate endogenous spells at the ZLB that last for more
than four quarters without introducing a wedge in the investment optimality condition. This wedge, however,
makes it difficult to evaluate internal devaluations, since it affects all the optimality conditions of the agents.

                                                        23
Marginal effects of structural reforms in goods markets, when the baseline has ZLB
                                                   GDP                                                                   Employment                                                     Consumption
 0.6                                                                                       0.8                                                               0.1
 0.4                                                                                       0.6                                                                 0
                                                                                           0.4
 0.2                                                                                                                                                         -0.1
                                                                                           0.2
     0                                                                                                                                                       -0.2
                                                                                             0
-0.2                                                                                      -0.2                                                               -0.3
-0.4                                                                                      -0.4                                                               -0.4
              1       2           3        4       5       6       7       8       9 10              1       2       3       4       5    6   7   8   9 10              1       2   3    4    5   6   7   8   9 10

                                          Investment                                                                     Asset Prices                                                Terms of trade
 3                                                                                        0.8                                                                  1

 2                                                                                        0.6                                                                0.5
                                                                                          0.4
 1                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                          0.2
 0                                                                                          0                                                                -0.5

-1                                                                                        -0.2                                                                -1
          1       2           3           4        5       6       7       8       9 10              1       2       3       4       5    6   7   8   9 10              1       2   3    4    5   6   7   8   9 10

                                      Gross exports                                                                           Inflation                                             Real interest rate
 0.6                                                                                      0.2                                                                 0.4
 0.4                                                                                        0                                                                 0.3
                                                                                                                                                              0.2
 0.2                                                                                      -0.2
                                                                                                                                                              0.1
     0                                                                                    -0.4
                                                                                                                                                                0
-0.2                                                                                      -0.6                                                               -0.1
-0.4                                                                                      -0.8                                                               -0.2
              1       2           3        4       5       6       7       8       9 10              1       2       3       4       5    6   7   8   9 10              1       2   3    4    5   6   7   8   9 10

           Periphery
           Core
Deviations from a baseline scenario with deleveraging and negative demand shocks that have taken interest rates to the ZLB

                                                                       Figure 5: The ZLB. Goods markets reform.

Marginal effects of structural reforms in labor markets, when the baseline has zero lower bound
                                                   GDP                                                                   Employment                                                     Consumption
     0.2                                                                                  0.25                                                               0.12
                                                                                           0.2                                                                0.1
 0.15
                                                                                                                                                             0.08
                                                                                          0.15
     0.1                                                                                                                                                     0.06
                                                                                           0.1
                                                                                                                                                             0.04
 0.05                                                                                     0.05                                                               0.02
         0                                                                                   0                                                                  0
                  1       2           3        4       5       6       7       8   9 10              1       2       3        4      5    6   7   8   9 10              1       2    3    4   5   6   7   8   9 10

                                          Investment                                                                         Asset Prices                                            Terms of trade
  0.4                                                                                      0.04                                                                0.1
  0.3                                                                                      0.02                                                               0.05
  0.2                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                                                    0
  0.1                                                                                     -0.02
      0                                                                                   -0.04                                                              -0.05

 -0.1                                                                                     -0.06                                                               -0.1
              1       2           3           4        5       6       7       8   9 10                  1       2       3       4    5   6   7   8   9 10                  1   2    3    4   5   6   7   8   9 10

                                      Gross exports                                                                           Inflation                                             Real interest rate
  0.15                                                                                     0.03                                                               0.03
                                                                                           0.02                                                               0.02
     0.1
                                                                                           0.01
                                                                                                                                                              0.01
  0.05                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                          -0.01
         0                                                                                                                                                   -0.01
                                                                                          -0.02
 -0.05                                                                                    -0.03                                                              -0.02
                  1       2           3        4       5       6       7       8   9 10                  1       2       3       4    5   6   7   8   9 10                  1   2    3    4   5   6   7   8   9 10

           Periphery
           Core
Deviations from a baseline scenario with deleveraging and negative demand shocks that have taken interest rates to the ZLB

                                                                       Figure 6: The ZLB. Labor market reform.




                                                                                                                                     24
5.3    Internal devaluations and the size of the periphery
    How important is the size of the periphery on the effects of internal devaluations? We can
think about this question as addressing both the issue of what occurs when the size of the
periphery changes (e.g., a new country joins the eurozone) and gauging differences in how many
peripheral countries undertake an internal devaluation (e.g., just Spain doing so or Spain and
Italy simultaneously?).
    Figures 7 to 10 answer this question both under normal monetary conditions and at the
ZLB. We plot the short-term responses (i.e., the average of the first year of the simulation) of
different variables for the periphery (lines with squares) and the core (lines with crosses) as the
relative size of the former increases from 5% to 60% of the monetary union.
    Figure 7 shows the effect of a marginal (i.e., 1%) permanent reduction in price mark-ups
when the economy is away from the ZLB. The size of the periphery has little impact on the
response of aggregate variables at the periphery, except inflation, the terms of trade, and the
real interest rate, whose reaction becomes slightly more pronounced as the region undergoing
the reform gets larger.
    Why? Because as the size of the periphery increases, we have several forces operating in
different directions. On the one hand, the competitiveness channel loses strength: the size of
commercial partners against which competitiveness gains can be exploited narrows. On the other
hand, the supply effects gain strength, as a larger fraction of the monetary union is becoming
more efficient, and the real interest rate effect gets stronger as the deflationary impact becomes
more prominent and the central bank engineers a larger interest rate cut.
    Indeed, the larger the periphery, the more the core benefits. This result might seem coun-
terintuitive if we only consider the "beggar-thy-neighbor" nature of internal devaluations, but it
can be explained by the aggregate gains in efficiency and the accommodative reaction of nominal
interest rates. Both of these mechanisms depend positively on the size of the periphery.
    Figure 8 revisits the same exercise but at the ZLB. Now, as the periphery gets bigger, defla-
tionary pressures become larger, and so does the real interest rate. If the size of the periphery
is large enough, the negative real interest rate channel dominates and output, employment,
consumption, and investment fall both in the core and in the periphery.
    As in Andr´  es et al. (2017) and Gerali et al. (2015), our model predicts that an internal
devaluation achieved through goods markets reforms spurs economic growth, even if the economy
lacks an autonomous monetary policy or is at the ZLB. This result differs from that of Eggertsson
et al. (2014), who find that such reforms reduce output in the domestic economy and in the
monetary union as a whole at the ZLB. The response of asset prices and investment explains
this difference. As seen in Figure 6, the goods markets reform at the ZLB generates a sharp
appreciation of asset prices that is followed by a boost in domestic investment. Thus, the
expectations channel is a key element of the transmission mechanism that we want to include

                                                25
Marginal effects of goods markets reforms in periphery, depending on the size of periphery
Horizontal axis: size of periphery                                                                                                                                                                                                   Short-term effects (average of first year)
                    GDP                                                                                                                                 Consumption                                                                               Gross Exports
  1                                                                                                                  0.6                                                                                                             0.7
                                                                                                                     0.5                                                                                                             0.6
0.8
                                                                                                                     0.4                                                                                                             0.5
0.6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.4
                                                                                                                     0.3
0.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.3
                                                                                                                     0.2                                                                                                             0.2
0.2                                                                                                                  0.1                                                                                                             0.1
  0                                                                                                                   0                                                                                                                0
          0.05
                    0.10
                              0.15
                                       0.20
                                                0.25
                                                         0.30
                                                                  0.35
                                                                           0.40
                                                                                    0.45
                                                                                             0.50
                                                                                                     0.55
                                                                                                             0.60




                                                                                                                               0.05
                                                                                                                                        0.10
                                                                                                                                                 0.15
                                                                                                                                                          0.20
                                                                                                                                                                   0.25
                                                                                                                                                                            0.30
                                                                                                                                                                                     0.35
                                                                                                                                                                                             0.40
                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.45
                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.55
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.35
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.45
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.55
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.60
                           piH differential (ToT)                                                                                                         CPI inflation                                                                                           Real interest rate
 0.6                                                                                                                       0                                                                                                          0.05
 0.4                                                                                                                 -0.05                                                                                                               0
 0.2                                                                                                                  -0.1                                                                                                           -0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -0.1
  0                                                                                                                  -0.15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -0.15
-0.2                                                                                                                  -0.2                                                                                                            -0.2
-0.4                                                                                                                 -0.25                                                                                                           -0.25
-0.6                                                                                                                  -0.3                                                                                                            -0.3
           0.05
                     0.10
                               0.15
                                       0.20
                                                0.25
                                                         0.30
                                                                  0.35
                                                                           0.40
                                                                                    0.45
                                                                                             0.50
                                                                                                     0.55
                                                                                                             0.60




                                                                                                                                  0.05
                                                                                                                                           0.10
                                                                                                                                           0.15
                                                                                                                                           0.20
                                                                                                                                                                     0.25
                                                                                                                                                                     0.30
                                                                                                                                                                     0.35
                                                                                                                                                                                              0.40
                                                                                                                                                                                              0.45
                                                                                                                                                                                              0.50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.55
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.35
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.45
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.55
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.60
                                                           Periphery
                                                           Core
                                                            Figure 7: The size of the periphery. Goods markets reform

Marginal effects of goods markets reforms in periphery, depending on the size of periphery
Horizontal axis: size of periphery                                                                                                                                                                                                   Short-term effects (average of first year)
                    GDP                                                                                                                                   Consumption                                                                             Gross Exports
  0.6                                                                                                                      0                                                                                                          0.4
  0.4                                                                                                                -0.1                                                                                                             0.2
  0.2                                                                                                                -0.2
    0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                     -0.3
 -0.2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -0.2
 -0.4                                                                                                                -0.4
                                                                                                                     -0.5                                                                                                             -0.4
 -0.6
 -0.8                                                                                                                -0.6                                                                                                             -0.6
             0.05
                       0.10
                                0.15
                                         0.20
                                                  0.25
                                                           0.30
                                                                    0.35
                                                                             0.40
                                                                                      0.45
                                                                                              0.50
                                                                                                      0.55
                                                                                                              0.60




                                                                                                                                 0.05
                                                                                                                                          0.10
                                                                                                                                                   0.15
                                                                                                                                                            0.20
                                                                                                                                                                     0.25
                                                                                                                                                                              0.30
                                                                                                                                                                                      0.35
                                                                                                                                                                                              0.40
                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.45
                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.55
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.35
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.45
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.55
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.60
                            piH differential (ToT)                                                                                                          CPI inflation                                                                                          Real interest rate
  0.6                                                                                                                   0                                                                                                             0.4
  0.4                                                                                                                -0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.3
  0.2                                                                                                                -0.2
                                                                                                                     -0.3                                                                                                             0.2
      0
                                                                                                                     -0.4                                                                                                             0.1
 -0.2                                                                                                                -0.5
 -0.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                     -0.6
 -0.6                                                                                                                -0.7                                                                                                             -0.1
             0.05
                       0.10
                                0.15
                                         0.20
                                                  0.25
                                                           0.30
                                                                    0.35
                                                                             0.40
                                                                                      0.45
                                                                                              0.50
                                                                                                      0.55
                                                                                                              0.60




                                                                                                                                 0.05
                                                                                                                                          0.10
                                                                                                                                                   0.15
                                                                                                                                                            0.20
                                                                                                                                                                     0.25
                                                                                                                                                                              0.30
                                                                                                                                                                                      0.35
                                                                                                                                                                                              0.40
                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.45
                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.55
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.35
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.45
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.55
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.60




                                                                Periphery
                                                                Core

                                      Figure 8: The size of the periphery. Goods markets reform at the ZLB




                                                                                                                                                                 26
in models that evaluate internal devaluations.
     This pattern of response also explains why our model predicts that, at the ZLB, the positive
output effects are circumscribed to the periphery and do not reach the rest of the monetary
union, which departs from the predictions in Gerali et al. (2015). The key difference is that, in
our analysis, the internal devaluation is only implemented in one region, and thus their effects
are asymmetric across the monetary union. Importantly, the supply channel associated with the
efficiency gain of the internal devaluation is limited to the reforming country, so the rest of the
union only perceives the increase in the real interest rate and a real appreciation. Both forces
exert a negative effect on demand in the core with an intensity that depends positively on the
size of the periphery.
    Figure 9 shows that the positive effects of the wage mark-up reform under normal monetary
conditions are enhanced for both the core and the periphery when the size of the area imple-
menting the reform increases because the long-term benefits of the reform become larger. For
sizes of the periphery below 20%, the effect of the wage moderation in the periphery is negative
in the short run (in terms of GDP, employment, consumption, and investment), but it becomes
positive and larger as the size of the area undertaking the reforms increases beyond 25% of the
monetary union and the accommodative reaction of monetary policy becomes bigger. Consump-
tion is the main driver of this result: the response of exports also increases with the size of the
periphery, but net exports barely change due to a parallel rise in imports. The reform is mildly
deflationary in the periphery. In the core, the short-term effects are always positive, and this
spillover effect is increasing with the size of the periphery.
    Since the labor reform is just barely deflationary in the short term, the results described
above remain mostly unchanged even at the ZLB (Figure 10). Even without accommodative
monetary policy, the union-wide efficiency gain grows with the size of the periphery.
    Summing up: internal devaluations in a region of the monetary union through goods markets
reforms have union-wide expansionary effects when the real interest rate can fall with the positive
development on the supply side of the periphery. This positive impact may turn negative in
the short run for the whole monetary union only if the central bank is constrained by the ZLB
and the size of the periphery is large, in fact quite larger than the size of the periphery in the
euro area. A small periphery can always profit from the disinflationary effects of its reform by
exploiting its competitiveness gains against a big core.
    On the other hand, the short-run effects of labor market reforms are largely independent
of the monetary policy regime. Since the pass-through from lower mark-ups imposed by wage-
setters into final goods prices is low for this reform due to the double nominal-rigidity layer,
disinflationary effects are much smaller than under goods markets reforms. This ensures that
labor market reforms do not backfire in the short run even when there is no margin for monetary
policy accommodation and the periphery is big.


                                                27
Marginal effects of labor market reforms in periphery, depending on the size of periphery
Horizontal axis: size of periphery                                                                                                       Short-term effects (average of first year)
                    GDP                                                                                        Consumption                            Gross Exports
 0.06                                                                                           0.1                                         0.1
 0.04                                                                                         0.05                                        0.05
 0.02                                                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                  0
    0                                                                                                                                     -0.05
-0.02                                                                                         -0.05                                        -0.1
-0.04                                                                                          -0.1                                       -0.15
         0.05
                 0.10
                 0.15
                 0.20
                                      0.25
                                      0.30
                                      0.35
                                                           0.40
                                                           0.45
                                                           0.50
                                                                                0.55
                                                                                0.60




                                                                                                      0.05
                                                                                                             0.10
                                                                                                             0.15
                                                                                                             0.20
                                                                                                                    0.25
                                                                                                                    0.30
                                                                                                                    0.35
                                                                                                                           0.40
                                                                                                                           0.45
                                                                                                                           0.50
                                                                                                                                  0.55
                                                                                                                                  0.60




                                                                                                                                                    0.05
                                                                                                                                                           0.10
                                                                                                                                                           0.15
                                                                                                                                                           0.20
                                                                                                                                                                   0.25
                                                                                                                                                                   0.30
                                                                                                                                                                   0.35
                                                                                                                                                                           0.40
                                                                                                                                                                           0.45
                                                                                                                                                                           0.50
                                                                                                                                                                                   0.55
                                                                                                                                                                                   0.60
                  piH differential (ToT)                                                                       CPI inflation                                Real interest rate
 0.08                                                                                          0.02                                       0.04
 0.06                                                                                          0.01
 0.04                                                                                                                                     0.03
                                                                                                  0
 0.02                                                                                                                                     0.02
                                                                                              -0.01
    0
                                                                                              -0.02                                       0.01
-0.02
-0.04                                                                                         -0.03
                                                                                                                                             0
-0.06                                                                                         -0.04
-0.08                                                                                         -0.05                                       -0.01
         0.05
                 0.10
                 0.15
                 0.20
                                      0.25
                                      0.30
                                      0.35
                                                           0.40
                                                           0.45
                                                           0.50
                                                                                0.55
                                                                                0.60




                                                                                                      0.05
                                                                                                             0.10
                                                                                                             0.15
                                                                                                             0.20
                                                                                                                    0.25
                                                                                                                    0.30
                                                                                                                    0.35
                                                                                                                           0.40
                                                                                                                           0.45
                                                                                                                           0.50
                                                                                                                                  0.55
                                                                                                                                  0.60




                                                                                                                                                    0.05
                                                                                                                                                           0.10
                                                                                                                                                           0.15
                                                                                                                                                           0.20
                                                                                                                                                                   0.25
                                                                                                                                                                   0.30
                                                                                                                                                                   0.35
                                                                                                                                                                           0.40
                                                                                                                                                                           0.45
                                                                                                                                                                           0.50
                                                                                                                                                                                   0.55
                                                                                                                                                                                   0.60
                                              Periphery
                                              Core
                                                    Figure 9: The size of the periphery. Labor market reform

Marginal effects of labor market reforms in periphery, depending on the size of periphery
Horizontal axis: size of periphery                                                                                                       Short-term effects (average of first year)
                    GDP                                                                                        Consumption                            Gross Exports
 0.08                                                                                          0.1                                        0.15
                                                                                              0.08                                         0.1
 0.06
                                                                                              0.06
                                                                                                                                          0.05
 0.04                                                                                         0.04
                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                              0.02
 0.02                                                                                                                                    -0.05
                                                                                                 0
    0                                                                                         -0.02                                       -0.1
         0.05
                 0.10
                        0.15
                               0.20
                                      0.25
                                             0.30
                                                    0.35
                                                           0.40
                                                                  0.45
                                                                         0.50
                                                                                0.55
                                                                                       0.60




                                                                                                      0.05
                                                                                                             0.10
                                                                                                             0.15
                                                                                                             0.20
                                                                                                                    0.25
                                                                                                                    0.30
                                                                                                                    0.35
                                                                                                                           0.40
                                                                                                                           0.45
                                                                                                                           0.50
                                                                                                                                  0.55
                                                                                                                                  0.60




                                                                                                                                                  0.05
                                                                                                                                                           0.10
                                                                                                                                                           0.15
                                                                                                                                                           0.20
                                                                                                                                                                  0.25
                                                                                                                                                                  0.30
                                                                                                                                                                  0.35
                                                                                                                                                                          0.40
                                                                                                                                                                          0.45
                                                                                                                                                                          0.50
                                                                                                                                                                                  0.55
                                                                                                                                                                                  0.60
                   piH differential (ToT)                                                                      CPI inflation                                Real interest rate
  0.08                                                                                        0.04                                        0.04
  0.06                                                                                                                                    0.03
  0.04                                                                                        0.02
                                                                                                                                          0.02
  0.02                                                                                           0                                        0.01
     0
                                                                                              -0.02                                          0
 -0.02
 -0.04                                                                                                                                   -0.01
                                                                                              -0.04
 -0.06                                                                                                                                   -0.02
 -0.08                                                                                        -0.06                                      -0.03
          0.05
                  0.10
                  0.15
                  0.20
                                      0.25
                                      0.30
                                      0.35
                                                           0.40
                                                           0.45
                                                           0.50
                                                                                0.55
                                                                                0.60




                                                                                                      0.05
                                                                                                             0.10
                                                                                                             0.15
                                                                                                             0.20
                                                                                                                    0.25
                                                                                                                    0.30
                                                                                                                    0.35
                                                                                                                           0.40
                                                                                                                           0.45
                                                                                                                           0.50
                                                                                                                                  0.55
                                                                                                                                  0.60




                                                                                                                                                  0.05
                                                                                                                                                           0.10
                                                                                                                                                           0.15
                                                                                                                                                           0.20
                                                                                                                                                                  0.25
                                                                                                                                                                  0.30
                                                                                                                                                                  0.35
                                                                                                                                                                          0.40
                                                                                                                                                                          0.45
                                                                                                                                                                          0.50
                                                                                                                                                                                  0.55
                                                                                                                                                                                  0.60




                                              Periphery
                                              Core

                               Figure 10: The size of the periphery. Labor market reform at the ZLB




                                                                                                                28
5.4    Internal devaluations and the degree of trade integration
    How does the degree of trade integration between the core and the periphery change the
answers from the previous pages? We can answer this question by lowering H in equation (1),
the elasticity of substitution between home and foreign varieties, from our calibrated value of 1
to 0.67, which represents a lower degree of trade integration.

          Marginal effects of structural reforms in goods markets, when trade elasticities are set to 0.67
                                   GDP                                         Employment                                      Consumption
          0.8                                                  1                                            0.4
                                                             0.8
          0.6                                                                                               0.2
                                                             0.6
          0.4                                                0.4                                              0
                                                             0.2
          0.2                                                                                               -0.2
                                                               0
            0                                               -0.2                                            -0.4
                 1   2   3    4    5   6     7   8   9 10          1   2   3    4   5    6   7   8   9 10          1   2   3    4   5   6   7   8   9 10

                              Investment                                       Asset Prices                                 Terms of trade
             3                                                 1                                             1.5
           2.5                                               0.8                                               1
             2                                               0.6                                             0.5
           1.5
                                                             0.4                                               0
             1
           0.5                                               0.2                                            -0.5
             0                                                 0                                              -1
          -0.5                                              -0.2                                            -1.5
                 1   2   3     4   5     6   7   8   9 10          1   2   3    4   5    6   7   8   9 10          1   2   3    4   5   6   7   8   9 10

                             Gross exports                                      Inflation                                  Real interest rate
           0.6                                              0.2                                             0.2
           0.4                                                0                                             0.1
           0.2                                              -0.2                                              0
             0                                              -0.4                                            -0.1
          -0.2                                              -0.6                                            -0.2
          -0.4                                              -0.8                                            -0.3
                 1   2   3     4   5     6   7   8   9 10          1   2   3    4   5    6   7   8   9 10          1   2   3    4   5   6   7   8   9 10

                     Periphery
                     Core
          Deviations from a baseline scenario with no other shocks. Horizontal axis in years.

                         Figure 11: Lower trade integration. Goods markets reform.

    Figures 11 and 12 document that the positive effects of goods and labor markets reforms
(under normal monetary conditions) become smaller (symmetrically, a higher H makes the
responses stronger) and have more prolonged adverse transitory effects. In the core, the opposite
happens: a lower elasticity induces better output and employment outcomes.
    When H = 0.67, the periphery reacts more negatively and the core more positively in terms
of GDP, employment, output, and consumption. However, we have the opposite result for gross
and net exports in each region: exports evolve better in the periphery and worse in the core.
This result is explained by the real interest rate channel, which creates a demand effect that
ends up being stronger than the relative price effect. When H = 0.67, both reforms are more
deflationary in the periphery and more inflationary in the core, but the monetary union-wide
inflation rate is roughly unchanged. Thus, the rise in the nominal rate is also the same across
different elasticities of substitution. This makes for a larger increase in the real rate in the
periphery and a lower one in the core in the case of low trade elasticities, which in turn explains


                                                                                    29
          Marginal effects of structural reforms in labor markets, when trade elasticities are set to 0.67
                                   GDP                                          Employment                                        Consumption
           0.2                                               0.3                                              0.2
                                                             0.2                                              0.1
           0.1
                                                             0.1
                                                                                                                0
             0                                                 0
                                                                                                              -0.1
                                                            -0.1
          -0.1                                                                                                -0.2
                                                            -0.2
          -0.2                                              -0.3                                              -0.3
                 1   2   3     4   5     6   7   8   9 10           1   2   3    4    5    6   7   8   9 10           1   2   3    4    5   6   7   8   9 10

                              Investment                                        Asset Prices                                   Terms of trade
           0.4                                                0.1                                             0.2
                                                             0.05
           0.2                                                                                                0.1
                                                                0
             0                                              -0.05                                               0
                                                             -0.1
          -0.2                                                                                                -0.1
                                                            -0.15
          -0.4                                               -0.2                                             -0.2
                 1   2   3     4   5     6   7   8   9 10           1   2   3     4    5   6   7   8   9 10           1   2   3    4    5   6   7   8   9 10

                             Gross exports                                       Inflation                                    Real interest rate
           0.3                                              0.05                                              0.08
           0.2                                                                                                0.06
           0.1                                                 0
                                                                                                              0.04
             0
                                                                                                              0.02
          -0.1                                              -0.05
          -0.2                                                                                                   0
          -0.3                                               -0.1                                             -0.02
                 1   2   3     4   5     6   7   8   9 10           1   2   3     4    5   6   7   8   9 10           1   2    3    4   5   6   7   8   9 10

                     Periphery
                     Core
          Deviations from a baseline scenario with no other shocks. Horizontal axis in years.

                         Figure 12: Lower trade integration. Labor market reform.


why domestic demand rises less in the periphery and more in the core.


5.5    Reform sequencing
    A concern for policymakers is whether there is a desirable sequencing for implementing
reforms. Which reform should go first, goods or labor markets? The discussion relies not so
much on the likely interaction among these reforms, as in Blanchard and Giavazzi (2003), but
on the aggregate consequences of undertaking these reforms in our monetary union model, in
terms of the present value GDP gains derived from alternative sequencing strategies. Figure
13 and Table 2 provide some answers (in the interest of space, here we only present results for
GDP, but the effects on consumption, investment, and employment are equivalent).
    First, notice the large sizes of discounted output gains in Table 2, with gains as high as
35%. This number is the product of a gain of around 0.6% a year discounted in a world of
low real interest rates (around 2%). We calibrated our discount factors to generate such low
real interest rates because they correspond to the observations in Europe since the early 2000s.
As emphasized by Blanchard (2019), in such an environment, any positive improvement in an
economy's efficiency has a large discounted value. Our model simply reflects Blanchard's insight.
    Second, under normal monetary conditions (left panel of Figure 13), delaying any of the re-
forms reduces the present discounted value of their positive effects. However, when the monetary


                                                                                      30
  Marginal effects on GDP of structural reforms in goods and labor markets,
  depending on time of implementation, with two different baseline scenarios
              When the baseline scenario has no shocks                     When the baseline scenario has negative shocks and ZLB
      1                                                                1
    0.8                                                              0.8
    0.6                                                              0.6
    0.4                                                              0.4
    0.2                                                              0.2
      0                                                                0
   -0.2                                                             -0.2
          1    2     3    4    5     6    7     8     9    10                 1    2     3    4    5     6    7      8   9    10

          Periphery, when both reforms are implemented right away                 Periphery, when goods markets reform is delayed
          Core, when both reforms are implemented right away                      Core, when goods markets reform is delayed

                                              Figure 13: Reform sequencing.

union is at the ZLB (right panel of Figure 13; the baseline has negative demand and deleveraging
shocks that take the nominal interest rate to the ZLB for one year). At the ZLB, price mark-up
reforms have a negative impact on the core because of their deflationary effects. This, in turn,
moderates the positive response of activity in the periphery. Labor market reforms are instead
almost inflation-neutral in the core (even moderately inflationary), so postponing wage mark-up
reductions does not produce any positive differential effect.

                               Table 2: Present value of accumulated GDP gain

                                               Normal monetary conditions                          At the ZLB
                                               Periphery Core     MU                          Periphery Core             MU
          Simultaneous reforms                   35.3     1.6     13.4                          32.1     -0.8            10.7
          Delay labor reform                     34.5     1.6     13.1                          31.4     -0.9            10.4
          Delay prod. reform                     34.2     1.6     13.0                          34.1      1.6            13.0
          Net gain from:
          1) delaying labor reform                  -0.7        0.0               -0.3            -0.8            -0.1   -0.3
          2) delaying prod. reform                  -1.1        0.0               -0.4            2.0             2.4    2.3


    Consequently, in a scenario in which negative shocks have pushed the monetary union into
the ZLB, the present value of accumulated GDP gains is maximized when labor market reforms
are implemented right away, but the goods markets reforms are delayed.


5.6       An alternative reform: More flexible wages
   Our final experiment analyzes the effects of increasing the flexibility of wages in the periphery,
a dimension of labor market policies that has been frequently advocated in some euro area
countries (Gal´i and Monacelli, 2016). In particular, we lower the wage Calvo parameter, w ,
from 0.75 to 0.72. Notice that, as we did in previous experiments, we consider a marginal reform,
not a radical one, since the former is likely to be politically more feasible.

                                                                31
    Unlike the previous reforms, this change does not improve the steady state of the economy
because a change in the flexibility of wages does not affect steady-state wage mark-ups. Instead,
this reform affects how an economy absorbs shocks. Thus, the effects of such a reform can only
be gauged in scenarios in which the economy is hit by shocks. For the simulation below, we
use the same scenario as when we enforced the ZLB: the whole monetary union suffers an
exogenous negative demand shock and its periphery is hit by a deleveraging shock that brings
nominal interest rates against the ZLB.

           Marginal effect of having more flexible wages (lower wage Calvo parameter) in periphery when
           periphery is hit by a deleveraging shock and the whole area by a demand shock that takes it to the ZLB
                                      GDP                                          Employment                                        Consumption
            0.4                                                 0.5                                              0.12
            0.3                                                 0.4                                               0.1
                                                                0.3                                              0.08
            0.2
                                                                0.2                                              0.06
            0.1
                                                                0.1                                              0.04
              0                                                   0                                              0.02
            -0.1                                               -0.1                                                 0
                    1   2   3     4   5     6   7   8   9 10           1   2   3    4    5    6   7   8   9 10           1   2    3    4   5   6   7   8   9 10

                                 Investment                                        Asset Prices                                   Terms of trade
              1                                                 0.03                                             0.2
                                                                0.02
                                                                                                                 0.1
            0.5                                                 0.01
                                                                   0                                               0
              0                                                -0.01
                                                                                                                 -0.1
                                                               -0.02
            -0.5                                               -0.03                                             -0.2
                    1   2   3     4   5     6   7   8   9 10           1   2   3     4   5    6   7   8   9 10           1   2   3    4    5   6   7   8   9 10

                                Gross exports                                       Inflation                                    Real interest rate
              0.2                                              0.02                                               0.08
             0.15                                                 0                                               0.06
              0.1                                                                                                 0.04
                                                               -0.02
             0.05                                                                                                 0.02
                                                               -0.04
                0                                                                                                    0
            -0.05                                              -0.06                                             -0.02
             -0.1                                              -0.08                                             -0.04
                    1   2   3     4    5    6   7   8   9 10           1   2   3     4   5    6   7   8   9 10           1   2    3    4   5   6   7   8   9 10

                      Periphery
                      Core
           Deviations from a baseline scenario with demand shocks bringing interest rates to the ZLB, and deleveraging in the periphery

                                                    Figure 14: Making wages more flexible.

    Figure 14 depicts the marginal effects (i.e., the difference with respect to the response with
less flexible wages) of higher wage flexibility after the simultaneous occurrence of the two negative
shocks described above. The positive effects in the panels of this figure mean that, while those
shocks still have negative effects, they are smaller both in the periphery and in the core when the
periphery's wages are more flexible. After the contractionary shocks, more flexible wages make
the adjustment less harmful in employment, preventing a larger fall in consumption. Although
wage flexibility facilitates a faster downward adjustment of prices (and hence higher real rates
at the ZLB; this is in line with the intuition in De Long and Summers, 1986), wage flexibility
also improves competitiveness and has a stronger positive effect on exports.




                                                                                         32
6    Concluding Remarks
    In this paper, we have shown that, under conditions resembling those of the eurozone, internal
devaluations by countries at the periphery have substantial long-run benefits for these countries.
These benefits carry over to the short run, even at the ZLB, thanks to the expectations channel.
The gains in efficiency associated with goods and labor markets reforms outweigh a possible
lack of monetary accommodation.
    Interestingly, the core also benefits from the internal devaluations in the periphery, except
when these are centered around goods market reforms and the eurozone is at the ZLB. Thus,
in most cases, internal devaluations do not suffer from the "beggar-thy-neighbor" aspect of
nominal devaluations. And even in the cases where they do, a euro-wide policy coordination
can sequence the structural reforms to avoid most of the negative aspects of the absence of a
response in nominal interest rates.
    Our paper opens many avenues for future research, including exploring a richer set of struc-
tural reforms and analyzing how structural reforms and fiscal consolidation can be combined
to hasten the recovery from the current COVID-19 crisis. We hope to address some of these
questions in the near future.




                                               33
References
Andr´             ´ and Thomas, C. (2017). Structural reforms in a debt overhang. Journal
    es, J., Arce, O.,
 of Monetary Economics, 88:15­34.

Andr´
    es, J. and Burriel, P. (2014). Inflation dynamics in a model with firm entry and (some)
 heterogeneity. Technical report, Banco de Espa~ na.

Andr´
    es, J. and Burriel, P. (2018). Inflation and optimal monetary policy in a model with firm
 heterogeneity and Bertrand competition. European Economic Review, 103:18­38.

      ´ Hurtado, S., and Thomas, C. (2016). Policy spillovers and synergies in a monetary
Arce, O.,
  union. International Journal of Central Banking, 12(3):219­277.

Bilbiie, F. O., Ghironi, F., and Melitz, M. J. (2012). Endogenous entry, product variety, and
  business cycles. Journal of Political Economy, 120(2):304­345.

Blanchard, O. and Giavazzi, F. (2003). Macroeconomic effects of regulation and deregulation
  in goods and labor markets. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(3):879­907.

Blanchard, O. J. (2019). Public debt and low interest rates. Working Paper 25621, National
  Bureau of Economic Research.

Cacciatore, M. and Fiori, G. (2016). The macroeconomic effects of goods and labor markets
  deregulation. Review of Economic Dynamics, 20:1­24.

Cacciatore, M., Fiori, G., and Ghironi, F. (2016). Market deregulation and optimal monetary
  policy in a monetary union. Journal of International Economics, 99:120­137.

Calvo, G. A. (1983). Staggered prices in a utility-maximizing framework. Journal of Monetary
  Economics, 12(3):383­398.

Campagne, B. and Poissonnier, A. (2016). Structural reforms in DSGE models: A case for
  sensitivity analyses. Technical report, INSEE.

De Long, J. and Summers, L. H. (1986). Is increased price flexibility stabilizing? American
  Economic Review, 76(5):1031­1044.

Draghi, M. (2017). Structural reforms in the euro area. Introductory remarks at the ECB
  conference.

Druant, M., Fabiani, S., Kezdi, G., Lamo, A., Martins, F., and Sabbatini, R. (2009). How are
  firms' wages and prices linked: Survey evidence in Europe. Technical Report 1084, ECB.


                                             34
Eggertsson, G., Ferrero, A., and Raffo, A. (2014). Can structural reforms help Europe? Journal
  of Monetary Economics, 61:2­22.

Erceg, C. J., Henderson, D. W., and Levin, A. T. (2000). Optimal monetary policy with
  staggered wage and price contracts. Journal of Monetary Economics, 46(2):281­313.

Farhi, E., Gopinath, G., and Itskhoki, O. (2014). Fiscal devaluations. Review of Economic
  Studies, 81(2):725­760.

Farhi, E. and Werning, I. (2012). Dealing with the trilemma: Optimal capital controls with
  fixed exchange rates. Working Paper 18199, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Fern´
    andez-Villaverde, J. (2014). Discussion of Can structural reforms help Europe? Journal of
  Monetary Economics, 61:23­31.

Fern´
    andez-Villaverde, J., Gordon, G., Guerr´
                                           on-Quintana, P., and Rubio-Ram´
                                                                         irez, J. F. (2015).
  Nonlinear adventures at the zero lower bound. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control,
  57(C):182­204.

Fern´
    andez-Villaverde, J., Guerr´
                               on-Quintana, P., and Rubio-Ram´
                                                             irez, J. (2012). Supply policies
  and the zero lower bound. IMF Economic Review, 62(2):248­260.

Gal´
   i, J. (2011). The return of the wage Phillips curve. Journal of the European Economic
 Association, 9(3):436­461.

Gal´
   i, J. and Monacelli, T. (2016). Understanding the gains from wage flexibility: The exchange
 rate connection. American Economic Review, 106(12):3829­68.

Garc´
    ia, C., Mora, E. G., Martin, J. M., and Casas, P. T. (2009). Una actualizaci´
                                                                                on de las
 funciones de exportaci´
                       on e importaci´
                                     on de la econom´ia espa~
                                                            nola. Documentos ocasionales-
 Banco de Espa~na, 5:9­47.

Gerali, A., Notarpietro, A., and Pisani, M. (2015). Structural reforms, investment and zero
 lower bound in a monetary union. The Manchester School, 83:120­139.

Iacoviello, M. (2005). House prices, borrowing constraints, and monetary policy in the business
  cycle. American Economic Review, 95(3):739­764.

Iacoviello, M. and Neri, S. (2010). Housing market spillovers: Evidence from an estimated
  DSGE model. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2(2):125­64.

Kiyotaki, N. and Moore, J. (1997). Credit cycles. Journal of Political Economy, 105(2):211­248.



                                              35
Montero, J. M. and Urtasun, A. (2014). Price-cost mark-ups in the Spanish economy: A
 microeconomic perspective. Technical report, Banco de Espa~
                                                           na.

OECD (2015). Structural reforms in Europe: Achievements and homework. Technical report,
 OECD.

Woodford, M. (2001). Fiscal requirements for price stability. Journal of Money, Credit and
 Banking, pages 669­728.




                                           36
Appendix
    We provide now further details regarding how the labor market works in our model. Fol-
lowing Gal´  i (2011), we assume that each representative household consists of a unit squared
of individuals indexed by (i, j )  [0, 1] × [0, 1], where i represents the variety of labor service
provided by the individual and j indexes her disutility from working, given by j  . Let nx t (i) de-
note the number of variety-i workers in household x = u, c employed at time t. Total household
disutility from working is given by:

                                                1        nx
                                                          t (i)                             1          1+
                                                                                                nx
                                                                                                 t (i)
                                                                  j  djdi =                               di.
                                            0        0                                  0        1+

Given the type-specific wage Wt (i), the number of type-i workers that each household would
like to send to work is:
                                                                                                                   1/
                               Wt    (i) x         nx (i)1+                                          x t Wt (i)
             arg max         x
                             t          nt (i) - t  t                                           =                          x
                                                                                                                          lt (i) ,
                  x
                 nt (i)             Pt              1+                                               t  Pt

where x          x
          t  1/ct . Unemployment in the market for type-i labor is just the number of work-
                                                                                     x
ers willing to work at the going wage minus effective labor demand: ut (i)  x=u,c lt   (i) -
           x
   x=u,c nt (i).
    Let
                      1                                           1/            1                   1/                    1/
                                             x t Wt                                  Wt (i)                     x t Wt
            x
           lt              x
                          lt (i) di =                                                                    di =                  w,l
                                                                                                                               t ,
                  0                          t  Pt                          0         Wt                        t  Pt

                                        1                                        1                  -w
                                                                                     Wt (i)                       w,n
                           Ntx              nx
                                             t      (i) di =          nx
                                                                       t                                  di = nx
                                                                                                                t t ,
                                    0                                        0        Wt
denote total household-specific labor supply and labor demand, respectively, where w,lt  
  1              1/       w,n      1           -w
 0
    (Wt (i) /Wt ) di and t  0 (Wt (i) /Wt )        di are indexes of wage dispersion. Then,
aggregate unemployment is:
                                                                      1
                                                    ut                    ut (i) di = lt - Nt .
                                                                  0
                      x
where lt  x=u,c lt      and Nt  x=u,c Ntx are aggregate labor supply and labor demand, respec-
tively. The unemployment rate is urate  t  ut /lt .
    Finally, notice that the total nominal wage income earned by each type-x household equals
  1                                       e,x     h,x
 0
    Wt (i) nx              x          x
            t (i) di = Wt nt , where nt  nt + nt .




                                                                                37
