                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   HOW AND WHEN TO USE THE POLITICAL CYCLE TO IDENTIFY ADVERTISING
                              EFFECTS

                                        Sarah Moshary
                                       Bradley T. Shapiro
                                          Jihong Song

                                       Working Paper 27349
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27349


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2020




The authors would like to thank Sylvia Hristakeva, Mitch Lovett, Sanjog Misra and participants
at the 2019 Marketing Science Conference and the 12th Workshop on the Economics of
Advertising and Marketing for valuable feedback. Results calculated (or derived) based on data
from The Nielsen Company (US), LLC and marketing databases provided by the Kilts Center for
Marketing Data Center at The University of Chicago Booth School of Business. The conclusions
drawn from the Nielsen data are those of the researchers and do not reflect the views of Nielsen.
Nielsen is not responsible for, had no role in, and was not involved in analyzing and preparing the
results reported herein. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Sarah Moshary, Bradley T. Shapiro, and Jihong Song. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How and When to Use the Political Cycle to Identify Advertising Effects
Sarah Moshary, Bradley T. Shapiro, and Jihong Song
NBER Working Paper No. 27349
June 2020
JEL No. C01,C26,C36,L0,L62,M3,M37

                                           ABSTRACT

A central challenge in estimating the causal effect of TV advertising on demand is isolating
quasi-random variation in advertising. Political advertising, which topped $14 billion in
expenditures in 2016, has been proposed as a plausible source of such variation and thus a
candidate for an instrumental variable. We provide a critical evaluation of how and where this
instrument is valid and useful across categories. We characterize the conditions under which
political cycles theoretically identify the causal effect of TV advertising on demand, highlight
threats to the exclusion restriction and monotonicity condition, and suggest a specification to
address the most serious concerns. We test the strength of the first stage category-by-category for
274 product categories. For most categories, weak-instrument robust inference is recommended,
as first-stage F-statistics are less than 10 for 221 of 274 product categories in our benchmark
specification. The largest first-stage F-statistics occur in categories that typically advertise
locally, such as automobile dealerships and restaurants. Failure to use the suggested specification
leads to results that suggest violations of exclusion and monotonicity in a significant number of
categories. Finally, we conduct a case study of the auto industry. Despite a very strong first stage,
the IV estimate for this category is imprecise.

Sarah Moshary                                     Jihong Song
University of Chicago                             Princeton University
Booth School of Business                          jihongs@princeton.edu
5807 S Woodlawn Ave
Chicago, IL 60637
Sarah.moshary@chicagobooth.edu

Bradley T. Shapiro
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
Bradley.Shapiro@chicagobooth.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w27349
1        Introduction

        In 2016, political groups in the United States spent in excess of $4 billion on television advertis-

ing. By increasing the price of advertising time, this large disruption in the TV advertising market

may generate exogenous variation in non-political commercial advertising.1 Using this variation in

an instrumental variables (IV) framework was first suggested by Sinkinson and Starc [2018], which

estimates the effect of advertising for cholesterol-lowering drugs. In this paper, we provide a critical

evaluation of that approach using data across all product categories that advertise on television

in the United States. Our intention is to guide practitioners on how and when to use political

advertising as an instrument. We also seek to provide researchers a roadmap for scrutinizing IV

strategies that are meant to have broad applicability by establishing the properties and regularities

of this candidate instrument. This study may be read as a cautionary one. Our findings suggest that

despite the intuitive appeal of the political advertising IV strategy, the plausibility of the exclusion

restriction is sensitive to the specification, and the first stage is often weak. These findings highlight

pitfalls that may plague other IVs as well.

        We begin by characterizing the conditions under which the political advertising IV strategy is

valid. This first step is crucial for any IV strategy because the exclusion restriction and monotonicity

condition are not directly testable. Thus, a sound theoretical argument is needed to pinpoint a

specification that satisfies both conditions. In this case, the justification of the exclusion restriction

rests on the premise that political advertising reduces commercial advertising by increasing the price

of commercial advertising. Operationally, we argue that this requires the inclusion of television

market fixed-effects and time fixed-effects at the periodicity of the data in order to isolate the

price mechanism and prevent contamination from other sources that might violate exclusion or

monotonicity. These arguments apply to any past or future election where the television advertising

market continues to operate as it does in our data.

        Second, we characterize where the IV strategy has a sufficiently strong first stage to limit weak

instrument bias. We use data on political advertising and commercial advertising for 274 product

categories from 2010-2016. This data covers two US Presidential elections (2012 and 2016) and

several midterm, state, and local elections. Overall, we find that relatively few categories have a
    1
        https://adage.com/article/media/2016-political-broadcast-tv-spend-20-cable-52/307346/



                                                           2
sufficiently strong first stage to alleviate concerns about weak instrument bias. For example, in a

simple log-linear specification, we find that political advertising has a first-stage F-statistic less than

10 in 221 of 274 product categories and an F-statistic greater than 25 in only 28 categories.2 While

the exact number changes across specifications, the qualitative result is the same: most categories

exhibit a weak first stage.3 Overall, political advertising has a very concentrated effect on a few

categories that advertise almost exclusively locally; for example, advertising by car dealerships, hos-

pitals, household furnishings outlets, and appliance stores is strongly offset by political advertising,

while advertising for national brands in consumer packaged goods is not.4

       While the exact quantitative results on category-by-category first stage F-statistics do not nec-

essarily generalize to political advertising associated with all future elections, they are useful for two

reasons: first, they guide practitioners who hope to use variation in political advertising between

2010 and 2016 as an instrument for commercial advertising; and second, they guide our prior for

how much and for which types of product categories a given level of political advertising is likely to

disrupt the commercial advertising market in future elections.

       Finally, we fully implement the strategy for one product category, automobiles, where both (1)

the first stage is particularly strong, and (2) the short-run effect of advertising on sales is expected

to be zero. The purpose of this exercise is twofold. First, we want to characterize the properties

of the IV estimator in an instance where the F-statistic exceeds conventional thresholds that limit

weak instrument bias. Second, because we believe that the true advertising effect is zero, the IV

estimate provides a placebo test of the exclusion restriction. We find that the IV strategy produces

a confidence interval that contains the presumed truth (zero), but the confidence interval is wide,

containing improbably large negative and positive values. Thus, this case study underscores that

political advertising may not identify precise advertising elasticities, even for the 28 categories with

a strong first stage. For these categories, our findings suggest that reducing noise in sales is of
   2
      We specify advertising as a log because researchers typically want to identify an advertising elasticity, where the
independent variable of interest is the log of advertising and the dependent variable of interest is the log of quantity.
    3
      This includes using machine learning as in Belloni, Chen, Chernozhukov, and Hansen [2012] to find the functional
form that gets the strongest possible first stage.
    4
      The distribution of first-stage F-statistics that we recover raises a question of inference with weak instruments.
The F-statistic for many categories falls near the critical value of 10, proposed by Stock and Yogo [2005], although
more recent work highlights that this value may be too permissive (for example, Olea and Pflueger [2013]). We suggest
that researchers justify their choice of critical values on a case-by-case basis, depending on the research question. If the
first-stage relationship appears weak, as measured by the F-statistic, rather than disregard the political advertising
instrument, researchers should consider using weak identification robust inference methods (e.g., Andrews [2016],
Anderson and Rubin [1949]).


                                                             3
first-order importance to obtaining a precise estimate.5

       To demonstrate the strength of the first stage, we focus on estimating category-level advertising

effects because political advertising constitutes only one source of variation. As a result, it may

be used to estimate a parameter on a single endogenous variable. In oligopoly settings, own and

rival advertising are potentially confounded by competitive responses, so that estimating brand-level

effects using political advertising as an instrument requires either an additional source of variation

or a particular functional form assumption.6 , 7 As an example, in section 2.6, we describe how to use

political advertising in conjunction with a logit model of demand to estimate brand-level advertising

effects.

       Category-level advertising effects are also interesting and important in their own right in many

circumstances. For many research questions (e.g. Shapiro [2018], Sinkinson and Starc [2018]),

separating category expansion from the business stealing effects of advertising is important and

requires an instrument like political advertising that can identify category-expansive advertising

effects. Second, several policy debates revolve around the category-level effect of advertising, such

as bans on television advertising for junk food and smoking, as in Dubois et al. [2018] and Tuchman

[2019].

       This paper contributes to the literature that seeks to identify the effects of television advertising

using observational data (including Shapiro [2018], Hartmann and Klapper [2018], Sinkinson and

Starc [2018], and Thomas [2017], among others). Shapiro [2018] exploits the borders of television

markets to generate quasi-random variation in advertising. Hartmann and Klapper [2018] uses the

ex ante uncertain identity of the teams in the Super Bowl, which provides randomness in which

households watch television during the game. Thomas [2017] combines data on how TV advertising

bundles viewers of a single show with information on ideal targeting to construct an instrument for

advertising. Li et al. [2019] compare IV and non-IV approaches in estimating the effect of political

advertising on votes. Sinkinson and Starc [2018] pioneered the approach in this paper, using political
   5
      Our results in this case study also underscore that the problem of weak instruments is one of bias rather than
precision. A strong instrument circumvents bias due to weak instruments, but it need not increase precision.
    6
      For example, researchers may interact political advertising with brand fixed effects. This would require an
assumption that the amount of displacement on one brand is independent of the amount of displacement on a rival
brand. This might be reasonable in some cases, but it is not an assumption we are willing to apply broadly across
274 categories for the purposes of this demonstration.
    7
      For example, Sinkinson and Starc [2018] use political advertising in conjunction with a temporary ban on adver-
tising for the popular product, Lipitor, to identify brand-level advertising effects.



                                                         4
advertising as an exogenous shifter of television advertising. Lovett et al. [2019] show that a version

of this instrument provides little power in determining the effect of advertising on word-of-mouth.

All of these approaches are clever ideas implemented in case-studies. This paper goes beyond a

single case-study to characterize the usefulness of the instrument more generally. Thus, it also adds

to the literature moving beyond case-studies to characterize empirical results in a generalizable way

(Shapiro, Hitsch, and Tuchman [2019]).

    Beyond the case of advertising, this paper adds to the literature on instrumental variables, in

particular by providing a road map for scrutinizing instruments meant to have broad applicability.

This adds to recent work on Bartik shift-share style instruments (Borusyak, Hull, and Jaravel [2018],

Goldsmith-Pinkham, Sorkin, and Swift [2018]) and BLP instruments (Gandhi and Houde [2017])

by characterizing the circumstances under which IV approaches which are meant to be generally

implementable are valid.8 Finally, this paper also adds to the literature thinking carefully about

the use of instrumental variables in marketing contexts (Rossi [2014]). Our results validate many

of Rossi [2014]'s concerns with the implementation of IVs in marketing­in particular, the necessary

conditions for validity in this case are generally not innocuous. As a result, researchers wishing

to use the instrument require a strong theoretical argument that the assumptions hold in their

particular settings.

    The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the political advertising IV strategy, including

the theoretical justification for the instrument, exclusion restriction, and monotonicity condition.

Section 3 describes the Nielsen Ad Intel data and illustrates how political advertising is broadly

related to commercial advertising. Section 4 presents the results for the first stage across categories.

Section 5 shows a case-study as a proof of concept using the automobile category, which has a strong

first stage. Section 6 discusses limitations of the approach. Section 7 concludes.

2    Conditions for Validity

    In this section, we present the conditions required for political advertising to identify the causal

effect of commercial advertising either at the category level or brand level (for a monopolist). First,

political advertising and commercial advertising must be correlated strongly enough to avoid weak
   8
     Bartik instruments originate in (Bartik [1991]). The idea is to instrument for employment growth rate with the
product of national industry growth rates with local industry shares to estimate the elasticity of labor supply. Since
the endogeneity is posited to occur on the local industry growth rates, this instrument satisfies exclusion.



                                                          5
                 Figure 1: Political Advertising and Commercial Demand - a DAG




instrument bias. This condition is testable in the data. Second, we need any correlation between

political advertising and commercial sales to operate exclusively through changes in commercial

advertising, or an exclusion restriction. This condition is not directly testable, and we will use

theory to justify it. Third, we require a monotonicity condition: that each treatment unit exhibits

changes in commercial advertising in the same direction for a given change in political advertising.

This condition is also not directly testable and will require theoretical justification.

   The goal is to estimate the causal effect of category-level advertising on category-level sales.

For the purposes of exposition, we will employ a log-log functional form as governing the true

relationship of interest:

                               log (1 + Qjmt ) =  · log (1 + Ajmt ) + jmt .                         (1)


where j indexes category, m indexes television market, and t indexes time in months. To be clear,

we would like to estimate this regression equation category by category. An OLS regression of sales

on advertising will not recover the causal parameter of interest ( ) because advertising is likely a

function of the unobservable    mt .   As a result, we propose an instrumental variables approach using

political advertising as an exogenous shifter of category-level commercial advertising.

   To fix ideas about how the relationship between commercial advertising and political advertising

maps into the necessary conditions for instrument validity, we employ a series of directed acyclic

graphs (DAGs). Figure 1 illustrates the basic problem. While we want to estimate the effect of



                                                     6
advertising on quantity, there exist unobservables, U , that simultaneously drive advertising and

demand. We can think of these unobservables as demand shocks. We propose using political

advertising as a source of variation in advertising that is unrelated to those unobservables. In

each subsection below, we will break apart this figure to identify sources of validity and sources of

potential threat.




2.1      Relevance

       Figure 2 shows the relationship between the instrument, political advertising, and the endoge-

nous variable, commercial advertising. The intuition for the political IV strategy is that there is

a maximum capacity of advertising time. Thus, when candidates advertise, they reduce the resid-

ual supply of advertising facing other product categories.9 The negative supply shock increases

equilibrium prices. Because demand curves slope downward, higher prices lower the quantity of

airtime demanded by commercial advertisers. Thus, we predict a negative sign on the first stage of

commercial advertising on political advertising. In other words, an increase in political advertising

in market m at time t should decrease commercial advertising.

       It is important to note that while this argument holds directionally for each commercial adver-

tiser, it need not hold with equal magnitude across potential commercial advertisers. The magnitude

depends on exactly which ad spots are of the most interest to political advertisers as well as the

willingness to pay of commercial advertisers. A main contribution of this paper is to document

when and where the first stage is sufficiently strong so as to be useful.10

       It is also important to note that there may be other sources of correlation between political
   9
      Note that this condition does not require a hard capacity constraint, so long as the marginal cost of advertising
time increases in the quantity of ads. In theory, local television stations have some flexibility in the airtime they
devote to advertising compared to programming (e.g., run shorter or fewer local news segments). If viewers exhibit
increasing disutility of advertising time, then the presence of political ads increases the marginal cost of commercial
airtime. In our sample, we find very little variation in total advertising time both across stations and over time,
suggesting that crowd-out of commercial advertising is nearly 1:1 with the presence of political ads.
   10
      Here it is worth pointing out that Lovett et al. [2019] employs a version of this instrument in studying the
effect of advertising on word-of-mouth. Instead of estimating effects category by category, it estimates a single
effect of advertising on word-of-mouth with a random coefficient. The instruments employed are political advertising
interacted with brand intercepts. Overall, it finds that the set of instruments has a weak first stage in that regression
and produces several positive coefficients in the first stage, an indication that there might be some monotonicity
violations. We will break apart the problem in detail to see exactly where the instrument is weak and where the
theory might fail.




                                                           7
advertising and commercial advertising. These factors may threaten either the exclusion restriction

or the monotonicity condition, which we discuss below. These potential threats are depicted in figure

2 below the main proposed channel of the relationship between political advertising and commercial

advertising.

                    Figure 2: Political Advertising and Commercial Advertising




2.2   Exclusion

   To recover an unbiased estimate of the causal effect of commercial advertising on sales, political

advertising must be correlated with product sales exclusively through its correlation with the en-

dogenous variable, commercial advertising. Since political advertising is not truly randomized across

markets by campaigns, understanding political demand for airtime is important for justifying this

exclusion restriction.

   Political advertisers wish to maximize their chance of winning an election given a fixed budget.

To accomplish this goal, they must advertise to viewers who meet two criteria: viewers must be

persuadable and also potentially pivotal in the election of interest. A viewer is potentially pivotal

if changing their vote could change the result of the election. That is, political campaigns do

not want to advertise in a market where the election outcome is a foregone conclusion whether

they advertise or not--advertising in these markets would waste their scarce budgets. Thus, this

                                                 8
campaign objective suggests two determinants of political advertising: (1) the price of airtime and

(2) the likelihood that the vote of the marginal ad-viewer will flip the election.

   Figure 3 illustrates these sources of demand for political advertising. The potential threats

to exclusion are depicted with dotted lines. In particular, we must assume that there is no path

leading from the unobservable demand shocks, U , to political advertising. The first threat is a

direct path from U to the pivotality of a market. This would be the case if the product market

in question were especially politically relevant. For example, if the product market were health

insurance on the Affordable Care Act "Obamacare" exchanges, and access to health insurance were

a particularly important political issue in a market, demand shocks for health insurance could

directly impact pivotality. In this case, the exclusion restriction is violated because some of the

variation in political advertising would be contaminated by the unobserved demand shock U .

   The second potential threat to exclusion acts through the equilibrium in the market for ad-

vertising. That is, a demand shock, U , could lead to higher (lower) commercial advertising for a

product category. This increase (decrease) in advertising decreases (increases) the residual supply

of advertising, raising (lowering) the price of advertising faced by political campaigns. This price

change would lower (raise) the amount of political advertising. In this scenario, there is a negative

correlation between political advertising and commercial advertising, but that correlation operates

through U , which has a direct effect on commercial demand, violating the exclusion restriction.

   We argue that making use of market and time fixed effects alleviates these concerns to an extent.

Non-election time periods serve as a `pre-treatment' period, while high and low political advertising

markets serve as `treatment' and `control' units, respectively. Exclusion requires that political

competitiveness (pivotality) does not drive the relative changes in commercial product demand

conditions across markets between election and non-election time periods. This type of violation

only seems plausible for very special product categories. As an example, consider a market where a

manufacturing plant closed in October of an election year, leaving a large number of people without

health insurance. The closure stimulates demand for individual insurance and potentially makes

the political election more/less competitive. However, such stories are difficult to tell for the typical

product category that advertises on television.

   In terms of paths from U to prices faced by political campaigns, the difference-in-differences

style variation alleviates these concerns to a large degree. Much of the variation in political ad-

                                                   9
vertising comes from variation in the political cycle­there is nearly zero political advertising in the

pre-treatment period, not because advertising prices are high, but because there is no impending

election.11 Even during election season, many markets are completely non-competitive, and hence

see almost no political advertising. The difference in commercial advertising between those markets

and politically competitive markets is significantly larger than the difference in political advertising

among the competitive markets. These observations combined lead us to argue that the majority

of residual variation in political advertising net of market and time fixed effects is driven by the

likelihood that political advertising will shift the election rather than by relative prices.

      Another consideration is whether firms modify their other promotional activities in response to

the political advertising shock. For example, if TV advertising becomes expensive, a firm might

substitute from TV to digital advertising, confounding the relationship between TV advertising and

sales. Alternatively, a firm might reduce complementary promotional activities in conjunction with

a reduction in TV advertising. Fortunately, this potential confound is directly testable with data

on these other promotional activities.

      Finally, if demand shocks U alter the prices faced by campaigns, then these shocks must also

change aggregate commercial advertising. Most commercial categories constitute a small fraction

of total advertising, so that even a large change in a single category's advertising would be unlikely

to disrupt the market as a whole. As a result, the type of demand shock U that would be most

problematic is one correlated across all commercial product categories, such as a negative income

shock. If residents of a particular DMA cut spending across all categories, then total commercial

advertising demand would fall, increasing the residual supply facing political campaigns, and thus

increasing political advertising. In this scenario, more political advertising is spuriously correlated

with lower commercial demand, leading to an over-estimate of the effect of commercial advertising

on demand. In Section 3.2, we estimate the total disruption in commercial advertising that can

be attributed to political advertising, which provides some perspective on the likelihood that the

exclusion restriction is violated in this fashion. However, if researchers are particularly concerned

about the price mechanism in their specific case, they may wish to find a more direct measure of

political pivotality to serve as an instrument for commercial advertising.

      Overall, we cannot fully rule out these threats to the exclusion restriction. As a result, we instead
 11
      This is shown graphically in Section 3.2 below.


                                                        10
                        Figure 3: Political Advertising and Commercial Advertising




provide a road map for the required theoretical arguments that must be made to justify exclusion. If

a researcher is willing to assume a priori that an advertising effect must be greater than or equal to

zero, a positive and significant reduced form coefficient from the regression of commercial demand

on political advertising would indicate a violation of the exclusion restriction. Such an assumption

might be considered reasonable in the context of category-level advertising effects. In Appendix

D, we present reduced form regression results for a set of products in which we have demand data

from AC Nielsen's RMS scanner data. For 5 out of 36 product categories, we estimate a positive

and significant reduced form coefficient, indicating a possible violation of the exclusion restriction

in those categories (although we would expect 1 to 2 categories to be positive and significant by

chance).12 The frequency of these results may suggest to researchers that this exclusion restriction

is not entirely benign and requires careful justification on a category-by-category basis.


 12
      We do not adjust our inference for multiple hypothesis testing.




                                                          11
2.3   Monotonicity

   Finally, the application of standard instrumental variable techniques requires a monotonicity

condition, following Angrist and Imbens [1995]. Under the theory outlined above, where political

advertising crowds out commercial ads, monotonicity means that an increase in political advertising

must never increase commercial advertising. There are two potential threats to this assumption,

and neither involves a relationship between political advertising and commercial advertising through

the price mechanism (the lower path in Figure 3).

   First, if there are time-varying differences across markets in viewer attention, then political ad-

vertising and commercial advertising could exhibit a positive relationship. Both political advertisers

and commercial advertisers would like to reach more attentive audiences. If this effect outweighs

price effects for any market-time observations, monotonicity will fail. We note that attentiveness

threatens the monotonicity condition, even if it does not affect product market sales directly (if

attentiveness drove sales, then it would constitute a violation of the exclusion restriction). This

mechanism is illustrated in Figure 4. To deal with this potential issue, we include market fixed

effects. While this does not solve any issues surrounding attentiveness shocks at the market-time

level that can be anticipated by political and commercial advertisers, it does account for the fact

that viewers in some markets pay more attention to their televisions. Any residual attentiveness

effects on both political and commercial advertising must be assumed to be zero.

   The second threat to monotonicity relates to the fact that both political advertisers and com-

mercial advertisers operate in multiple, inter-related markets. First, political advertisers tend to

advertise in ways that are correlated across months. In particular, there is more political advertising

in all markets in months just before an election than in months far from an election. Figure 5 illus-

trates how this can be a problem for the monotonicity condition. In particular, consider advertising

in market m. If our intuition holds, then political advertising in market m increases the price of a

local ad spot in market m, reducing local commercial advertising in that market. At the same time,

political advertising also increases in market -m. Again, the price of a local ad spot in market

-m increases, reducing the quantity demanded for local ad spots in market -m. The reduction

in local commercial advertising in market -m is not concerning by itself. However, if the viewers

in market -m are sufficiently important to the advertiser, it may choose to advertise nationally.


                                                  12
                       Figure 4: Political Advertising and Commercial Advertising




National advertising is seen by viewers in all markets. So while demand for local ad spots in market

m decreases, viewers in market m may see more ads in total because more national ads are run.

Monotonicity is violated if the increase in national ads dominates the decrease in local ads in market

m for the category in question.

       This problem is driven by the combination of two factors. First, political advertising is correlated

across markets within a time period. Second, national advertising is seen by viewers in all markets.

We can control for both of these factors by including a time fixed effect at the periodicity of the

data.13 These fixed effects allow us to partial out both national advertising and the correlation in

political advertising between markets within a time period, so that only changes in local ad spots in

market m identify advertising effects. Conditional on time fixed effects at the level of periodicity in

the data, monotonicity violations coming from substitution from one local market to another local

market are still possible, but are less obviously plausible than substitution to national advertising.

       One way to check the plausibility of the monotonicity condition is to inspect the sign of the

first-stage estimate. The theory highlighted in Section 2.1 indicates that political advertising and

commercial advertising should be negatively correlated. A positive correlation indicates a possible

violation of the monotonicity condition, either coming from shocks to viewer attentiveness or from
  13
    Here we note that Lovett et al. [2019] find many first-stage coefficients that are the wrong sign. That paper also
does not employ time fixed effects at the periodicity of the data due to limitations in its data, which we suggest could
explain some of the apparent violations of the theory.



                                                          13
substitution across markets.14 In Appendix F, we show that with market fixed effects and year-

month fixed effects, only about 3% of first-stage estimates are positive and significant, roughly the

proportion that should occur by chance under a null hypothesis of a zero first stage. However,

if we remove the year-month fixed effects or use coarser time controls, nearly 50% of first-stage

estimates are positive and significant, and more are positive than negative, violating the theory

outlined above. These patterns highlight the importance of time fixed effects at the periodicity of

the data to implement this research design.

       Here we note again that a researcher may impose further structure on the problem and explicitly

model heterogeneous treatment effects rather than use the LATE formulation. This could, in prin-

ciple, make the monotonicity assumption unnecessary. That said, a positive relationship between

political advertising and commercial advertising remains a warning sign that the instrument does

not work as the theory prescribes (through offset). As this theory justifies the exclusion restric-

tion, evidence against that theory casts doubt on the exclusion restriction, even if the monotonicity

assumption is not needed.
  14
     A positive correlation would indicate that a non-price mechanism was contributing to the first stage, either by
itself or in conjunction with the posited price mechanism. In the former case, it is likely that more political advertising
increases commercial advertising in some circumstances while reducing commercial advertising in others. This would
be a violation of monotonicity. Alternatively, a positive first stage relationship could be driven entirely by a non-price
mechanism that violates the exclusion restriction.




                                                            14
                    Figure 5: Political Advertising and Commercial Advertising




2.4   LATE considerations

   In the presence of heterogeneous treatment effects, a valid instrumental variable identifies a

local average treatment effect (LATE). That is, the treatment effect identified is the average effect

among `compliers' to the instrument, those ads which are crowded out by political advertising. To

interpret the effects of crowd-out, it is important to consider how the market clears. If TV stations

do not anticipate political advertising demand when selling in the upfront market to commercial

advertisers (typically in May or June), then they may displace commercial ads in response to an

influx of political dollars. Indeed, many contracts include provisions for the priority of the airtime:

a low-priority ad is more likely to get displaced than a more expensive high-priority ad. If an ad

spot is displaced, then the station issues a "make-good" and the spot is aired at another time. While

make-goods supposedly offer comparable viewership, industry wisdom is that they are generally of

inferior quality. Because priority is explicitly priced into commercial advertising contracts, political


                                                  15
ads presumably displace spots for which commercial WTP is low.15

       Such selection may be more severe if stations anticipate political demand. In this case, stations

should set higher prices in the upfront market in election years, particularly in contested states.

High prices reduce advertising by the lowest WTP commercial firms. Therefore, political GRPs

instruct us about the treatment effect from the bottom of the distribution of advertising efficacy.

       An issue related to both LATE considerations and the exclusion restriction is the potential

for commercial firms to coordinate other marketing levers, such as sales force or price promotions,

with its TV advertising strategy. In this case, even if political advertising does not directly affect

this other lever, it may indirectly change other marketing efforts through its effect on commercial

advertising. Any indirect effects would change the interpretation of the LATE. Political advertising

would then identify the `total' effect of advertising plus other marketing activities, including the

direct path from advertising to sales as well as a path from advertising to other marketing levers to

sales. To be clear, the LATE would not identify how TV advertising affects sales holding all else

equal. This concern must be evaluated on a case-by-case basis: it is a non-issue for firms that set

marketing levers independently, but a potential problem for others that link them algorithmically. If

possible, we advocate directly testing the relationship using data on these other marketing activities.




2.5      Preferred Specification

       Our regression of interest, described in equation 1, is a standard log-log advertising regression

for category j in market m on contemporaneous sales at time t. The goal of this paper is to use

political advertising as an instrument for category advertising flow, Ajmt .16 In order to address the
  15
      Category-level average WTP may change between different political cycles if the nature of competition in those
categories changes over time. For example, in one election, it may be that a category has a new entrant firm that
has a very high WTP for advertising space due to a need to inform customers of its existence. In a future election,
that firm is no longer a new entrant, and as a result has a lower WTP for advertising space. In such an example,
the category-level first stage could increase in a future example. These kinds of considerations are important for
researchers to keep in mind when they interpret the LATE associated with the political advertising IV.
   16
      We focus on estimating the effect of advertising flow even though advertising is typically thought to have accumu-
lating stock effects. If, in August, firms anticipate higher prices of advertising in October due to political campaigns,
they may increase advertising in August to take advantage of stock effects that linger into November. Such anticipa-
tion and dynamic effects would pose problems for the validity of this specification. If we specify our model with an
accumulating advertising stock as the endogenous variable to account for this problem, the dynamic behavior would
serve to weaken the first stage, as current period crowd-out would be partially offset by previous period anticipatory
effects. In Appendix E, we specify the model using advertising stock as the endogenous variable of interest and find
that the instrument is generally weaker. As a result, the main analysis should be viewed as perhaps an over-optimistic



                                                           16
most plausible threats to monotonicity and the exclusion restriction, our final specification includes

market fixed effects and time fixed effects at the periodicity of the data. We specify our first stage

equation as:


                                log (1 + Ajmt ) =  · f (Pmt ) + m + t +   jmt .                    (2)

In the equation above, Ajmt is the GRP for category j in market m in month t, Pmt is political

advertising market m in month t,  governs the relationship between political and commercial

advertising, and m , t are market and month fixed effects. We specify category advertising on the

left-hand side as a log because researchers typically want to identify an advertising elasticity. Here,

we leave the relationship between the endogenous variable and the instrument reasonably general,

as we will show robustness to many different first stage functional form specifications including a

flexible one using machine learning. Next, we specify the reduced form equation as:



                               log (1 + Qjmt ) =  · g (Pjmt ) + m + t + ujmt .                     (3)




2.6    Brand-Level Advertising Effects

    Our preferred specification estimates the effect of advertising on sales for an entire category

and, in the case of monopoly, for a particular brand. Even in oligopoly settings, category-level

advertising elasticities are of interest because they reveal the extent to which advertising is market-

expanding. For a good like cigarettes, the importance of an advertising ban hinges precisely on

whether advertising increases smoking. However, in other instances, it is important to quantify

business-stealing; such quantification is challenging with the political advertising instrument because

it affects all firms within a market simultaneously. If the researcher is willing to impose additional

structure on the relationship between advertising and sales, however, then more progress can be

made. As an example, one approach is to model skmt , the share of brand k in market m at time t,

using the logit as follows:17
view of the strength of the first stage.
  17
     The utility of the outside option is normalized to zero.




                                                          17
                                    exp Xkmt  -  · pjkt +  · Adskmt + kmt
                   skmt =                                                                       .
                            1+     k K    exp Xk mt  -  · pk mt +  · Adsk mt + k mt

Using the standard Berry [1994] inversion, the difference between the share of brand k and the

outside option somt can be written as:


                        ln skmt - ln somt = Xkmt  -  · pkmt +  · Adskmt + kmt ,                                 (4)


which we can estimate using linear IV with political advertising as an instrument. The key restriction

is that a single parameter ( ) governs both own- and cross- advertising elasticities:


                                     k   =  · Adskmt · (1 - skmt )

                                   kk    = - · sk mt · Adsk mt for all k = k


The idea is analogous to estimating a price coefficient in a logit demand function using a single

industry-wide cost shock.

       Finally, we note that in this framework, the category-level F-statistics presented below are

informative about the brand-level F-statistics. To be clear, the first stage that corresponds to

equation 4 is:


                                 Adskmt = Xkmt o + 1 · P GRPmt +             kmt .                              (5)


It is important to cluster standard errors at least at the market-time (m × t) level in this brand-level

regression (equation 5) precisely because this is the level at which political advertising shocks oc-

cur.18 The category-level regressions exploit exactly this market-time variation, and so the category-

level F-statistics speak to the magnitude of this variation. Said differently, disaggregating the data

to the brand-level rather than the category-level does not buy the researcher any additional variation
  18
    In practice, due to repeated observations in the outcome, practitioners will typically want to cluster standard
errors at the market level. For that reason, we cluster at the market level throughout. In either case, the relevant
clustering for the brand-level formulation and the category-level formulation is the same, as the relevant quasi-
exogenous variation is at the same level.




                                                        18
in political advertising, so will not typically buy the researcher additional first stage strength.




3         Data and Aggregate Analysis
3.1        Ad-Intel Data

         Our main source of data is the Nielsen Ad-Intel database that records all TV advertisements

in 130 DMAs in the contiguous United States from 2010 to 2016.19 The ads are recorded at the

occurrence level, where an occurrence is the placement of an ad by a specific advertiser on a given

channel, in a specific market, for a specific duration, on a given date and time. Nielsen uses its

propriety technology to collect TV programming information and identify advertising occurrences

based on their unique audio and video content.20 Occurrences are therefore measured in the same

way in all of the 130 DMAs used in our analysis.

         Because occurrences can differ substantially in their reach, estimated impressions (the number of

eyeballs viewing an ad) can serve as a scaling factor to help in comparisons between ad occurrences.

For each ad occurrence, we calculate gross rating points (GRPs), a frequently used measure of

advertising intensity, as the number of impressions for the ad as a percentage of all TV-viewing

households in a DMA.

         The Ad-Intel database provides impressions estimates across markets and media types. For

local media types the database provides impressions at the "station­month­day of week" level in 5-

15 minute time intervals.21 In the top 25 DMAs, Nielsen measures impressions using "Local People

Meters" that capture all TV-viewing activities of Nielsen households, so the data is available in

all months.22 In all other DMAs, Nielsen measures impressions using diaries filled out by Nielsen

households, and the data is only available in February, May, July, and November ("sweep months").23

For non-sweep months in those DMAs, we impute impressions by taking the average between the
    19
     The data is missing for North Platte, NE DMA in June 2011, and for Yakima-Pasco-Richland-Kennewick, WA
DMA in December 2014.
  20
     "Nielsen Monitor-Plus Methodology by Medium", page 19.
  http://en-us.nielsen.com/sitelets/cls/documents/adviews/AdViews-Methodology-by-Medium-InfoKit.pdf
  21
     These include spot TV, network TV broadcast locally, and syndicated TV broadcast locally.
  22
     In 2016, Nielsen started providing impressions data in all months for 70 markets, including the 25 LPM markets
and 45 "Set Meter" or "Code Reader" markets.
  23
     The impressions data is missing for Birmingham (Ann and Tusc), AL DMA in May 2011.




                                                        19
two closest sweep months.24 We show in Appendix C that our results are robust to a more flexible

imputation method. For national media types (we only use cable TV), the impressions are measured

at the program level but are only available nationally; we thus compute GRPs for those ads at the

national level and assume that they are the same in every market.25

       Nielsen groups advertisers into 343 categories. Political campaigns and unions are classified

as "B181: Organization Advertising: Political, Union," and Super PACs are found in a separate

category, titled "B189: Miscellaneous Organization Advertising." We identified 616 advertisers in

the latter category as super PACs by manually matching the advertiser names with the list of super

PACs created by OpenSecrets.26 We then calculate total political advertising at the DMA-month

level by summing up the GRPs for all category B181 ads and super PAC ads. Table 1 provides

summary statistics for political advertising at the DMA-month level. Of particular note is that

political advertising makes up a larger share of total GRPs than of total duration. This means

that, on average, political advertisers buy spots with high viewership. While political advertising

accounts for as much as 9.39% of total advertising views in a market-month, it never makes up more

than 1.53% of the total advertising airtime.

       Among the 342 non-political categories,27 we use the top 274 that constitute 99.9% of total

GRPs for analysis. We aggregate the data to the category-DMA-month level by summing up the

GRPs of individual ads.

         Table 1: Summary Statistics: Political Advertising at DMA-Month Level (N = 10917)

                                                                               Quantiles
                                Mean      SD      Min    5%     10%    25%    50%      75%     90%     95%      Max
 Political GRP                  4484.5   9017.1   0.0    5.4    19.3   85.8   723.0   4421.7   13698   22446   102791
 Political/Total GRP (%)         0.53     1.03    0.00   0.00   0.00   0.01   0.08     0.54    1.65    2.64     9.39
 Political Duration (Hours)     14.92    27.39    0.00   0.09   0.27   1.17   4.03    15.26    42.74   68.59   362.37
 Political/Total Duration (%)    0.08     0.14    0.00   0.00   0.00   0.01   0.02     0.08    0.23    0.36     1.53




  24
     We weight the data from two closest sweep months by time difference. For example, for March we use 2/3
February and 1/3 May.
  25
     For more description of processing the Nielsen Ad-Intel database and the data computed from it, please see
Shapiro et al. [2019].
  26
     https://www.opensecrets.org/pacs/superpacs.php
  27
     We re-define the "B189: Miscellaneous Organization Advertising" category after taking out the 616 identified
super PACs.




                                                         20
3.2   Political Advertising and the Commercial Advertising Market

   In this section, we document how the commercial advertising market as a whole fluctuates with

movements in political advertising. We begin by overlaying the time series of political advertising

and commercial advertising for the Columbus, OH DMA. Figure 6, panel (a) shows these time series

in levels. It plots the time series of average daily GRP in each month; both series are de-meaned

(the means are shown in the legend). Here, it appears that political advertising offsets commercial

advertising almost 1-1. Figure 6, panel (b) shows the time series in log-scale for both commercial

and political advertising. Here, we see that large percentage changes in political advertising lead

to hardly any change in the percentage of commercial ads. Changes in log commercial advertising

are nearly imperceptible in the picture. Panels (a) and (b) can be reconciled by the fact that each

political ad GRP crowds out roughly one commercial ad GRP, but because political advertising is a

relatively small share of total advertising, the total disruption of the commercial ad market is small

in percentage terms.

   Next, we analyze the relationship between political and commercial advertising systematically

across all markets in regression form. In particular, we estimate regressions of the form:


                                      Ajmt =  · Pmt + m + t +     mt ,                            (6)
                                j J

where J denotes a set of categories; Ajmt is the amount of advertising in commercial category j , in

market m, in month t; and Pmt is the amount of political advertising in market m, and in month t.

We include market and time fixed effects. We consider A and P measured both in duration (hours)

and in GRPs. The coefficient  measures the crowd-out effect in levels.

   Panel (A) of Table 2 describes the results where A and P are measured in GRPs. Column

(1) presents the results for all commercial advertising­that is, all non-political advertising, except

for ads that promote the television station's own programming. Our estimates suggest that each

political GRP offsets 0.85 commercial GRPs. Column (2) shows the effect of political advertising

on advertising for the television station's own programming. It is negative and significant, but

small­each political GRP offsets about 0.045 programming GRPs. Column (3) shows the effect of

political advertising on all non-political advertising. Each political GRP offsets about 0.86 non-

political GRPs. Notably, this number has a confidence interval that excludes 1, which means that


                                                 21
Figure 6: Time Series of Political and Commercial Advertising in Columbus, OH DMA
                                                 (a) Average Daily GRP in Each Month (Time Series Mean Taken Out)




                                   2000
  Average Daily GRP (Demeaned)




                                                                                                                            Category
                                                                                                                            (Time Series Mean)

                                                                                                                                Commercial
                                      0                                                                                         (25196)

                                                                                                                                Political
                                                                                                                                (279)




                                  -2000




                                          2010        2011        2012      2013           2014   2015    2016     2017
                                                                                   Year



                                                             (b) Average Daily GRP in Each Month (Log Scale)


                                  10000
  Average Daily GRP (Log Scale)




                                   100
                                                                                                                             Category
                                                                                                                                  Commercial
                                                                                                                                  Political




                                     1




                                          2010        2011         2012     2013           2014    2015    2016     2017
                                                                                   Year


                                           Notes: Time-series means for panel (a) are taken out and listed in the legend.




                                                                                      22
political GRPs lead to an expansion of total advertising GRPs (shown in column (4)). Each political

GRP expands total GRPs by roughly 0.14. This suggests that while political advertising offsets

commercial advertising, it also expands the total amount of advertising viewed on television. Panel

(B) of Table 2 describes the analogous results where A and P are measured in duration rather than

in GRPs. The findings are qualitatively and quantitatively similar for each column. To give a sense

of how the results look in percentage terms, we also report the approximate percentage effects of

an 1% increase of political advertising from its mean in Table 2. We observe that the magnitudes

in percentage terms are considerably smaller. For example, column (1) of Panel (A) shows that a

10% increase in political advertising corresponds to a 0.06% decrease in commercial advertising. In

other words, although political ads crowd out commercial ads almost one to one, the effect is still

small in percentage terms because there are far fewer political ads than there are commercial ads.28

       Overall, it appears that while political advertising offsets commercial advertising, it has a rela-

tively minimal impact (percentage wise) on the advertising market as a whole.


  28
    Calculation based on Figure 6 and the point estimates in Table 2 shows that about 7% of total commercial
advertising was offset in Columbus, OH in the month with the most political advertising (October 2010). In all other
months and in most other markets, the offset is considerably lower.




                                                        23
                             Table 2: Crowd-out Effect for Aggregate Categories

            Ad Category:               Commercial      Programming         Non-Political        Total
                                          (1)               (2)                (3)               (4)
            Panel A: Ads Measured in GRP
            Political           -0.850                    -0.045             -0.859            0.141
                                         (0.054)             (0.013)           (0.063)         (0.063)
            Partial F                     247.6                11.5             184.1             4.9
            Partial R2                    0.062               0.002             0.043           0.001
            Percentage Effect (%)        -0.0056             -0.0014           -0.0046          0.0008
            Panel B: Ads Measured in Duration
            Political            -0.798       -0.021                         -0.770            0.230
                                         (0.049)             (0.011)           (0.050)         (0.050)
            Partial F                     265.2                3.8               233             20.8
            Partial R2                     0.05               0.001             0.036           0.003
            Percentage Effect (%)        -0.0008             -0.0001           -0.0006          0.0002
"Programming" includes all categories for TV programs and TV networks/stations. "Commercial" includes all cate-
gories except "Programming" and "Religious, Charitable, and Humanitarian Organizations". "Non-political" includes
all categories except political ads.
"Percentage Effect" is the coefficient multiplied by 1/100 of the mean of independent variable and then divided by
the mean of dependent variable. It approximates the crowd-out effect for an 1% increase of political advertising in
percentage terms, and is close to the estimate from a log-log specification.
Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the DMA level. DMA and month × year fixed effects included.
N = 10917.  p<0.1;  p<0.05;  p<0.01




4         Political Advertising as an Instrument

         In this section, we test the strength of the political advertising instrument across 274 categories.

We first employ equation (2) and set f (Pmt ) = Pmt in our benchmark "log-linear" specification. We

specify category advertising as a log in our benchmark model because researchers often want to

identify an advertising elasticity, which is most natural with the endogenous variable in log form.

We specify political advertising in levels in our benchmark model for simplicity.29

         To ensure that our qualitative results are not driven by our somewhat arbitrary choice of func-

tional form, we take two additional approaches. First, we estimate a second specification where both

category advertising and political advertising are measured in levels. Second, we allow the first stage
    29
    Ex post, the linear term is the most frequently selected term in the LASSO specification, suggesting that it is
typically the best single first stage predictor in terms of functional form.



                                                        24
shape to be guided by the data using a machine learning specification to pick the functional form

of political advertising. We do so using the LASSO method in Belloni, Chen, Chernozhukov, and

Hansen [2012] to select the optimal f (Pmt ) by combining 40 non-linear functions. Overall, our re-

sults are robust across alternative specifications and measurements, indicating that the qualitative

results are not driven by the choice of functional form. Finally, we document several category-level

characteristics that are linked to a strong first stage.

       We cluster standard errors at the television market level to account for the potential serial

correlation of errors within a market over time. We assess the instrument strength using the effective

F -statistic of Olea and Pflueger [2013], which is identical to the Kleibergen-Paap partial F -statistic

in the case with one endogenous variable and one instrument. For each specification, we classify

categories into three bins: F > 25 (strong), F  [10, 25] (semi-strong), and F < 10 (weak). We

use these bins because researchers employ a variety of rules to determine whether an F -statistic

is "large enough" to allow for standard inference.30 One common rule of thumb suggests that

F > 10 is sufficient. However, Olea and Pflueger [2013] suggest a critical value of 23.11 for rejecting

H0 : Nager Bias < 10% with one instrument. As it is generally accepted that F < 10 constitutes

a weak instrument, weak-instrument robust inference (e.g., Anderson and Rubin [1949], Andrews

[2016]) should be used for the F < 10 categories. For categories where F  [10, 25], whether

the instrument is sufficiently strong depends on the relevant critical value to the researcher on a

case-by-case basis, but for F  [10, 25] we suggest that researchers consider using weak-instrument

robust inference. While these two breakpoints are arbitrary, they correspond roughly to the critical

values for rejecting the null of weak-instruments at different tolerance levels. For our benchmark

specification, the Olea and Pflueger [2013] critical value is 23.11 for rejecting H0 : Nager Bias < 10%

and 12.05 for rejecting H0 : Nager Bias < 30% at 5% level; the Stock and Yogo [2005] critical value

is 16.38 for rejecting H0 : Maximal Size < 10% at 5% level.
  30
    It might be suggested that we adjust our F-statistics to account for the fact that we are testing 274 hypotheses
at one time. On one hand, we are indeed testing 274 categories at the same time in this paper, so the adjustment
may seem necessary. On the other hand, other researchers using this instrument will likely focus on one category at
a time, so the unadjusted F-statistics should be the objective of interest. To the extent that the reader would prefer
adjusted F-statistics, our F-statistics reported here would represent an upper bound on the adjusted F-statistics.




                                                         25
4.1   First Stage Results

   We begin by evaluating the first stage employing the level of political advertising (in GRPs) as

a single instrument for the log of category advertising, which we call the "log-linear" specification.

We will discuss these results in some detail and then present the results for alternative functional

form choices.

   The distribution of partial F -statistic is reported in Figure 7, in which the vertical line is at

the Stock and Yogo [2005] critical value of 16.38. The partial-F ranges from 0.0004 to 327.5, and

it is greater than 25 for 28 categories, between 10 and 25 for 25 categories, and below 10 for 221

categories. The categories with F > 25 are listed in Panel A of Table 3, the categories with

F  [10, 25] are listed in Panel B of Table 3, and the categories with F < 10 are listed in Table 7

in Appendix A.

   The coefficient j in the log-linear first stage represents the crowd-out effect in log points of one

extra political GRP. To make the coefficient easier to interpret, we scale it by the median political

GRP across markets in October 2016 (which is 23,438). The scaled coefficient thus represents the

median crowd-out effect in log points across markets in the most heated month before election.

Figure 8 plots the distribution of scaled coefficients, which range from -0.264 to 0.088 and have a

median of -0.008 across all categories. The median effect is -0.064 for the F > 25 categories, -0.028

for the F  [10, 25] categories, and -0.005 for the F < 10 categories.

   The signs of the first stage coefficients can also be used as a check on the theory used to justify the

exclusion restriction and monotonicity condition. For the set of 28 categories with F > 25, the first-

stage sign is negative for 27--consistent with crowd out--with the sole exception of "Miscellaneous

Organization Advertising". Although not easily identified by our hand-matching, many of these

organizations may be political, so that a positive first stage reflects the importance of political

pivotality for these advertisers. Overall, for the categories where the instrument appears strongest,

we find no indication of a violation of our theory in the first-stage coefficient signs. For the set of

25 categories with F  [10, 25], only one has a positive sign, and that is "Cellular Radio Systems &

Accessories." For the set of 221 categories with F < 10, 64 have a positive point estimate on the

first-stage coefficient. Many of these may be due to chance, as the first stage is quite weak. For our

specifications, in the categories for which we have a strong first stage, we only see a `wrong sign' first



                                                   26
stage for one commercial advertising category. It appears that the market and time fixed effects do

a reasonable job of correcting for the potential monotonicity concerns. While these patterns do not

prove that there are no monotonicity violations (this assumption is fundamentally untestable), it

does speak to perhaps the most plausible ones.

                       Figure 7: Distribution of Partial F-Statistic, Log-Linear


                  20




                  15

                                                                                                            Range of F
          Count




                                                                                                                0-10
                  10                                                                                            10-25
                                                                                                                >25



                  5




                  0
                                                                   1        5    10        25   100
                                    Partial F, Log-Linear Specification (Log Scale)




     Figure 8: Distribution of Scaled First-Stage Coefficients, Colored by Range of Partial-F

                                                                            -0.008
                  60




                  40
                                                                                                            Range of F
          Count




                                                                                                                0-10
                                                                                                                10-25
                                                                                                                >25

                  20




                  0
                             -0.2                      -0.1                          0.0              0.1
                                             Scaled Coefficient (x 23438)




                                                              27
            Table 3: List of Categories with Strong or Semi-Strong Log-Linear First Stage

 Category                                         Partial F   Partial R2   Scaled Coef   Size Rank   Spot Share   GRP/OCC
 Panel A: 28 Categories With F > 25
 Household Furnishings & Appliance Stores           327.5       0.058        -0.134         13          0.74        2.8
 Autos & Light Truck - Dealerships                  280.2       0.035        -0.197        16           0.96        2.9
 Hospitals, Physicians & Misc. Physical Culture     197.2       0.031        -0.117        25           0.68        2.6
 Optical Goods and Services                         184.6       0.018        -0.139        70           0.59        2.6
 Misc. Entertainment & Combination Copy             144.6       0.020        -0.264        78           0.80        2.3
 Passenger Cars-Factory: New & CPO                  143.0       0.026        -0.040          6          0.24        2.9
 Miscellaneous Professional Services                141.2       0.028        -0.051          3          0.36        1.8
 Restaurants, Hotel Dining & Nightclubs             135.4       0.026        -0.031          2          0.22        2.7
 Construction, Engineering & Architecture           122.2       0.018        -0.154         61          0.84        2.7
 Miscellaneous Retail                               114.4       0.023        -0.043          7          0.25        2.5
 Passenger Cars-Dealer Assn: New & CPO              106.8       0.018        -0.206         55          1.00        3.1
 Light Trucks & Vans-Factory: New & CPO             105.9       0.024        -0.051         15          0.29        3.0
 Misc. Organization Advertising                      96.5       0.028         0.088        26           0.31        1.9
 Dance, Theater, Concerts, Opera                     91.3       0.014        -0.149         76          0.54        2.6
 Automotive                                          72.2       0.011        -0.083         58          0.41        2.2
 Schools & Camps, Seminars                           71.9       0.014        -0.054         18          0.37        1.5
 Light Trucks & Vans-Dealer Assn: New & CPO          63.0       0.011        -0.176         77          1.00        3.2
 Data Communications Networks                        53.5       0.010        -0.050         28          0.29        2.0
 Misc Financial Inst. Services & Products            52.4       0.009        -0.042         33          0.25        1.6
 Banks                                               45.0       0.006        -0.073         65          0.43        3.3
 Cakes, Pies, Pastries & Donuts                      43.1       0.005        -0.022        116          0.10        1.6
 Cable Television Stations                           42.9       0.007        -0.054        42           0.36        2.1
 Direct Response Products                            40.3       0.011        -0.012          8          0.05        0.9
 Apparel, Footwear & Accessory Stores                36.8       0.004        -0.020         31          0.14        2.5
 TV Station                                          35.4       0.006        -0.113        51           0.99        2.1
 Fix-it Supplies                                     31.3       0.002        -0.113        203          0.13        1.8
 Cereals                                             30.1       0.007        -0.013         20          0.06        1.8
 Real Estate, R.E. Brokers & Developers              27.2       0.004        -0.083        123          0.43        2.5
 Panel B: 25 Categories With F  [10, 25]
 Plumbing & Sanitary Equipment                      23.6        0.003        -0.026        113          0.11        2.4
 Amusement Parks & Sporting Events                  23.0        0.002        -0.059         71          0.48        2.2
 Appetizers, Snacks & Nuts                          21.4        0.003        -0.009         35          0.04        1.7
 Automobile Insurance                               20.0        0.004        -0.010         11          0.07        1.9
 Medical & Dental Insurance                         18.9        0.002        -0.055         69          0.43        2.0
 Life Insurance                                     18.3        0.004        -0.023         97          0.07        1.2
 Golf Equipment                                     17.9        0.004        -0.028        216          0.00        1.9
 Breads, Rolls, Waffles & Pancakes                  17.6        0.001        -0.033         95          0.18        1.6
 Hotels & Resorts                                   17.2        0.003        -0.039         45          0.32        2.7
 Food & Liquor Stores                               16.8        0.003        -0.072         57          0.77        3.2
 Religious, Charitable & Humanitarian Org.          16.1        0.003        -0.040        49           0.33        1.3
 Lotteries                                          15.9        0.002        -0.262        142          1.00        3.2
 Magazines, Newspapers, Misc Media                  15.1        0.002        -0.034        107          0.15        2.1
 Other Insurance & Combination Copy                 14.4        0.003        -0.015         19          0.13        2.0
 Medical Appliances & Equipment                     14.3        0.001        -0.029        159          0.07        2.4
 Cold, Cough & Sinus Remedies                       12.7        0.001        -0.012         21          0.04        1.8
 Misc Accessories, Supplies & Hardware              12.6        0.001        -0.054        175          0.11        2.2
 Coffee, Tea, Cocoa & Derivatives                   12.2        0.002        -0.016         85          0.06        2.5
 Cellular Radio Systems & Accessories               11.8        0.003         0.013         46          0.03        2.8
 Jewelry, Gift Stores & Galleries                   11.2        0.001        -0.042        56           0.28        2.2
 TV Program: Late Night News                        11.0        0.002        -0.139        155          0.92        2.9
 Comb Copy & Misc Major Appliances                  10.4        0.001        -0.023        162          0.05        2.0
 Cheese Products                                    10.2        0.002        -0.017        101          0.09        2.2
 Computerized Games, Accessories & Software         10.2        0.001        -0.006         27          0.02        2.0
 Drugs, Toiletries & Salons                         10.2        0.001        -0.021         72          0.16        2.6
Table Notes: "Size Rank" is the category rank by total GRP across all markets and years. "Spot Share" is the share of
ads bought in spot markets. "GRP/OCC" is the average GRP per occurrence. See Section 4.3 for further discussions
about those category characteristics. "Scaled Coefficient" is the log-linear regression coefficient times 23438.


                                                              28
4.2    Robustness to Specification and Measurement

    In this section, we examine the robustness of the first-stage results above to alternative specifi-

cations and measurements.

    First, we show that the first-stage results are stable if we specify the category ads (left hand

side of equation 2) in levels instead of logs. Next, we use a machine-learning method to capture

the potential non-linear effect of political advertising. Finally, we show that our results are robust

to measuring advertising in total duration of advertising, which is measured consistently across

markets and time (in lieu of GRP).

    We start by specifying category advertising in levels rather than in logs in the first stage. Column

(3) of Table 4 summarizes the results for the "linear-linear" specification. Comparing columns (3)

and (1), changing the category GRPs from logs to levels adds 5 categories to the F > 25 bucket and

5 categories to the 10 < F < 25 bucket. Figure 10 compares the partial-F for all categories between

the two specifications, and shows that the identities of the strongest categories are not changed.

    Next, we employ a LASSO to try and get additional first stage strength through a better

functional form fit. Technical details of the LASSO formulation are presented in Appendices B.1 and

B.2.31 The basic statistics of the "Log-Lasso" and "Linear-Lasso" specifications are listed in columns

(2) and (4) of Table 4, respectively. Comparing with the "Log-Linear" specification, 3 categories

are "downgraded" from F > 25 to 10 < F  25, but 28 categories are "upgraded" from F < 10 to

10 < F  25.32 This is potentially a notable improvement, depending on which critical values are

relevant to the researcher. However, zero categories are "upgraded" from F < 25 to F > 25. The

identities of the strong instrument categories remain stable. The "Linear-Lasso" compares similarly

with the "Linear-Linear" model. Overall, the results of the first stage analyses employing a LASSO

are not qualitatively different from the benchmark models with a single instrument and do not
   31
      Intuitively, we employ this approach to make sure we choose a functional form of political advertising to get
every last bit of available strength out of the first stage. If we specify a linear model and the first stage is highly
non-linear, we may find a weak instrument but there exists a specification where that instrument might be strong.
Conducting this LASSO exercise comes at a cost, as it requires further assumptions and may make final estimates
difficult to interpret in the presence of heterogeneous treatment effects. For the purposes of our exercise, the LASSO
is simply meant to demonstrate how much additional strength could be added to the first stage. Authors should
carefully consider the additional required assumptions of the LASSO if they choose to employ such a formulation in
order to increase first stage strength.
   32
      Further analysis in Appendix B.3 shows that the LASSO is indeed picking up crowd-out relationships that are very
different from log-linear for those 28 "upgraded" categories, though for some categories the first stage improvement
comes at the cost of monotonicity concerns.




                                                          29
produce any additional categories where political advertising is clearly a strong instrument.33

       Finally, we show robustness to using advertising measured in duration rather than in GRP. This

exercise is helpful for two reasons. First, as we discuss in Section 3.1, the impressions data for the

105 non-LPM DMAs are only measured by Nielsen in 4 sweep months (February, May, July, and

November), so we must impute the impressions for non-sweep months. Because the vast majority

of political ads occur from August to October in election years, one might worry that this induces

measurement error in our analyses based on GRPs. In contrast, advertising duration is measured

by Nielsen using the same technology across all 130 DMAs. Second, the intuition of crowd-out is

that a political ad takes the place of a commercial ad, a mechanism which operates through ad

duration rather than viewership. Specifying the model in duration as such may increase first stage

strength.34

       Columns (5) to (8) in Table 4 summarizes the first-stage results when both category ads and

political ads are measured in duration (minutes). By comparing panels (A) and (B) for columns

(5)-(8) to columns (1)-(4), we see that the first-stage results using durations are generally weaker.

However, panel (C) suggests that the identities of the strongest categories are not changed, though

the partial-F stats become smaller. Figure 9 confirms this finding by showing that the strong

categories in the GRP-log-linear specification are also relatively strong in the duration-log-linear

specification (the correlation is strong and positive in the right tail of the scatterplot). In total, these

results suggest that weak first stages in the benchmark model are not driven by the interpolation

of viewership that comprises part of GRP measurement.
  33
     The number of optimal instruments selected is 1 for 49 categories, 2 for 25 categories, 3 for 11 categories, 4 for
one category, and 5 for one category. The linear term f (Pmt ) = Pmt is most likely to be selected: it is the optimal
instrument for 19 categories, and numbers among the terms selected for another 31 categories. This result supports
our choice of the log-linear specification as the benchmark, and suggests that the crowd-out is stronger when the level
of political advertising is high.
  34
     A final reason to show the duration analysis, is some researchers may have access to advertising occurrence data,
but not viewership data, and this would provide a guide in such cases.




                                                          30
                                                             Table 4: Comparison Across Different Specifications

Measure                                                                    GRP                                                                                                                   Duration
LHS                                                   Log                                            Linear                                                                      Log                                        Linear
RHS                                          Linear          Lasso                      Linear                     Lasso                                                Linear          Lasso                  Linear                   Lasso
                                               (1)             (2)                           (3)                    (4)                                                   (5)              (6)                    (7)                     (8)
Panel A: Number of Categories in Partial-F Bins
> 25        28         25         33           32                                                                                                                         19              18                       19                     18
10 - 25     25         49         30           56                                                                                                                         33              45                       40                    56
< 10       221         13         211          14                                                                                                                        222              10                      215                     12
NS                    187                     172                                                                                                                                         201                                            188
Panel B: Top 3 Categories for Each Specification
1         FA (327)  HP (197)     FA (253)     FA (253)                                                                                                                 Car (195)   Car (195)                  AD (152)               Car (115)
2         AD (280)  FA (163)    AD (209)     AD (209)                                                                                                                  FA (161)    FA (118)                   Car (115)              AD (87)
3         HP (197)  Car (143)   Ent. (174)   Opt. (130)                                                                                                                AD (116)    LT (105)                    FA (97)                LT (72)
Table Notes: The left hand side is category advertising, and the right hand side is political advertising. Both sides are
either measured in GRP or in duration. "NS" means that the Lasso algorithm does not select any of the 40 non-linear
transformations. The top 3 categories for each specification are listed in abbreviations, with their partial-F statistics
in parentheses. The abbreviations are: "FA" for "Households Furnishings & Appliance Stores", "HP" for "Hospitals,
Physicians, & Misc. Physical Culture", "AD" for "Autos & Light Truck: Dealerships" ,"Car" for "Passenger Cars­New
& CPO", "LT" for "Light Trucks & Vans­New & CPO", "Ent." for "Misc. Entertainment & Combination Copy", and
"Opt." for "Optical Goods and Services".



                                        Figure 9: Partial F : Duration / GRP                                                                                       Figure 10: Partial F : Linear / Log-Linear

                                  250                                                                                                                            250


                                  100                                                                                                                            100

                                  50                                                                                                                             50

                                  25                                                                                                                             25


                                  10                                                                                                                             10
                                                                                                                          Partial F, Linear-Linear (Log Scale)




                                   5                                                                                                                              5
Partial F, Duration (Log Scale)




                                   1                                                                                                                              1




                                  0.1                                                                                                                            0.1




                                                       0.1             1            5   10     25   50 100   250                                                                          0.1             1          5     10   25   50 100   250
                                                       Partial F, GRP (Log Scale)                                                                                                      Partial F, Log-Linear (Log Scale)




Note: This plot compares columns (5) and (1) of Table 4.                                                                  Note: This plot compares columns (3) and (1) of Table 4.




                                                                                                                     31
4.3   Category Characteristics Related to First-Stage Strength

   In this section, we examine the characteristics associated with first-stage strength. Figure 11

plots the distributions of four characteristics for each F -statistic bin. Panel (A) shows that larger

categories tend to have stronger crowd-out effects. Per Section 2.4, these may be categories with

lower willingness-to-pay on the margin due to an already built-up advertising stock; they may

be on the relatively flat part of the advertising response curve. Panels (B) and (C) show that

categories that rely more on spot markets (higher spot GRP shares) and advertise more in high-

impression periods (higher GRP per occurrence) tend to have stronger first stages. For the F >

25, 10 < F < 25, and F < 10 categories, the median spot GRP share is 0.37, 0.11, and 0.04,

respectively, and the median average GRP per occurrence is 2.46, 2.16, and 1.99. Since political

ads are primarily bought on spot markets (spot share 0.94) and are very eyeball-heavy (3.54 GRPs

per occurrence), the associations between these two characteristics and first-stage strength are

intuitive. The categories that advertise primarily locally likely have less flexibility to substitute to

national television due to their inherently local nature (e.g. car dealerships, appliance stores, and

hospitals). The association with high-impression dayparts may reflect a preference for reach over

frequency, as might be the case for durable products. For these types of goods, frequent reminders

may be less useful than broadly distributed information. Because there are relatively few ad slots

with high reach, these types of categories likely have less flexibility to substitute their ad dollars

elsewhere. Finally, Panel (D) plots the share of spot GRPs in the "morning" and "early fringe"

(which corresponds to the late afternoon/early evening) dayparts, in which political ads are the most

concentrated. The shares in those two dayparts are slightly larger for the F > 25 categories (median

0.41 v.s. 0.38), but its association with first-stage strength is weak. This pattern might indicate that

some categories substitute to other dayparts, offsetting low willingness-to-pay advertisers in those

dayparts indirectly. The first three category characteristics are also listed along with the first-stage

results in Tables 3 and 7.




                                                  32
                                 Figure 11: Distributions of Four Category Characteristics, Colored by Partial-F

                                              (A) Total GRP (Millions)                                          (B) Share of GRP in Spot Markets
                       20
                                                                                          15



                       15

                                                                                          10

                       10



                                                                                           5
                        5
Number of Categories




                        0                                                                  0                                                                        Range of F
                                1                  10               100                                                  0.01           0.10   0.25   0.50   1.00      0-10
                                    (C) Average GRP Per Occurrence (Spot Only)                       (D) Share of Spot GRP in Morning / Early Fringe                   10-25
                                                                                                                                                                       25+
                       15
                                                                                          30




                       10                                                                 20




                        5                                                                 10




                        0                                                                  0
                                      1                         2             3                                    0.1           0.2     0.3          0.5
                                                                          Category Characteristic (Log Scale)

Figure Notes: Each observation is a category. Panels C and D use data from local spot markets only. The vertical
dotted lines show the characteristics for political advertising. The "morning" daypart is from 6 to 9 AM, and the
"early fringe" daypart is from 4:30 to 7 PM.




5                            Proof of Concept: Auto Advertising

                            We implement the political advertising IV to understand ad effects for motor vehicles. The

purpose of this exercise is twofold. First, we want to characterize the properties of the IV estimator

conditional on having a sufficiently strong first stage to limit weak instrument bias. Second, our

prior is that the short-run category-level auto advertising elasticity is likely zero. That is, we believe

auto advertising is unlikely to change an individual's need for a new car (although it may change an

individual's choice of car, so that advertising is primarily business-stealing). Thus, we interpret the

IV estimate of the short run category level ad effect as a placebo test of the exclusion restriction.

                            Automotive advertising is large. Dealers and manufacturers spent an estimated $51 billion



                                                                                               33
                                     Figure 12: Auto and Political GRPs Over Time in 4 Example Markets

                                                Columbus, OH                                                      Miami, FL
                    3000                                                            3000




                    2000                                                            2000




                    1000                                                            1000
Average Daily GRP




                      0                                                                0                                                              Category

                                                New York, NY                                                    Pittsburgh, PA                           Auto
                                                                                                                                                         Political
                    2000

                                                                                    2000
                    1500


                    1000
                                                                                    1000

                     500


                      0                                                                0
                           2010   2011   2012    2013   2014   2015   2016   2017          2010   2011   2012    2013    2014    2015   2016   2017
                                                                                    Year




worldwide in 2017.35 Automotive advertising has also been studied in the economics and marketing

literature (e.g. Murry [2017]). Anecdotal evidence from the popular press suggests that political

advertising is particularly relevant for car dealerships, so we interpret this case study as a near ideal

case for the theory of the identification strategy.36 We sum GRPs across manufacturers, dealers, and

dealer associations for motorcycles, light trucks, passenger cars, and vans.37 Figure 12 shows the

co-movement of GRPs aired by political groups and the automotive industry for 4 media markets:

Columbus, Miami, New York, and Pittsburgh. It is easy to see the ebb and flow of the political cycle

across all media markets, where GRPs spike in the fall of even years. Advertising cycles appear to

be high frequency for auto advertisers, but low amplitude. Our sales data comes from RL Polk, and

includes the monthly quantity of motor vehicle purchases by buyer ZIP code from 2010-2016.38

                     An OLS regression of sales on GRP that includes month×year fixed effects and ZIP code fixed

effects suggests an ad elasticity of 0.108 (Table 6), which is likely spurious due to the usual endo-
               35
     https://adage.com/article/cmo-strategy/world-s-largest-advertisers-2017/311484
               36
     Tim Higgins. "No One Hates Political Ads More than Car Dealers," Bloomberg News, January 8, 2016
[https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-01-08/no-one-hates-political-ads-more-than-car-delaers].
  37
     The 7 categories are: T111 "Passenger Cars­Factory, New & CPO", T112 "Light Trucks & Vans­Factory, New
& CPO", T115 "Motorcycles and Misc. Vehicles­Factory, New", T121 "Passenger Cars­Dealer Association, New &
CPO", T122 "Light Trucks & Vans­Dealer Association, New & CPO", T161 "Autos and Light Truck­Dealerships",
and T163 "Motorcycles and Misc. Vehicles­Dealerships".
  38
     The data comes from vehicle registrations.


                                                                                           34
                                 Table 5: Summary Statistics on Auto Sales

                            count        mean           sd           min              max
                   sales   1646659      37.38261     287.9025         0              76646
                   grps    1681092      55012.33     11941.77      18757.73         108048.8
                   Summary statistics on automobile purchases from 24608 ZIP codes 2010-2016.


geneity concerns that dealers and manufacturers strategically target advertising at areas with high

latent demand for motor vehicles. That association is depicted graphically in Figure 13, panel (a).

       To obtain a causal estimate of the effect of category advertising on category sales for automobiles,

we turn to the political advertising instrument. Based on our results in Section 4, the auto industry

appears amenable to the political ad strategy; six auto categories number among the categories

where political advertising has a strong first-stage (see table 3).

       Panel (b) of Figure 13 reproduces that first stage relationship graphically. As predicted by our

theory, there is a negative relationship between log political GRPs and log auto GRPs. Panel (c) of

the figure shows the reduced form relationship between auto sales and political GRPs that appears

nearly flat and is not statistically significant. Table 6 displays the corresponding regression results,

which include month×year fixed effects and ZIP code fixed effects (standard errors are clustered

at the DMA level).3940 The preferred specification is in column (4), where we estimate a strong

first stage, with a partial F-statistic of 402, which is far above conventional thresholds for limiting

weak instrument bias. The IV estimate of the ad elasticity is 0.07 and is not statistically significant

(column 4 of table 6). From the perspective of the exclusion restriction, it is reassuring that zero

is in the confidence interval, as we expect the true short-run effect of car advertising on category

car sales to be zero. However the 95% confidence interval of [-0.024, 0.16] is reasonably wide, and

spans a considerable portion of the distribution found in Shapiro et al. [2019]. It also contains point

estimates obtained from estimating the model with automobile advertising stock (rather than flows)

as the explanatory variable. The results using stock are reported in columns 5 and 6 of table 6,

which differ in how political advertising is measured (as a flow and stock, respectively).
  39
     We use ZIP code fixed effects instead of DMA fixed-effects due to the fact that we have outcome data at the ZIP
code level. ZIP code fixed effects reduce more noise in the dependent variable than do DMA fixed-effects.
  40
     Note that we omit price in our regression specification (equation 1) because we aim to estimate the total effect
of advertising, which is potentially be mediated through price. That is, if advertising affects pricing, then price is a
"bad control" (Angrist and Pischke [2009]). If our goal was to estimate a "partial equilibrium" effect of advertising
that held prices fixed, we would instead include price as a covariate, requiring a second instrument for price.




                                                          35
                                              Table 6: Automotive Advertising Effects

                                                        OLS                                                                   IV                                       Optimal IV
                                            (1)                   (2)                 (3)                           (4)                 (5)                  (6)          (7)
   Log(Auto GRP)                         0.779                  0.108               2.463                          0.068                                                 0.054
                                         (0.163)                (0.048)             (1.447)                       (0.047)                                               (0.049)
   Log(Stock Auto GRP)                                                                                                           0.022                      0.100
                                                                                                                                (0.077)                    (0.083)
   N                                    1,646,415              1,646,415       1,646,415                         1,646,415     1,361,372                  1,361,372    1,646,415
   Instrument                                                                     flow                              flow          flow                       stock        flow
   FE                                       No                       Yes          No                                Yes           Yes                         Yes         Yes
   First-Stage F                             .                        .          15.05                            402.85        136.48                      142.37       159.59
Notes: Standard errors clustered at the DMA level. FE indicate DMA and month × year fixed effects. Instrument
refers to whether political GRPs are measured as a flow or stock variable. The first-stage MOP F-statistic is reported
in the last row.



                                         Figure 13: Political Advertising and Auto Sales
                                        (a) OLS                                                                               (b) First Stage

                              Log Sales vs Log GRP for Automobiles                                                Log GRP vs Log Political GRP for Automobiles
               2.6




                                                                                                 11
               2.4




                                                                                                 10.95
                 2.2




                                                                                             logtotal
          lnsales




                                                                                               10.9
               2




                                                                                                 10.85
               1.8




                                                                                                 10.8
               1.6




                       10.4      10.6       10.8                11           11.2                            0            2             4             6            8    10
                                             logtotal                                                                                       logpgrp




                                                                           (c) Reduced Form

                                                               Log Sales vs Log Political GRP for Automobiles
                                                    2.4
                                                    2.3
                                                 lnsales
                                                   2.2
                                                    2.1
                                                    2




                                                           0           2            4                    6            8            10
                                                                                         logpgrp



Notes: All panels of this figure show bin-scatter plots with 20 equi-percentile bins. Zipcode and Year × Month fixed
effects are taken out.


    We take a few main lessons from this exercise. First, it demonstrates that a very strong first

stage does not guarantee a precise estimate in the two-stage least squares regression. In this case,

                                                                                        36
the dependent variable is noisy, even with a battery of fixed-effects. Individuals do not buy cars

frequently, and the exact timing of their purchases is likely driven by many omitted factors. Our

estimated confidence interval includes both zero and meaningfully positive advertising elasticities.41

Second, that we find a statistically significant short-run effect of advertising on category-level car

purchases in the OLS (when the true effect is likely zero) reinforces our belief that the endogeneity

of advertising in this setting is a first order problem. Further, our confidence in the exclusion

restriction for political advertising is incrementally increased by the fact that using the IV puts the

true effect (zero) into the confidence interval.




6         Conclusions

         This paper investigates when and how the political cycle can be used to estimate the causal effect

of commercial advertising on sales. Absent a source of quasi-random variation, observational data is

likely to yield biased estimates on the return to commercial advertising. We carefully enumerate the

necessary assumptions for political advertising to identify causal effects, and discuss considerations

of which LATE it identifies. Using Ad Intel data from 2010-2016, we present descriptive evidence

that political advertising increases sharply during election seasons and offsets commercial advertising

almost 1-1. We also show that the offset constitutes only a small overall change in the aggregate

commercial advertising market. We find that political advertising moves commercial advertising

levels (first stage F > 25) for 28 out of 274 product categories that advertise on television. We

show how to use LASSO to obtain optimal instruments and document that it marginally improves

first-stage power for several particularly weak categories.

         An important consideration in employing the political advertising instrument is whether the

exclusion restriction holds. We highlight two potential threats: first, through the price mechanism,

as negative product-market demand shocks might reduce commercial advertising demand, lower-

ing prices for airtime and luring political advertisers; and second, through fluctuations in viewer

attentiveness across markets and over time, which might attract both political and commercial
    41
    This further highlights that the point of testing for weak instruments is limiting finite sample bias and not about
ensuring precision in the IV estimate.




                                                          37
advertisers. We argue that integral to the implementation of the political advertising instrument

is the inclusion of time and market fixed effects. Using this preferred specification, we estimate

the advertising elasticity for the automotive industry using monthly vehicle sales data. While the

confidence interval of the IV estimate contains the presumed truth of zero short-run advertising

effect on category-level demand of automobiles, the estimate is imprecise.

   Given our results, our subjective recommendation to researchers interested in employing po-

litical advertising as an instrument is three-fold. First, given that political advertising is a weak

instrument in the vast majority of cases, researchers should consider using weak identification ro-

bust inference. Second, researchers may want to avoid the instrument in cases where the first stage

is the "incorrect" sign because it suggests that the theory underlying the validity of the IV ap-

proach is violated. In these cases, political advertising and commercial advertising are related in

some way other than crowd out. It could be that there is substitution between markets or positively

correlated preferences for particularly attentive viewers occurring in conjunction with crowd-out, vi-

olating monotonicity. Alternatively, there could be some path from unobservable demand shocks to

both political advertising and commercial advertising, violating the exclusion restriction. While we

stop short of recommending complete avoidance of the instrument for the categories where LASSO

returns zero terms, it signals to the researcher that the instrument is particularly weak. While

Belloni, Chen, Chernozhukov, and Hansen [2012] provide a way forward in such cases, it is unlikely

that the political cycle will produce an informative IV. Researchers may wish to find other sources

of variation in such cases. Finally, we want to emphasize that the exclusion restriction might be

difficult to justify in some cases. Appendix D documents that for 36 categories of grocery products,

5 of them show signs of potential exclusion restriction violations. When employing this instrument,

researchers and practitioners should make sure to carefully consider the possible exclusion restric-

tion violations and decide how likely such violations are in their particular case. It should not be

taken for granted that the instrument satisfies the exclusion restriction in all cases.



References

Theodore W Anderson and Herman Rubin. Estimation of the parameters of a single equation in

  a complete system of stochastic equations. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 20(1):46­63,


                                                  38
  1949.

Isaiah Andrews. Conditional linear combination tests for weakly identified models. Econometrica,

  84(6):2155­2182, 2016.

Joshua D Angrist and Guido W Imbens. Two-stage least squares estimation of average causal effects

  in models with variable treatment intensity. Journal of the American statistical Association, 90

  (430):431­442, 1995.

Joshua D Angrist and Jorn-Steffen Pischke. Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricist's Com-

  panion. Princeton University Press, 2009.

Timothy J Bartik. Who benefits from state and local economic development policies? WE Upjohn

  Institute for Employment Research, 1991.

Alexandre Belloni, Daniel Chen, Victor Chernozhukov, and Christian Hansen. Sparse models and

  methods for optimal instruments with an application to eminent domain. Econometrica, 80(6):

  2369­2429, 2012.

Steven T. Berry. Estimating discrete-choice models of product differentiation. The RAND Journal

  of Economics, 25(2):242­262, 1994.

Kirill Borusyak, Peter Hull, and Xavier Jaravel. Quasi-experimental shift-share research designs.

  arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.01221, 2018.

Pierre Dubois, Rachel Griffith, and Martin O'Connell. The effects of banning advertising in junk

  food markets. The Review of Economic Studies, 85(1):396­436, 2018.

Amit Gandhi and Jean-François Houde. Measuring substitution patterns in differentiated products

  industries. 2017.

Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham, Isaac Sorkin, and Henry Swift. Bartik instruments: What, when, why,

  and how. NBER Working Paper 24408, 2018.

Wesley R Hartmann and Daniel Klapper. Super bowl ads. Marketing Science, 37(1):78­96, 2018.

Xing Li, Wesley R Hartmann, and Tomomichi Amano. Preference externality estimators: A com-

  parison of border approaches and ivs. Available at SSRN 3402187, 2019.

                                               39
Mitchell J. Lovett, Renana Peres, and Linli Xu. Can your advertising really buy earned impressions?

  the effect of brand advertising on word of mouth. Quantitative Marketing and Economics, Apr

  2019. ISSN 1573-711X. doi: 10.1007/s11129-019-09211-9. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/

  s11129-019-09211-9.

Sarah Moshary. Price discrimination in political advertising: Evidence from 2012 us presidential

  election. The RAND Journal of Economics, Forthcoming.

Charles Murry. Advertising in vertical relationships: An equilibrium model of the automobile

  industry. Working Paper., 2017.

José Luis Montiel Olea and Carolin Pflueger. A robust test for weak instruments. Journal of

  Business & Economic Statistics, 31(3):358­369, 2013.

Peter E Rossi. Even the rich can make themselves poor: A critical examination of iv methods in

  marketing applications. Marketing Science, 33(5):655­672, 2014.

Bradley Shapiro, Guenter J. Hitsch, and Anna Tuchman. Generalizable and robust tv advertising

  effects. Working Paper, Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3273476, 2019.

Bradley T. Shapiro. Positive spillovers and free riding in advertising of prescription pharmaceuticals:

  The case of antidepressants. Journal of Political Economy, 126(1):381­437, 2018. doi: 10.1086/

  695475. URL https://doi.org/10.1086/695475.

Michael Sinkinson and Amanda Starc. Ask your doctor? Direct-to-consumer advertising of phar-

  maceuticals. Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming, 2018.

James Stock and Motohiro Yogo. Testing for Weak Instruments in Linear IV Regression, pages

  80­108. Cambridge University Press, New York, 2005. URL http://www.economics.harvard.

  edu/faculty/stock/files/TestingWeakInstr_Stock%2BYogo.pdf.

Michael Thomas.         Mass advertising as a natural experiment.               Available at SSRN:

  https://ssrn.com/abstract=3182092, 2017.

Anna E Tuchman. Advertising and demand for addictive goods: The effects of e-cigarette advertis-

  ing. Marketing Science, 38(6):994­1022, 2019.


                                                  40
A    Additional Tables

                 Table 7: List of 221 Categories with Weak Log-Linear First Stage (F < 10)


Category                                             Partial F Partial R2 Scaled Coef Size Rank Spot Share GRP/OCC
Cosmetics, Misc. Beauty Aids & Supp                    10.0     0.002     -0.096      244       0.08        3.2
Radio Stations                                          9.6     0.002     -0.223      193       0.91        1.9
City, State & Foreign Governments                      9.0      0.001     -0.100      141       0.86        2.1
TV Program-Multi-News                                  8.9      0.001     -0.054       48       0.96        2.5
TV Program-Cable-Talk Show                             8.9      0.000     -0.018      273       0.01        1.5
Non-Carbonated                                         8.8      0.001     -0.012      239       0.03        1.6
Food Wraps, Foils & Bags                               8.8      0.001     -0.008      125       0.03        1.7
Garden Machinery, Implements & Fixtures                 8.6     0.001     -0.068      158       0.25        2.8
Accting, Auditing & Bookkeeping Services               8.5      0.002     -0.024      100       0.10        1.6
Pasta Products & Pasta Product Dinners                 8.3      0.000     -0.046      218       0.06        2.8
Pre-Recorded Video                                     7.9      0.001      0.003       40       0.01        1.7
Telecommunication Systems & Services                    7.6     0.001     -0.050      151       0.22        2.2
Car Batteries                                           7.5     0.001     -0.023      258       0.01        2.8
Fitness & Diet Programs & Spas                         7.5      0.001     -0.024       60       0.18        2.3
TV Program-Evening-Ent                                  7.2     0.001     -0.136      187       0.32        1.5
All Other Prepared Dinners & Entrees & Pizzas          6.9      0.001     -0.007       32       0.06        1.9
Motion Pictures                                        6.9      0.001      0.004        5       0.02        2.0
Computers, Components & Accessories                    6.7      0.001      0.008       59       0.01        2.4
Home Insurance                                         6.3      0.001     -0.023      111       0.09        2.0
Telephone Companies, Public & Private                  6.3      0.001     -0.010       14       0.13        2.2
TV Program-Prime-Sports                                 6.3     0.001     -0.056      223       0.35        1.7
Garden Pest Controls                                   6.1      0.001     -0.081      169       0.22        3.1
Regular Carbonated                                     6.1      0.001     -0.011       93       0.04        2.2
Security Systems & Fire Safety Systems                 6.1      0.001     -0.051      171       0.19        2.3
Sport & Protective Footwear                            6.1      0.001     -0.011      118       0.01        1.5
Soups                                                   5.9     0.000     -0.021       67       0.05        1.9
Motorcycles & Vhcls Misc-Factory:new                   5.9      0.000     -0.012      164       0.03        2.2
Pre-Fabricated Homes & Buildings                       5.8      0.001     -0.192      271       0.81        2.7
Books & Music                                          5.7      0.001     -0.015      219       0.05        1.5
TV Program-Synd-Ent                                    5.5      0.001     -0.025       38       0.88        1.3
Combination Copy & Misc Dairy Products                 5.5      0.001     -0.009       44       0.06        1.9
Petroleum Companies, General Promotion                 5.5      0.000     -0.035      201       0.05        3.2
Cookies & Crackers                                     5.4      0.002      0.008       74       0.01        1.6
Jellies, Jams, Preserves, Peanut Butter                5.4      0.001     -0.010      134       0.05        2.2
Mattresses                                             5.3      0.000     -0.048      135       0.07        2.3
Blouses & Shirts                                        5.2     0.000     -0.016      255       0.00        2.9
Paint, Varnishes & Misc Coatings                       5.2      0.001      0.032      115       0.03        2.4
Miscellaneous Medication & Proprietary Remedies        5.2      0.001     -0.007       82       0.04        1.6
TV Program-Multi-Ent                                   5.1      0.001     -0.044      160       0.49        1.6
Refrigerators & Freezers                               5.0      0.000     -0.018      198       0.01        2.0
TV Program-Synd-Talk Show                              5.0      0.001     -0.039       96       0.91        1.7
Car Cleaners, Waxes & Polishes                         5.0      0.001     -0.013      231       0.03        1.2
Pet Food (not Elsewhere Classified)                     4.8     0.001     -0.045      265       0.06        2.8
TV Program-Morning-News                                 4.8     0.001     -0.101      170       0.99        2.1
Stationery & Miscellaneous Paper Goods                 4.7      0.001     -0.018      192       0.02        1.7
Sauces, Gravies, Dips                                  4.6      0.000     -0.010      127       0.02        1.9
General Household Small Appliances(not Else Class)      4.2     0.000      0.007      130       0.01        1.8
Farm Machinery & Equipment                             4.2      0.001     -0.054      245       0.43        2.7
Shampoos, Conditioners & Cream Rinses                  4.0      0.000     -0.005       52       0.02        1.3
TV Program-Daytime-Sports                              4.0      0.000     -0.036      213       0.33        1.6
                                                                                             Continued on next page


                                                      41
                                        Table 7 ­ Continued from previous page
Category                                           Partial F Partial R2 Scaled Coef Size Rank Spot Share GRP/OCC
Women's Scents & Fragrances                           3.9      0.000        0.011   143       0.03        2.9
Mobile Homes,campers,rvs:dealerships                  3.8      0.000       -0.124   204       0.96        2.7
Mutual Funds & Money Funds                            3.8      0.000        0.007   194       0.01        2.9
TV Program-Prime-Ent                                  3.8      0.001        0.010     4       0.19        2.2
Toys                                                  3.7      0.001        0.001    24       0.00        1.9
Home Audio Equipment & Accessories                    3.7      0.000        0.023   209       0.01        2.8
Pre-Recorded Audio                                    3.7      0.000        0.008   185       0.04        1.2
TV Program-Daytime-Ent                                3.6      0.001       -0.018   109       0.24        1.5
Shoes & Boots, Regular & Casual                       3.5      0.000       -0.012   157       0.01        1.8
Disinfectants                                         3.5      0.001       -0.007   144       0.04        1.4
Electronics Stores (Incl Rental)                      3.2      0.000       -0.018   110       0.10        2.2
Resort Promotion (Area)                               3.1      0.001       -0.028    92       0.40        2.5
Horticultural Services & Misc                         3.1      0.001       -0.116   199       0.28        2.3
Baking Mixes, Crusts & Baking Ingred                  3.1      0.001       -0.025   189       0.06        1.5
Hair Dressings, Sprays & Restoration Prod             3.0      0.000       -0.006   147       0.01        1.3
Car & Truck Rental Svcs                               2.9      0.000        0.018   161       0.01        1.3
TV Program-Cable-News                                 2.8      0.000       -0.001   112       0.00        1.6
Credit Cards                                          2.8      0.000       -0.004    30       0.03        1.8
Investments & Collectns (not Else Class)              2.7      0.000       -0.043   257       0.30        2.0
Diapers(Incl Infant & Adult)                          2.7      0.000       -0.005    81       0.02        1.6
Small Kitchen Appliances & Equipment                  2.7      0.000       -0.007   133       0.03        1.9
Home Phone Equipment                                  2.6      0.000        0.014   128       0.04        2.5
Bedding & Linens                                      2.6      0.000       -0.019   232       0.12        1.2
Gasoline Dealrs Services & Promotions                 2.4      0.000       -0.038   208       0.39        3.0
Misc Toilet Goods                                     2.4      0.000        0.005    62       0.02        2.0
Personal Care/Grooming Appliances                     2.3      0.000        0.007   207       0.02        1.2
Laxatives                                             2.3      0.000       -0.005   114       0.02        2.4
Miscellaneous Sporting Equipment                      2.3      0.000       -0.009   261       0.04        1.0
Toilet Soaps                                          2.3      0.000       -0.005    99       0.02        1.5
TV Program-Daytime-Talk Show                          2.2      0.000        0.056   196       0.08        3.0
Misc Corporate Advertising (not Else Class)           2.2      0.000       -0.012   119       0.10        2.4
US Government                                         2.2      0.000       -0.008    63       0.15        1.0
Gelatins & Puddings (Mixes & Prepared)                2.2      0.000       -0.012   227       0.01        2.0
Department Stores                                     2.1      0.000       -0.005     9       0.11        2.9
Boats, Motors & Accessories                           2.1      0.000       -0.051   267       0.70        2.6
Jewelry                                               2.0      0.000       -0.056   241       0.26        3.0
TV Program-Overnite-News                              2.0      0.000       -0.119   174       1.00        2.8
Cable Tv Network                                      2.0      0.000       -0.001    17       0.01        1.3
Misc Equipment, Fixtures & Systems                    2.0      0.000       -0.038   243       0.29        2.2
Sunglasses, Frames & Corrective Lenses                2.0      0.000       -0.005   122       0.02        2.1
Laundry Detergents & Cleaning Preparations            2.0      0.000       -0.004    39       0.02        1.6
Gasoline & Oil                                        1.9      0.000        0.009   149       0.05        2.0
Other Fruits                                          1.7      0.000       -0.015   225       0.09        2.0
Misc Men's Toiletries & Hygienic Goods                1.7      0.000        0.002   217       0.00        0.8
Motorcycle & Vehicle Misc-Dealerships                 1.7      0.000       -0.098   252       0.93        2.5
Dairy Product Substitutes                             1.7      0.000       -0.009   168       0.04        2.3
Sponges                                               1.7      0.000       -0.003    75       0.02        1.8
Misc Building Materials                               1.7      0.000       -0.029   270       0.30        2.0
Non-Computerized Games                                1.7      0.000        0.002    86       0.00        1.9
Infants Foods                                         1.6      0.000       -0.007   190       0.02        1.5
Combination Copy Food/Food Products/Gp                1.6      0.000       -0.017   154       0.07        2.3
Computer & Data Processing Services                   1.6      0.000       -0.025   264       0.20        1.8
Pharmaceutical Houses, Gp                             1.6      0.000       -0.003    10       0.03        2.5
Steamship, Truck & Other Facilities                   1.6      0.000       -0.008   120       0.10        2.4
Television Stations                                   1.5      0.000        0.022   237       0.13        2.3
                                                                                           Continued on next page


                                                    42
                                      Table 7 ­ Continued from previous page
Category                                         Partial F Partial R2 Scaled Coef Size Rank Spot Share GRP/OCC
Liquor                                              1.5      0.000        0.001    64       0.01        1.4
Car & Truck Tires & Tubes                           1.4      0.000       -0.004   136       0.02        2.3
Hardware & Lumber Stores                            1.4      0.000       -0.023   152       0.12        2.6
Feminine Hygiene Products                           1.3      0.000       -0.003    84       0.02        1.1
Shaving Equipment & Supplies                        1.3      0.000        0.003    91       0.01        1.7
TV Program-Multi-Sports                             1.3      0.000       -0.012   102       0.29        2.1
Doors & Windows                                     1.2      0.000       -0.072   266       0.73        2.5
Candy & Gum                                         1.2      0.000        0.002    12       0.01        1.5
Deodorizers, Air Fresheners & Purifiers             1.2      0.000       -0.002    68       0.02        1.4
Floor & Furniture Polish & Wax                      1.2      0.000       -0.009   205       0.02        1.7
Dental Supplies & Mouthwashes                       1.2      0.000       -0.003    23       0.03        1.7
Insecticides                                        1.2      0.000       -0.019   226       0.08        2.3
Stoves & Ranges (Including Microwave)               1.2      0.000       -0.019   256       0.03        2.7
Railroad Travel                                     1.1      0.000       -0.028   249       0.16        2.7
Salad Dressings & Mayonnaise                        1.1      0.000        0.006   129       0.08        2.0
Facial Cleansers & Make-Up Removers                 1.1      0.000       -0.005   139       0.02        1.4
Shortening, Oil, Margar & No-Stick Prod             1.1      0.000        0.006   165       0.03        1.9
Vegetable Juices                                    1.0      0.000        0.004   177       0.01        2.6
Patio & Barbecue Equip & Accessor                   1.0      0.000       -0.011   229       0.03        1.5
Hosiery                                             0.9      0.000       -0.009   259       0.01        2.6
Gas, Power, Lighting & Water Companies              0.9      0.000       -0.062   167       0.81        3.1
Online Tv Program-Promo                             0.9      0.000        0.006   268       0.02        1.3
Video Equipment & Accessories                       0.8      0.000        0.009   180       0.02        3.0
TV Program-Cable-Sports                             0.7      0.000        0.001    41       0.01        2.3
Misc Household Furnishings                          0.7      0.000        0.012   230       0.02        1.6
Employment Recruitment                              0.7      0.000       -0.039   221       0.41        1.9
TV Program-Evening-Sports                           0.7      0.000       -0.027   224       0.54        1.8
Beans & Grains                                      0.7      0.000        0.027   179       0.05        2.2
Furniture                                           0.7      0.000       -0.035   220       0.20        2.8
Computer Software                                   0.7      0.000        0.002    50       0.01        2.1
Beer                                                0.7      0.000        0.002    43       0.02        1.8
Heating & Cooling Equip, Fixtrs & Systems           0.7      0.000        0.023   210       0.36        2.8
Combination Copy & Misc Prepared Food               0.6      0.000        0.004   236       0.02        2.5
Reducing Aids                                       0.6      0.000       -0.003   131       0.02        1.2
Condiments, Pickles, Relishes                       0.6      0.000       -0.034   212       0.08        1.9
Telex, Telemail & Telegram Systems                  0.6      0.000        0.010   238       0.04        1.0
Cameras and Photographic Supplies                   0.5      0.000        0.006   183       0.02        2.3
Meats, Poultry & Fish                               0.5      0.000       -0.004    80       0.12        2.8
Pets & Pet Supplies                                 0.5      0.000       -0.004   103       0.08        2.0
TV Program-Morning-Ent                              0.5      0.000       -0.005    94       0.25        2.2
Vacuum Cleaners & Dishwashers                       0.5      0.000       -0.002   126       0.02        1.8
Misc Medical & First-Aid Supplies                   0.5      0.000        0.005   188       0.02        1.3
Comb Copy & Misc Commun & Public Utilit             0.5      0.000       -0.021   247       0.18        3.2
Depilatories, Face & Body Hair Bleaches             0.5      0.000       -0.004   234       0.02        1.2
Watches                                             0.4      0.000       -0.008   211       0.07        2.8
Comb Copy & Misc Elec Entertnmnt Equip              0.4      0.000        0.005   121       0.01        2.0
Men's Scents & Fragrances                           0.4      0.000       -0.007   181       0.02        2.5
Bottled Waters                                      0.4      0.000       -0.014   178       0.07        1.8
Sugars, Syrups & Artificial Sweeteners              0.4      0.000       -0.005   191       0.02        2.0
Medicated Skin Products & Liniments                 0.4      0.000       -0.003    90       0.05        1.5
In-Home Tests (Including Computerized)              0.4      0.000       -0.004   182       0.07        1.3
Vegetables                                          0.4      0.000       -0.005   140       0.10        2.0
Shoe Care Products                                  0.4      0.000       -0.002   145       0.02        2.6
Sunscreens & Tanning Products                       0.4      0.000       -0.005   172       0.02        1.7
Apparel Fabrics & Finishes                          0.4      0.000       -0.003   248       0.00        1.8
                                                                                         Continued on next page


                                                  43
                                         Table 7 ­ Continued from previous page
Category                                            Partial F Partial R2 Scaled Coef Size Rank Spot Share GRP/OCC
Other Soaps & Detergents                               0.4      0.000        0.001    98       0.02        1.4
Laundry Equipment                                      0.4      0.000        0.004   186       0.02        2.6
Window Coverings & Trtmnts & Hh Fabrics                0.4      0.000       -0.015   272       0.09        2.2
Misc Clnrs, Waxes & Polishes (Spec Uses)               0.3      0.000       -0.002    89       0.04        1.2
Skin Care Creams, Lotions & Oils                       0.3      0.000        0.001    29       0.03        1.6
Anti-Freeze & Additives                                0.3      0.000        0.005   253       0.05        1.7
Facial Make-Up Products                                0.3      0.000        0.002    88       0.02        2.0
Hispanic Tv Network                                    0.3      0.000       -0.012   242       0.21        1.1
Home Workshop Hand & Power Tools                       0.3      0.000       -0.003   163       0.02        1.7
Miscellaneous Laundry Supplies                         0.3      0.000        0.008   206       0.02        1.5
Auto & Truck Parts,accessories & Kits                  0.2      0.000        0.005   173       0.09        2.6
Underclothing                                          0.2      0.000       -0.004   184       0.00        1.9
Vinyl Flrng & Misc Hard Surf Flr Covrgs                0.2      0.000       -0.006   262       0.05        1.4
Fruit Juices & Fruit Flavored Drinks(Incl Powdrd)      0.2      0.000        0.001    37       0.02        2.0
Exercise Equipment                                     0.2      0.000        0.001   215       0.01        1.4
Airline Travel                                         0.2      0.000        0.010   153       0.23        3.2
Hair Coloring & Curling Formulae                       0.2      0.000        0.001    73       0.02        1.8
Airline Freight                                        0.2      0.000        0.003   214       0.04        3.0
Seasonings, Spices & Extracts & Marinades              0.2      0.000       -0.007   166       0.03        2.0
Cat Food                                               0.2      0.000       -0.001   106       0.01        1.8
TV Program-Daytime-News                                0.2      0.000       -0.024   235       0.92        2.2
Cruise Ship Travel                                     0.2      0.000        0.004   148       0.07        2.4
Dog Food                                               0.2      0.000       -0.001    53       0.01        1.7
Auto & Light Trucks-Factory:corp Advrtsng              0.2      0.000       -0.009   260       0.10        1.9
Brokerage Svcs                                         0.1      0.000       -0.001    36       0.03        2.5
Manicure Preparations & Implements                     0.1      0.000        0.004   197       0.02        1.4
Combination Copy Ready-to-Wear                         0.1      0.000       -0.001   132       0.01        1.8
Dietary Carbonated                                     0.1      0.000       -0.002   150       0.04        2.5
Vitamin Preparations & Tonics                          0.1      0.000       -0.001    22       0.02        1.7
TV Program-Prime-News                                  0.1      0.000       -0.006   156       0.52        1.8
Pain Relievers, Sedatives & Sleeping Preps             0.1      0.000        0.001    34       0.02        1.4
Digestive Aids & Antacids                              0.1      0.000       -0.001    54       0.02        1.6
Lip Make-Up                                            0.1      0.000        0.001   138       0.01        1.3
Cleaners & Cleansers (Genl Hshold Use)                 0.0      0.000       -0.001   87        0.03        1.2
Craft, Hobby & Sporting Goods & Toy Stores             0.0      0.000        0.002    66       0.17        2.6
Citrus Fruits                                          0.0      0.000       -0.001   240       0.01        3.5
TV Program-Evening-News                                0.0      0.000       -0.003   108       0.65        2.4
Typewriters & Misc Office Equipment                    0.0      0.000       -0.005   250       0.01        2.4
Miscellaneous Passenger Travel                         0.0      0.000       -0.015   254       0.64        2.3
Fertilizers & Seed Treatments                          0.0      0.000        0.007   222       0.17        2.4
Household Paper Products                               0.0      0.000       -0.000   105       0.02        1.9
Combination Copy & Misc Hygienic Goods                 0.0      0.000       -0.002   274       0.04        2.6
TV Program-Latenite-Sports                             0.0      0.000       -0.012   251       0.81        2.1
Wine                                                   0.0      0.000       -0.001   200       0.02        2.2
Sportswear                                             0.0      0.000       -0.001   202       0.01        2.2
Eye Make-Up                                            0.0      0.000        0.000    79       0.01        1.4
TV Program-Cable-Ent                                   0.0      0.000        0.000     1       0.00        1.4
Ice Cream, Frozen Novelties & Sherbet                  0.0      0.000       -0.002   137       0.11        2.6
Travel Services & Tours                                0.0      0.000       -0.000    47       0.03        2.3
Deodorants & Anti-Perspirants                          0.0      0.000        0.000   104       0.01        1.0
Miscellaneous Pdts/Svcs                                0.0      0.000       -0.001   124       0.46        1.8
Hobbycraft                                             0.0      0.000        0.000   228       0.02        2.5
Pens, Pencils, Markers & Miscellaneous                 0.0      0.000        0.001   195       0.01        2.2
Otr Manuf Materials & Supplies                         0.0      0.000        0.001   176       0.11        2.5
Cookware & Cutlery                                     0.0      0.000       -0.001   263       0.00        1.3
                                                                                            Continued on next page


                                                     44
                                        Table 7 ­ Continued from previous page
Category                                             Partial F Partial R2 Scaled Coef Size Rank Spot Share GRP/OCC
Broadcast Tv Network                                   0.0         0.000     -0.001         146        0.25    1.8
TV Program-Latenite-Ent                                0.0         0.000     -0.000         117        0.23    3.0
Lawn & Garden Seeds, Bulbs & Nursery Stock             0.0         0.000     -0.002         246        0.57    2.9
Agricultural Services & Miscellaneous                  0.0         0.000     -0.002         269        0.28    2.8
Business Propositions                                  0.0         0.000     -0.001         233        0.05    1.0
Milk, Butter, Eggs (Including Powdered)                0.0         0.000     -0.000          83        0.05    2.5



                 Table 8: List of 87 Categories with Non-Empty LASSO Selection


    Category                                                Partial F       Partial R2    # Terms
                                                        LASSO Log-Linear LASSO Log-Linear Selected
    Hospitals, Physicians & Misc. Physical Culture         197.2     197.2    0.031       0.031        1
    Household Furnishings & Appliance Stores               162.9     327.5    0.059       0.058        2
    Passenger Cars-Factory:New & CPO                       143.0     143.0    0.026       0.026        1
    Construction, Engineering & Archit Srvcs               122.2     122.2    0.018       0.018        1
    Autos & Light Truck - Dealerships                      109.0     280.2    0.036       0.035        2
    Light Trucks & Vans-Factory:New & CPO                  105.9     105.9    0.024       0.024        1
    Miscellaneous Professional Services                    100.5     141.2    0.029       0.028        2
    Dance, Theater, Concerts, Opera                         91.3      91.3    0.014       0.014        1
    Misc Entertainment & Combination Copy                   80.1     144.6    0.020       0.020        2
    Automotive                                              72.2      72.2    0.011       0.011        1
    Miscellaneous Organization Advertising                  68.9      96.5    0.028       0.028        2
    Optical Goods and Services                              64.6     184.6    0.021       0.018        3
    Data Communications Networks                            53.5      53.5    0.010       0.010        1
    Misc Financial Inst. Services & Products                52.4      52.4    0.009       0.009        1
    Miscellaneous Retail                                    51.1     114.4    0.025       0.023        3
    Restaurants, Hotel Dining & Nightclubs                 50.8      135.4    0.029       0.026        5
    Passenger Cars-Dealer Assn:New & CPO                    49.4     106.8    0.019       0.018        3
    Cakes, Pies, Pastries & Donuts                         43.1       43.1    0.005       0.005        1
    Direct Response Products                                40.3      40.3    0.011       0.011        1
    Apparel, Footwear & Accessory Stores                    36.8      36.8    0.004       0.004        1
    Schools & Camps, Seminars                               35.8      71.9    0.015       0.014        2
    Light Trucks & Vans-Dealer Assn:New & CPO               34.8      63.0    0.011       0.011        2
    Tv Station                                              29.5      35.4    0.006       0.006        2
    Real Estate, R.e. Brokers & Developers                  27.2      27.2    0.004       0.004        1
    Banks                                                   25.3      45.0    0.006       0.006        2
    Fix-it Supplies                                        24.4       31.3    0.002       0.002        2
    Medical Appliances & Equipment                          22.1      14.3    0.002       0.001        1
    Medicated Skin Products & Liniments                     19.5      0.4     0.002       0.000        1
    Cereals                                                 19.4      30.1    0.009       0.007        3
    Laxatives                                               19.3       2.3    0.003       0.000        1
    Non-Computerized Games                                  19.2       1.7    0.002       0.000        1
    Cable Television Stations                               18.8      42.9    0.008       0.007        3
    TV Program-Synd-Talk Show                               18.8       5.0    0.003       0.001        1
    Religious, Charitable & Humanitarian                    18.2      16.1    0.005       0.003        2
    all Other Prepared Dinners & Entrees & Pizzas           17.4       6.9    0.002       0.001        1
    Hotels & Resorts                                        17.2      17.2    0.003       0.003        1
    Computers, Components & Accessories                     16.5       6.7    0.002       0.001        1
    Jewelry, Gift Stores & Galleries                        16.4      11.2    0.002       0.001        1
    Home Audio Equipment & Accessories                      16.4       3.7    0.000       0.000        1
    Cookies & Crackers                                      16.1       5.4    0.004       0.002        2
    Lotteries                                               15.9      15.9    0.002       0.002        1
                                                                                      Continued on next page

                                                      45
                             Table 8 ­ Continued from previous page
Category                                               Partial F       Partial R2    # Terms
                                                   LASSO Log-Linear LASSO Log-Linear Selected
Plumbing & Sanit Equip, Fixtrs & Systems            15.9     23.6     0.003   0.003     2
Vitamin Preparations & Tonics                       15.5      0.1     0.002   0.000     1
Automobile Insurance                                15.4     20.0     0.004   0.004     2
Combination Copy & Misc Dairy Products              14.9      5.5     0.001   0.001     1
Life Insurance                                      14.8     18.3     0.004   0.004     2
City,state & Foreign Governments                    14.6      9.0     0.001   0.001     1
TV Program-Prime-Sports                             14.6      6.3     0.002   0.001     1
Sport & Protective Footwear                         14.4      6.1     0.002   0.001     1
Other Insurance & Combination Copy                  14.4     14.4     0.003   0.003     1
Regular Carbonated                                  14.2      6.1     0.004   0.001     3
Golf Equipment                                      13.9     17.9     0.004   0.004     2
Magazines, Newspapers, Misc Media                   13.8     15.1     0.002   0.002     2
Cheese Products                                     13.3     10.2     0.002   0.002     1
Pasta Products & Pasta Product Dinners              13.2      8.3     0.000   0.000     1
Women's Scents & Fragrances                         13.1      3.9     0.001   0.000     1
Beer                                                13.1      0.7     0.005   0.000     3
Disinfectants                                       12.9      3.5     0.002   0.001     1
Pet Food (not Elsewhere Classified)                 12.8      4.8     0.003   0.001     2
TV Program-Multi-News                               12.8      8.9     0.002   0.001     1
Misc Accessories, Supplies & Hardware               12.6     12.6     0.001   0.001     1
Stationery & Miscellaneous Paper Goods              12.4      4.7     0.001   0.001     1
Cold, Cough & Sinus Remedies                        12.4     12.7     0.002   0.001     2
Home Insurance                                      12.3      6.3     0.001   0.001     1
Sauces, Gravies, Dips                               12.1      4.6     0.001   0.000     1
Appetizers, Snacks & Nuts                           11.9     21.4     0.005   0.003     4
Cat Food                                            11.6      0.2     0.002   0.000     1
Vacuum Cleaners & Dishwashers                       11.6      0.5     0.002   0.000     1
Shaving Equipment & Supplies                        11.3      1.3     0.001   0.000     1
TV Program-Latenite-News                            11.0     11.0     0.002   0.002     1
Fitness & Diet Programs & Spas                      10.4      7.5     0.001   0.001     2
Coffee, Tea, Cocoa & Derivatives                    10.2     12.2     0.002   0.002     2
Computerized Games & Accessories Includ Software    10.2     10.2     0.001   0.001     1
Comb Copy & Misc Commun & Public Utilit             10.1      0.5     0.001   0.000     1
Cosmtcs Comb Cpy,misc Beauty Aids & Supp            10.0     10.0     0.002   0.002     1
Toilet Soaps                                        10.0      2.3     0.001   0.000     1
Medical & Dental Insurance                           9.7     18.9     0.002   0.002     3
Liquor                                               9.7      1.5     0.001   0.000     1
Breads, Rolls, Waffles & Pancakes                    9.3     17.6     0.001   0.001     2
Accting, Auditing & Bookkeeping Services             8.7      8.5     0.002   0.002     2
Food & Liquor Stores                                 8.7     16.8     0.004   0.003     3
Amusement Parks & Sporting Events                    8.1     23.0     0.002   0.002     3
Apparel Fabrics & Finishes                           7.9      0.4     0.001   0.000     1
Drugs, Toiletries & Salons                          7.9      10.2     0.002   0.001     2
Pre-Fabricated Homes & Buildings                     7.9      5.8     0.002   0.001     1
Cellular Radio Systems & Accessories                 7.8     11.8     0.003   0.003     2
Radio Stations                                      7.3       9.6     0.003   0.002     3




                                               46
B      Selecting the Optimal Instruments

B.1                      Candidates of Optimal Instruments Selection

We use the following four sets of non-linear transformations for political GRP as candidates for

optimal instruments:

    · A 5th degree orthogonal polynomial. [5 Terms]

    · A 5th degree orthogonal polynomial of log(1+political GRP). [5 Terms]

    · A cubic B-spline basis with 10 degrees of freedom. The knots are placed on equally spaced
       quantiles of political GRP. [10 Terms]

    · A cubic B-spline basis with 20 degrees of freedom. [20 Terms]

While each set of candidates could capture any non-linearity in the data fairly well on its own, we

use all of them together to account for the fact that we have no a priori knowledge about which set

fits the data best. In addition, our broad set of candidates allows the optimal instrument to be some

combination of polynomial and spline terms. Finally, we include the polynomial of log(1+political

GRP) to improve the fit for a potential constant-elasticity relationship. Figure 14 illustrates the

cubic spline basis with 10 terms by plotting them against both political GRP and log(1+political

GRP).

                                       Figure 14: Illustration: Cubic B-Spline Basis for Political GRP

                                Cubic B-Spline Basis, 10 Degrees of Freedom                                 Cubic B-Spline Basis, 10 Degrees of Freedom

                         1.00                                                                        1.00




                         0.75                                                                        0.75
      f(Political GRP)




                                                                                  f(Political GRP)




                         0.50                                                                        0.50




                         0.25                                                                        0.25




                         0.00                                                                        0.00

                                0        25000       50000       75000   100000                                   1e+01                  1e+03        1e+05
                                                 Political GRP                                                            Political GRP (Log Scale)




                                                                              47
B.2    The LASSO Method from Belloni et al (2012)

   Given a first-stage regression equation di = D(xi ) + vi where di is the endogenous variable,

xi  Rp are a vector of instruments, and D(·) is an unknown function, Belloni, Chen, Chernozhukov,
                                                        ^ (xi ) = x 
and Hansen [2012] approximate the optimal instrument by D           ^        ^
                                                                   i , where  is the solution of

a LASSO optimization problem:



                                              n                          p
                          ^  argmin p 1                        2
                                                   (di - xi b) +
                                                                 
                                                                              |^k k |               (7)
                                   b R
                                       n                         n
                                             i=1                        k=1


   In the program above,  is a tuning parameter that controls regularization, and ^k is an estimate
                                          n    2 2
of the optimal penalty loading k :-       i=1 xik vi .
                                                 Following the recommendation of Belloni et al.
                                                            
[2012] (Appendix A), we set the tuning parameter to  = 2.2 n-1 1 - 2p log(
                                                                         0.1
                                                                             n)  and estimate

the optimal penalty loadings using the following iteration procedure:


                                                         n    2         ¯)2 and solve the LASSO program
  1. Set the initial penalty loadings to ^k =            i=1 xik (di   -d

      above to obtain ~. Then estimate the first-stage residual as v
                                                                   ~i = di - xi ~.

                                            n    2 ~2
  2. Set the penalty loadings to ^k =       i=1 xik v i   and repeat.

  3. Iterate step (2) 15 times.




Since the DMA and month fixed effects should always be included in the regression, we partial out

these fixed effects from both the endogenous variable (category ads) and the 40 potential instruments

before running the LASSO procedure.



B.3    Further LASSO Results

   To further compare the LASSO optimal instruments with our benchmark log-linear specification,

we plot the partial-F and partial-R2 in scatter plots in Figures 15 and 16. We observe three main

patterns from this comparison. First, among the 221 categories with log-linear partial-F below



                                                   48
10, LASSO selects nothing for 186 categories, but produces a higher partial-F for 33 categories.

This pattern can be clearly seen from the left tail in Figure 15 above the 45-degree line, and it

suggests that the LASSO optimal instruments pick up a non-linear relationship between political

and category ads that is neglected in the log-linear specification. Second, for each of the 28 categories

with log-linear partial-F above 25, LASSO produces a smaller or equal partial-F and a slightly larger

partial-R2 , as shown in the right tail in Figure 15 below the 45-degree line, and in Figure 16 above

the 45-degree line. This pattern suggests the LASSO procedure trades off instrument strength

(which relates to bias of the IV estimator) for a better first-stage fit (which relates to variance of

the IV estimator).

   To further understand what the optimal instruments capture, we calculate the predicted effect

function gj (P ) := j fj (P ) for each category j from the LASSO selection fj (·) and the first-stage

coefficients j . We then plot gj (P ) against P for the 25 categories with LASSO F > 25 in Figure

17, for the 21 categories with both log-linear and LASSO F  [10, 25] in Figure 18, and for the

28 "upgraded" categories with log-linear F < 10 and LASSO F  [10, 25] in Figure 19. These

curves are helpful for considering monotonicity. In Figure 17, the curves all look reasonably flat

until very high levels of political advertising, when the crowd out becomes more severe. While some

early ranges show some positive effects of P on A, it does not appear significant and is drastically

outweighed by the negative impact at the high levels of P . Figure 18 shows similar results. Figure

19 looks somewhat different. There are a few brands with considerable amounts of positive effect

of P on A which may be a warning sign of monotonicity violations. However, most categories in

this figure show a very different crowd-out curve than those categories that have a strong first-stage

in the log-linear case. This illustrates that the LASSO strengthens the first stage, particularly for

brands that show patterns of crowd out that do not appear log-linear. However, this improvement

in relevance comes at the cost of monotonicity concerns.




                                                   49
 Figure 15: Partial F : LASSO v.s. Linear                                                                                                                                                                                          Figure 16: Partial R2 : LASSO v.s. Linear

                                                        250                                                                                                                                                                                 0.05



                                                        100                                                                                                                                                                                 0.02




                                                                                                                                                                                      Partial R2, Lasso Optimal Instruments (Log Scale)
     Partial F, Lasso Optimal Instruments (Log Scale)




                                                        50                                                                                                                                                                                  0.01


                                                        25                                                                                                                                                                                 0.005



                                                        10


                                                         5                                                                                                                                                                                 0.001




                                                         1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.0001




                                                        0.1


                                                              0.1                                           1             5     10      25    50    100   250                                                                                      0.0001              0.001          0.005 0.01    0.02   0.05
                                                                                                      Partial F, Linear Specification (Log Scale)                                                                                                    Partial R2, Linear Specification (Log Scale)




                                                         Figure 17: LASSO Predicted Displacement Effect, 25 Categories with LASSO F > 25
                                                                    Predicted Displacement (Lasso)




                                                                                                      0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Partial F


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    150

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    100

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    50
                                                                                                     -0.5




                                                                                                     -1.0
                                                                                                                                             1e+01                                1e+03                                                                                     1e+05
                                                                                                                                                                Political GRP (Log Scale)

Notes: For each category, we compute and plot the predicted displacement effect gj (P ) := j fj (P ) at each
level of political GRP P . Each line represents one category, and is colored by the Lasso partial-F .




                                                                                                                                                                            50
Figure 18: LASSO Pred. Effect, 21 Categories with LASSO F  [10, 25] and Log-Linear F  [10, 25]



                                               0.0
             Predicted Displacement (Lasso)




                                                                                                 Partial F
                                              -0.4
                                                                                                      20.0
                                                                                                      17.5
                                                                                                      15.0
                                                                                                      12.5


                                              -0.8




                                              -1.2
                                                     1e+01                     1e+03     1e+05
                                                             Political GRP (Log Scale)




Figure 19: LASSO Predicted Effect, 28 Categories with LASSO F  [10, 25] and Log-Linear F < 10


                                               0.2
             Predicted Displacement (Lasso)




                                               0.1


                                                                                                 Partial F


                                                                                                      17.5
                                               0.0
                                                                                                      15.0

                                                                                                      12.5


                                              -0.1




                                              -0.2


                                                     1e+01                     1e+03     1e+05
                                                             Political GRP (Log Scale)




C     Alternative Method For Imputing Local Impressions

    In this appendix, we explore a more flexible method for imputing local impressions data for

non-sweep months. Let Iijkt be Nielsen's impression estimate for station i, month t, day-of-week j ,

and 5-15 minute time interval k . Let t1 be the last sweep month before t, and let t2 be the first


                                                                         51
sweep month after t. When Iijkt is not observed, we want to impute it by taking a weighted sum of

Iijkt1 and Iijkt2 : Iijkt  1 Iijkt1 + 2 Iijkt2 .

       Our simple imputation method in the main text uses time distance as weights: 1 = (t - t1 )/(t2 -

t1 ) and 2 = (t2 - t)/(t2 - t1 ). The accuracy of this method on observed data in non-sweep months

in LPM markets is summarized by the blue line in Figure 20, which shows that the method tends

to overestimate the impressions.

       Our alternative, more flexible method allows 1 and 2 to vary across days of week and 3-hour

time intervals. Specifically, for each day of week j and each 3-hour time interval K , we take the

observed impressions across all stations in LPM markets and run the following regression:



                        Iijkt = 1jK Iijkt1 + 2jK Iijkt2 + ijkt         k  K, j Fixed

       and then we use the estimated parameters to impute the unobserved impressions for all stations

in non-LPM markets: Iijkt  ^1jK Iijkt + ^2jK Iijkt . The accuracy of our flexible method on
                                     1            2


observed data in non-sweep months is summarized by the red line in Figure 20. The flexible method

is able to correct a large fraction of overestimates.

       Finally, we use the flexible imputation method to re-compute GRPs and re-run the log-linear first

stage estimations as in Section 4.1. The scatterplot in Figure 21 compares the first stage partial-F

based on the two imputation methods, and it shows that the results are virtually unchanged for

most categories. While the partial-F from the flexibly-imputed data is slightly higher for most

categories with strong or semi-strong first stage, the differences only change our classification of two

categories, resulting in 29 categories with F > 25 and 25 categories with 10 < F < 25.42
  42
    Category "Plumbing & Sanitary Equipment, Fixtures, and Systems" has a partial-F of 23.6 under the original
imputation and 26.2 under the flexible imputation. Category "Pre-Recorded Video" has a partial-F of 7.9 under the
original imputation and 10.7 under the flexible imputation.




                                                       52
                  Figure 20: Accuracy of Simple and Flexible Impressions Imputation Methods




          0.075




          0.050                                                                                        Imputation
Density




                                                                                                       Method
                                                                                                           Simple
                                                                                                           Flexible



          0.025




          0.000

                  -50   -40   -30      -20      -10      0        10      20        30   40     50
                                    Percentage Deviation From True Impression (%)

Note: The figure plots the distributions (kernel density estimates) of imputation errors for two imputation methods.
Imputation error is calculated as the percentage deviation of the estimated impression from observed impression
in sweep months. We aggregate observed and imputed impressions to [Market-Year-Month-Day of Week] level (i.e.
summing the impressions across stations and time intervals) before calculating imputation errors. The densities are
estimated across 12586 such observations for each imputation method.




                                                             53
              Figure 21: First Stage Partial-F Statistics: Simple v.s. Flexible Imputation


                                                                              250


                                                                              100

                                                                              50


                        Partial F, GRP From Flexible Imputation (Log Scale)   25


                                                                              10

                                                                               5




                                                                               1




                                                                              0.1




                                                                                    0.1                1           5    10     25       50   100   250
                                                                                    Partial F, GRP From Simple Imputation (Log Scale)

Note: First stage partial-F statistics for 274 categories using GRPs calculated from flexibly-imputed impressions are
plotted along the vertical axis. Partial-F statistics based on our simple imputation method are plotted along the
horizontal axis.




D        Exclusion Restriction Robustness Test

       In this appendix, we conduct a robustness check under an assumption about the range of po-

tential advertising effect sizes. In particular, we assume that the category-level advertising effect is

positive (  0). Further, we posit that political advertising P crowds out commercial advertising

A. Under these assumptions, the effect of P on commercial sales log (1 + Q) should be strictly nega-

tive. As a result, any positive and statistically significant reduced-form estimate of P on log (1 + Q)

constitutes a violation of the exclusion restriction.

       We implement this test on 36 CPG categories in our data that could be matched to one or

more product modules in the Nielsen RMS database.43 For each category j , we calculate the total

revenue Qjmt of market m in month t by summing up the revenue of all products in the category
  43
    The RMS data contains the weekly quantity sold at the UPC-retail outlet level for several anonymous retail
chains that partner with Nielsen.


                                                                                                       54
across all stores in the market. We then estimate the reduced form regression as in equation (8),

where the right hand side is the same as the first-stage equation (2), and the standard errors are

clustered at market level. The RMS data is only available through 2014, so we have 60 months of

data. For each category, we estimate the reduced-form equation:



                               log(1 + Qmt ) = Pmt + m + t + mt ,                                    (8)

and report the reduced-form coefficient  for each of the 36 categories in Table 9. We find that

5 of the 36 (14%) categories show positive and significant reduced-form coefficients, indicating a

violation of the exclusion restriction; this is more than we should expect to occur simply due to

chance. None of the 36 categories show negative and significant reduced-form coefficients. That

said, only one of the 36 categories has a first stage F > 25 and only three more have F  [10, 25].

   Overall, we think the results of this robustness test indicate that the exclusion restriction requires

careful thought on a case-by-case basis. It is neither a weak nor obvious assumption. If we think

that demand shocks U might be correlated across categories, as might be the case for an income

shock, then the results here may themselves raise concerns for other categories.




                                                  55
                Table 9: Exclusion Restriction Robustness Check for 36 CPG Categories

 Category                                            RF Coef.     RF Std. Err.   RF p-value   Scaled RF Coef.   FS Partial F
 Candy & Gum                                          9.89×10-7    2.15×10-7       0.000           0.023             1.2
 Soups                                                1.04×10-6    3.05×10-7       0.001           0.024             5.9
 Sponges                                              6.72×10-7    2.55×10-7       0.009           0.016             1.7
 Deodorizers, Air Fresheners & Purifiers              5.91×10-7    2.35×10-7       0.013           0.014             1.2
 all Other Prepared Dinners & Entrees & Pizzas        6.12×10-7    2.71×10-7       0.025           0.014             6.9
 Jellies, Jams, Preserves, Peanut Butter              4.58×10-7    2.56×10-7       0.076           0.011             5.4
 Cold, Cough & Sinus Remedies                         5.48×10-7    3.07×10-7       0.076           0.013            12.7
 Cheese Products                                      4.76×10-7    2.84×10-7       0.096           0.011            10.2
 Cereals                                              3.31×10-7    2.24×10-7       0.142           0.008            30.1
 Skin Care Creams, Lotions & Oils                    -2.72×10-7    1.97×10-7       0.168          -0.006            0.3
 Deodorants & Anti-Perspirants                       -2.46×10-7    1.83×10-7       0.181          -0.006            0.0
 Dietary Carbonated                                  -2.39×10-7    2.04×10-7       0.244          -0.006            0.1
 Feminine Hygiene Products                            1.84×10-7    1.64×10-7       0.263           0.004             1.3
 Vitamin Preparations & Tonics                        1.84×10-7    1.65×10-7       0.267           0.004             0.1
 Cookies & Crackers                                   2.33×10-7    2.11×10-7       0.272           0.005             5.4
 Coffee, Tea, Cocoa & Derivatives                     2.09×10-7    1.96×10-7       0.290           0.005            12.2
 Dog Food                                             1.89×10-7    1.83×10-7       0.305           0.004             0.2
 Milk, Butter, Eggs (Including Powdered)              2.52×10-7    2.48×10-7       0.311           0.006             0.0
 Food Wraps, Foils & Bags                             2.14×10-7    2.43×10-7       0.381           0.005             8.8
 Diapers(Incl Infant & Adult)                         1.27×10-7    1.53×10-7       0.410           0.003             2.7
 Regular Carbonated                                   -1.5×10-7    1.82×10-7       0.413          -0.004            6.1
 Pain Relievers, Sedatives & Sleeping Preps           1.22×10-7    1.63×10-7       0.456           0.003             0.1
 Salad Dressings & Mayonnaise                        -1.94×10-7    2.69×10-7       0.473          -0.005            1.1
 Shampoos, Conditioners & Cream Rinses                1.17×10-7    1.83×10-7       0.524           0.003             4.0
 Beer                                                -4.03×10-7    7.43×10-7       0.588          -0.009            0.7
 Fruit Juices & Fruit Flavored Drinks(Incl Powdrd)    9.39×10-8    2.14×10-7       0.661           0.002             0.2
 Dental Supplies & Mouthwashes                        6.62×10-8    1.71×10-7       0.700           0.002             1.2
 Ice Cream, Frozen Novelties & Sherbet               -8.41×10-8    2.27×10-7       0.712          -0.002            0.0
 Cat Food                                             6.17×10-8    1.83×10-7       0.737           0.001             0.2
 Laxatives                                            4.92×10-8    1.63×10-7       0.764           0.001             2.3
 Laundry Detergents & Cleaning Preparations          -5.26×10-8    2.14×10-7       0.806          -0.001            2.0
 Liquor                                              -1.93×10-7    9.07×10-7       0.832          -0.005            1.5
 Shaving Equipment & Supplies                         4.03×10-8    2.04×10-7       0.843           0.001             1.3
 Digestive Aids & Antacids                            3.05×10-8    1.81×10-7       0.866           0.001             0.1
 Hair Dressings, Sprays & Restoration Prod           -1.93×10-8     1.8×10-7       0.915          -0.000            3.0
 Cleaners & Cleansers (Genl Hshold Use)              -1.42×10-8    2.05×10-7       0.945          -0.000            0.0




E     Log-Linear First Stage with Advertising Stock

    In this appendix, we report the log-linear first-stage results when the endogenous variable is the

"ad stock" over the past 12 months, rather than the "ad flow" of the current month. Specifically, we

estimate the following first-stage equation:



                                   log (1 + Sjmt ) = j Zmt + jm + jt + jmt ,                                               (9)

where the ad stock Sjmt is the weighted sum of category GRPs Ajmt over the past 12 months:



                                                             56
                                                       12
                                             Sjmt =           k Ajm,t-k .                                        (10)
                                                       k=0

    The ad stock measure captures the cumulative effect of past advertising and is frequently used
                                                                                         12
in the estimation of advertising elasticities. We use the monthly decay parameter  =        0.952 

0.6335, which is consistent with the weekly decay parameter of 0.9 used by Shapiro, Hitsch, and

Tuchman [2019]. We conduct this exercise for two versions of the instrument: the flow of political

advertising (Zmt = Pmt as before) and the stock of political advertising, which we assume decays at
                                                               12  k
the same rate as commercial advertising. (Zmt =                k=0  Pm,t-k )   Because political advertising flow

should not be able to affect the component of commercial advertising stock that comes from past

commercial advertising, the political stock instrument might be a stronger instrument. However,

the stock instrument requires additional assumptions.44

    The number of categories with partial-F statistics above 25 is 28 for the ad-flow specification

and 17 for the ad-stock specification with political ad flow as an instrument (the "stock-flow" speci-

fication). For the ad-stock specification with political ad-stock as the instrument (the "stock-stock"

specification), there are only 14 categories with partial-F above 25. The distribution of partial-F

for the three specifications are compared in Table 10, Table 11, and Figures 22--23 below. Figure

22 plots the partial-F for the "stock-flow" specification against the partial-F for the ad-flow specifi-

cation, while Figure 23 plots the partial-F for the "stock-stock" specification against the partial-F

for the ad-flow specification. The comparisons show that the ad-stock first stage is generally weaker

than the ad-flow first stage. The weak first stages of the two ad-stock specifications are more

pronounced for categories with strong ad-flow first stages, as shown by the right tails below the

45-degree line in Figures 22­23.

    We also compare the scaled first-stage coefficients for the three specifications in Table 11 and

Figures 24--25.45 The negative effect of political advertising on ad stock is generally smaller than

the negative effect on ad flow, which is expected because the ad stock is driven in a large part
   44
      Using the stock of political advertising as an instrument requires an additional exclusion. That is, we must
assume that the only structural state dependence operates through advertising carry-over. Otherwise, it is possible
that increased political advertising in time t - 1 leads to lower sales in time t - 1, which then leads to lower sales
in time t through structural state dependence. This violates the exclusion restriction that the instrument must only
affect the outcome through its correlation with the endogenous variable.
   45
      As before, the scaling factor is the median of instrument Zmt across markets in October 2016. The value is 23438
for the political ad flow and 32597 for the political ad stock.



                                                         57
by past advertising that is not affected by current political advertising. The scaled coefficients are

qualitatively similar in the specification with political ad stock as the instrument.

                                           Table 10: Classification of Categories by Range of Partial-F in 3 Specifications

                                                                                          Stock-Flow                                                             Stock-Stock
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Total (Ad-Flow)
                                                                           F > 25        10 < F  25     F  10                                          F > 25   10 < F  25           F  10
                                                   F > 25                     16               10           2                                              14          11               3                   28
                              Ad-Flow            10 < F  25                    1                9        15                                                0           10               15                  25
                                                   F  10                       0                6        215                                               0           3               218                 221
                              Total (Stock-Flow / Stock-Stock)                17               25        232                                               14          24              236



            Table 11: Quantiles of Log-Linear First Stage Partial-F and Scaled Coefficients: 3 Specifications

                                           Quantiles:                          Min            0.05     0.10                                           0.25      0.50          0.75           0.90         0.95            Max
                                     Partial-F        Ad-Flow                   0.0            0.0      0.0                                            0.4       2.1           6.9           26.1         78.9        327.5
                                     Partial-F      Stock-Flow                  0.0            0.0      0.0                                            0.3       1.6           4.8           14.5         32.9            98.2
                                     Partial-F     Stock-Stock                  0.0            0.0      0.1                                            0.3       1.3           4.1           14.2         26.8            88.3
                     Scaled Coef.                     Ad-Flow                -0.264         -0.121     -0.072                                        -0.029     -0.008       0.000           0.006        0.010       0.088
                     Scaled Coef.                   Stock-Flow               -0.162         -0.066     -0.039                                        -0.016     -0.003       0.001           0.007        0.016       0.130
                     Scaled Coef.                  Stock-Stock               -0.157         -0.063     -0.039                                        -0.014     -0.003       0.002           0.008        0.020       0.103


Figure 22: Partial F :                                                  "Stock-Flow" v.s.                       Figure 23: Partial F :                                                       "Stock-Stock" v.s.
Benchmark                                                                                                       Benchmark

                                    250                                                                                                              250

                                    100                                                                                                              100
                                    50                                                                                                               50
                                    25                                                                                                               25
                                                                                                                Partial F, Stock-Stock (Log Scale)
Partial F, Stock-Flow (Log Scale)




                                    10                                                                                                               10
                                     5                                                                                                                5



                                     1                                                                                                                1




                                    0.1                                                                                                              0.1




                                                       0.1          1       5 10     25 50 100 250                                                                          0.1          1       5 10     25 50 100 250
                                                  Partial F, Flow-Flow (Log Scale)                                                                                     Partial F, Flow-Flow (Log Scale)




                                                                                                       58
Figure 24: Scaled Coefficients: "Stock-Flow"                                                    Figure 25: Scaled Coefficients: "Stock-Stock"
v.s. Benchmark                                                                                  v.s. Benchmark


                                   0.1                                                                                              0.1




                                                                                                Scaled Coefficients, Stock-Stock
Scaled Coefficients, Stock-Flow




                                   0.0                                                                                              0.0




                                  -0.1                                                                                             -0.1




                                  -0.2                                                                                             -0.2




                                             -0.2          -0.1            0.0       0.1                                                  -0.2          -0.1            0.0       0.1
                                                    Scaled Coefficients, Flow-Flow                                                               Scaled Coefficients, Flow-Flow




F                                        Distributions of First-Stage Coefficients With Alternative Fixed

                                         Effects

                                     In this appendix, we provide suggestive evidence that DMA and year-month fixed effects are

necessary for satisfying the monotonicity condition (as discussed in Section 2.3). Specifically, we

estimate Equation (2) with three alternative sets of fixed effects: DMA + Year + Month, DMA +

Year, and DMA only.

                                     The number of categories with positive and negative first-stage coefficients under these specifica-

tions are reported in Table 12, and the distributions of coefficients are reported in Figure 26. Only

9 out of 274 categories (3.3%) have positive significant coefficients under the DMA and year-month

fixed effects, which is roughly what would be predicted just due to chance. In contrast, more than

130 categories, or almost half of all categories, have positive and significant first-stage coefficients

under each of the three alternative specifications. This shows that without the year-month fixed

effects, the theory does not work as prescribed. This is consistent with failures of the monotonicity

condition described in Section 2.3.




                                                                                           59
Table 12: Fraction of Positive / Negative First-Stage Coefficients Under Alternative Fixed Effects

                                         Fixed Effects                              Negative                       Positive
                                                                          p < 0.05           p  0.05    p < 0.05        p  0.05
                                         DMA + Year × Month                   96               112             9              57
                                         DMA + Year + Month                   92               31          131                20
                                         DMA + Year                           109              11          139                15
                                         DMA                                  110              16          136                12


                                Figure 26: Distribution of First-Stage Coefficients Under Alternative Fixed Effects

                                            FE: DMA + Year x Month                              FE: DMA + Year + Month


                                150                                                60




                                100                                                40




                                50                                                 20
     Count (Different Scales)




                                 0                                                  0                                                    p<0.05
                                                                                                                                             FALSE
                                                  FE: DMA + Year                                       FE: DMA
                                                                                   40                                                        TRUE



                                30
                                                                                   30


                                20
                                                                                   20



                                10
                                                                                   10




                                 0                                                  0
                                  -0.8     -0.4        0.0         0.4       0.8    -0.8       -0.4      0.0          0.4          0.8
                                                   Scaled First-Stage Coefficient (x23438, Outliers Not Plotted)




                                                                                        60
G        Implementation with FCC Data

       In this appendix, we provide a roadmap for implementing the political advertising instrument

with publicly available data from the Federal Communications Commission. The chief advantage of

the FCC dataset is that it is available in real-time to all audiences; our hope is that it will broaden the

applicability of this IV approach. Since August 2012, the FCC mandates that television stations in

the fifty largest DMAs post data about their sales of airtime to political groups, including campaigns

and Political Action Committees, to an online database, available at https://publicfiles.fcc.

gov. The posts must be in real-time, and as of July 2014, the mandate was expanded to include

all stations.46 In September 2018, we collected data on the total number of files uploaded to the

database by stations in each market in each month since August 2012. This dataset presents two

challenges: first, files comprise invoices, order forms, contracts, and occasionally other forms such as

a federal candidate certificates.47 Each file therefore represents an unknown number of GRPs. The

second challenge is that files must only be retained for two years, so that our data from August 2012-

August 2016 may contain only a selected sample of stations which have chosen to retain their files

for longer than required. This limitation is somewhat temporary, however, as we plan to update our

file counts in real-time going forward. To explore whether file counts capture political advertising

volumes, Figure 27 compares counts to GRPs measured by Ad Intel. We find a robust, positive

relationship between the two measures. Note also that neither challenge in the FCC data threatens

our identification strategy so long as file counts correlate with commercial airtime and also satisfy

the exclusion restriction from section 2. The use of file counts merely requires that compliance must

not be driven by a third factor that affects product markets directly.
  46
       FCC, About Public Inspection Files, Accessed December 3, 2018.
  47
       These must be ratified in order for an official campaign to receive lowest unit rates.




                                                             61
                                             Figure 27: FCC File Counts vs Political GRPs




                            9
     Log(1+Political GRP)




                            6




                            3




                            0

                                0                   2                      4                  6
                                                              Log(1+File Count)



                                                 Table 13: FCC File Counts and Spots

                                                                                      Percentile
                                                           Mean     SD         Min                 Obs
                                                                                     10 50 90
                                    Spots in an FCC File   57.71   74.66        1    7 37 124      3,869

Notes: Based on invoices, contracts, and order forms uploaded to the FCC online database during
    the 2012 Presidential Election. See Moshary [Forthcoming] for a detailed description of the
    data.



   We compare the "free" FCC political file count instrument with the "paid" political GRP in-

strument under the log-linear specification. Table 14 tabulates the numbers of categories by first-

stage strength for the two instruments: the FCC instrument achieves F > 25 in 15 categories and

10 < F < 25 in 17 categories, compared to 28 and 25 for the political GRP instrument. Meanwhile,

the number of categories with partial R2 > 0.01 is 14, compared to 21 for the benchmark. In

general, we find that the FCC instrument is weaker than the political GRP instrument at all levels.


                                                                   62
   The 15 categories in which the FCC instrument achieves F > 25 are listed in Table 15 along

with their partial F and partial R2 for both instruments. The comparison shows that the noise

of the FCC instrument has a large impact on both the first-stage strength and explanatory power.

However, the list also shows that the FCC instrument is mostly consistent with the political GRP

instrument in terms of the categories where they are strong. In fact, most of the strong categories

for the FCC instrument are the strongest ones for political GRP: all 15 categories in the list have

F > 50 and R2 > 0.01 in the benchmark specification. Therefore, the free FCC instrument may be

an attractive option for researchers interested in one of these categories.

Table 14: Classification of Categories by First Stage Strength: FCC v.s. Political GRP Instrument

                                                          FCC
       Instrument                                                               Total (Political GRP)
                                         F > 25     10 < F < 25      F < 10
                           F > 25           15             7            6                 28
     Political GRP      10 < F < 25         0              7           18                 25
                           F < 10           0              3          218                221
              Total (FCC)                   15            17          242


                   Table 15: List of 15 Categories With F > 25: FCC Instrument

   Category                                          Partial F          Partial R2         Disp. Effect
                                                  FCC     Pol. GRP   FCC      Pol. GRP   FCC     Pol. GRP
   Household Furnishings & Appliance Stores        82       330      0.054     0.058     -0.07     -0.14
   Miscellaneous Organization Advertising         74.3      154      0.054      0.05      0.08      0.13
   Miscellaneous Professional Services            73.3     141.2     0.042     0.028     -0.04     -0.05
   Autos & Light Truck - Dealerships              72.5     280.2     0.032     0.035      -0.1      -0.2
   Light Trucks & Vans-Factory:new & Cpo           49      106.1      0.02     0.024     -0.03     -0.05
   Hospitals,physicians & Misc.physical Culture   48.4     192.9     0.024      0.03     -0.06     -0.12
   Optical Goods and Services                     45.9     183.2     0.021     0.018     -0.08     -0.14
   Restaurants, Hotel Dining & Nightclubs         35.4     134.6     0.022     0.026     -0.02     -0.03
   Misc Entertainment & Combination Copy           34      146.7     0.008      0.02      -0.1     -0.27
   Dance, Theater, Concerts, Opera                33.2      90.2      0.01     0.014     -0.09     -0.15
   Passenger Cars-Factory:new & Cpo                31      143.4     0.017     0.026     -0.02     -0.04
   Schools & Camps, Seminars                      28.8      72.6     0.014     0.014     -0.03     -0.06
   Construction, Engineering & Archit Srvcs        28      120.9     0.013     0.017     -0.07     -0.15
   Miscellaneous Retail                           27.5     112.7     0.018     0.023     -0.02     -0.04
   Passenger Cars-Dealer Assn:new & Cpo           25.2      110       0.01     0.018      -0.1     -0.21




                                                     63
