                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   INFORMATION AND THE ACQUISITION OF SOCIAL NETWORK CONNECTIONS

                                          Toman Barsbai
                                         Victoria Licuanan
                                         Andreas Steinmayr
                                          Erwin Tiongson
                                            Dean Yang

                                        Working Paper 27346
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w27346


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2020

For helpful discussions, we thank Christine Binzel, David McKenzie, David Miller, Sharon
Maccini, John O'Sullivan, Christoph Trebesch, Justin Valasek, Tricia Yang, and Andy
Zapechelnyuk, as well as seminar audiences at U. Illinois (Urbana-Champaign), U. Kiel, U. Paris
1 Panthéon-Sorbonne, U. St Andrews, LMU Munich, U. Hohenheim, Wharton, and UC Davis,
and conference participants in Berlin, Edinburgh, Florence, Heidelberg, and Landeck. We
received funding from the International Initiative for Impact Evaluation (3ie), grant number
OW4/1171. The views expressed in this article are not necessarily those of 3ie or its members.
IRB review was provided by the University of Michigan (HUM00087460). We are deeply
indebted to CFO's former Officer-in-Charge Regina Galias, Ivy Miravalles, former Secretary
Imelda M. Nicolas, former Undersecretary Gertie A. Tirona, and the whole CFO team for their
continuous support. We also thank the PDOS officers and all contributors to the new PDOS
modules. We are grateful to Isabel Hernando for excellent project coordination and Alexander
Jung, Franziska Paul, and Jennifer Umlas for superb research assistance. Last but not least we
thank 3ie for funding, technical review, and support throughout the study. All remaining errors
are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Toman Barsbai, Victoria Licuanan, Andreas Steinmayr, Erwin Tiongson, and Dean Yang.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Information and the Acquisition of Social Network Connections
Toman Barsbai, Victoria Licuanan, Andreas Steinmayr, Erwin Tiongson, and Dean Yang
NBER Working Paper No. 27346
June 2020
JEL No. D83,D85,F22

                                          ABSTRACT

How do information interventions affect individual efforts to expand social networks? We study a
randomized controlled trial of a program providing information on settling in the U.S. for new
immigrants from the Philippines. Improved information leads new immigrants to acquire fewer
new social network connections. Treated immigrants make 16-28 percent fewer new friends and
acquaintances and are 65 percent less likely to receive support from organizations of fellow
immigrants. The treatment has no effect on employment, wellbeing, or other outcomes.
Consistent with a simple model, the treatment reduces social network links more in places likely
to have lower costs of acquiring network links (those with more prior fellow immigrants).
Information and social network links appear to be substitutes in this context: better-informed
immigrants invest less in expanding their social networks upon arrival. Our results suggest that
endogenous reductions in acquisition of social network connections can reduce the effectiveness
of information interventions.

Toman Barsbai                                    Erwin Tiongson
School of Economics                              Walsh School of Foreign Service
Priory Road Complex                              Georgetown University
Bristol                                          Washington, DC 20057
UK                                               ert@georgetown.edu
toman.barsbai@bristol.ac.uk
                                                 Dean Yang
Victoria Licuanan                                University of Michigan
123 Paseo de Roxas                               Department of Economics and
Legazpi Village                                  Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy
Makati                                           735 S. State Street, Room 3316
1229 Metro Manila                                Ann Arbor, MI 48109
Philippines                                      and NBER
vlicuanan.aim@gmail.com                          deanyang@umich.edu

Andreas Steinmayr
Department of Economics
University of Munich (LMU)
Ludwigstr. 33
D-80539 Munich
Germany
andreas.steinmayr@econ.lmu.de


A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/1389
1       Introduction
Failures of the perfect information assumption ­ that agents are endowed with
full information relevant for the decisions they make ­ are a popular focus of
research in economics. Imperfect information takes center-stage in economic
studies of health (Dupas, 2011; Einav and Finkelstein, 2018), labor market
search (Calv´ o-Armengol, 2004), and financial literacy (Lusardi and Mitchell,
2014), among other areas. Programs to mitigate information imperfections
are ubiquitous, and are themselves a frequent subject for applied research in
economics.
Individuals and households also make their own efforts to fill information gaps.
A commonly-studied information source is social networks, which can channel
information from more- to less-informed network members and thus provide
information capital (Jackson, 2019). Social networks facilitate flows of in-
formation about new agricultural technologies (Foster and Rosenzweig, 2010;
Carter, Laajaj and Yang, forthcoming), health goods (Dupas, 2014), microfi-
nance products (Banerjee et al., 2013), employment opportunities (including
migration) (Munshi, 2003; Beaman, 2012; Beaman and Magruder, 2012; Dust-
mann et al., 2016; Blumenstock, Chi and Tan, 2019), and business opportuni-
ties (Cai and Szeidl, 2018).
To date, there has been scarce research on how interventions to improve in-
formation might interact with the acquisition of social network connections.
Immigrants who have just arrived in their country of destination are a fruitful
context in which to study this interaction. Immigrants typically have im-
perfect information about their new societies. At the same time, immigrants
usually have small social networks at arrival. They are hence likely to invest in
social networks to reduce information imperfections. Substantial past research
documents the important role of social networks for immigrants.1 Immigrants
frequently live and work with compatriots in ethnic enclaves, motivated in part
    1
    Key citations include Massey (1988); Borjas (1992); Carrington, Detragiache and Vish-
wanath (1996); Orrenius et al. (1999); Munshi (2003); Calv´
                                                          o-Armengol and Jackson (2004);
Orrenius and Zavodny (2005); Amuedo-Dorantes and Mundra (2007); Dolfin and Genicot
(2010); Docquier, Peri and Ruyssen (2014); Mahajan and Yang (2020).


                                           2
by eased sharing of information that comes with geographic proximity (Portes
and Jensen, 1989; Beaman, 2012).
We implemented a randomized controlled trial on the impact of reducing im-
perfect information problems among immigrants. In collaboration with the
Philippine government, we designed an information intervention for new immi-
grants to the U.S.: an enhanced "pre-departure orientation seminar" (PDOS)
and an accompanying paper handbook. We randomly assigned these to Fil-
ipinos about to depart for the U.S. as new legal permanent residents ("green
card" holders). A control group received the standard PDOS, which was sub-
stantially less informative in terms of both quantity and quality of information
provided. We surveyed treatment and control group participants after arrival
on their settlement in the U.S.,2 social networks, employment, and overall life
satisfaction. Our empirical analyses are guided by a pre-analysis plan and
account appropriately for multiple hypotheses.
We find that the treatment led to reductions in the number of social network
links in the U.S. As pre-specified, we measure social network size with an
index combining information on the number of new friends and acquaintances,
and support received from Filipino organizations. This effect is substantial
in magnitude, amounting to 0.14 to 0.17 standard deviations of the network
size index, and is stable across the short- and longer-run. The treatment
has negative effects on each component of the index, reducing the number
of friends and acquaintances by 16-28 percent, and reducing support received
from organizations by two-thirds. The treatment has no large or statistically
significant impacts on settlement, employment, or self-reported wellbeing.
Our finding of a negative effect on social network links was unanticipated.
Because the new PDOS explicitly encourages migrants to make new friends
and join Filipino associations in the U.S., in our pre-analysis plan we hy-
pothesized a positive treatment effect on social network connections. After
seeing the actual negative treatment effect, we wrote down a simple theoret-
ical model that can rationalize such an effect. We consider individuals with
   2
     We measure "settlement" as the fraction of the following items the immigrant has
acquired: bank account, Social Security number, health insurance, and driver's license.


                                          3
imperfect information deciding on the optimal number of first-degree network
links ("friends").3 Friends are costly to acquire, but reduce information im-
perfections. We consider the impact of exogenously reducing information im-
perfections. Information and friends could be substitutes, meaning additional
information provided by the treatment reduces the marginal benefit of friends,
and correspondingly reduces friend acquisition. Alternately, information and
friends could be complements: the treatment could increase the marginal ben-
efit of friends, increasing friend acquisition. In the context of the model, our
empirical results are consistent with information and friends being substitutes:
improved information leads to offsetting reductions in acquisition of network
links.
In exploratory analyses, we examine the heterogeneity of the treatment effect
with respect to a proxy for the cost of finding friends, the size of the local
Filipino community. We test a theoretical prediction: the lower the cost of
acquiring friends, the more likely information and friends are to be substitutes
rather than complements. The heterogeneity in the treatment effect on the
social network size index indeed follows this pattern, as does heterogeneity in
the treatment effect on subjective wellbeing. While the treatment does not
affect labor market outcomes such as wages or employment, it does change
the way immigrants search for jobs. Immigrants who received employment-
related information in the new PDOS are less likely to have found their job
through social networks, which also suggests that information and networks
are substitutes.
Our work contributes to the economics literature on social networks (Sacer-
dote, 2014; Chuang and Schechter, 2015). Ours is the first study to examine the
causal impact of an exogenous reduction in information imperfections on so-
cial network links. Few studies examine factors influencing strategic network
formation. Comola and Mendola (2015) and Barr, Dekker and Fafchamps
(2015) examine correlates of new network connections. Very few studies mea-
   3
       The number of first-degree links is a measure of the expansiveness of the network.
The literature on social networks has argued that network expansiveness is important for
efficient information transmission (cf. Granovetter, 1973).



                                           4
sure the causal impact of any kind of exogenous treatment on social networks.
We are aware of only five other randomized controlled trials where social net-
work connections are an outcome of interest, and in none of these does the
randomized treatment relate to information. Three studies examine the im-
pact of a microfinance treatment. Comola and Prina (forthcoming), Banerjee
et al. (2018) and Cecchi, Duchoslav and Bulte (2016) find that savings, credit,
and insurance interventions (respectively) reduce social network connections.
Heß, Jaimovich and Sch¨   undeln (forthcoming) find that a community-driven
development program in Gambia reduces social network connections. Caria,
Franklin and Witte (2018) show that a job-search assistance intervention in
Ethiopia reduces social interactions between treated and untreated individuals.
We also contribute to the literature on immigrant integration. A well-documented
finding is that the economic assimilation of immigrants takes time and is usu-
ally imperfect. Especially in the first years after arrival, immigrants typically
earn considerably less than natives (Borjas, 1985; Lubotsky, 2007). Identi-
fying policies that facilitate the arrival and settling-in process of immigrants
is therefore important and only few studies have rigorously evaluated policies
that aim to improve the early integration path of immigrants (Rinne, 2013;
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine, 2015).
In addition, we provide a new Stata command that adjusts p-values for mul-
tiple hypothesis testing. It modifies the List, Shaikh and Xu (2019) method
to be regression-based and allow for inclusion of control variables.
From a policy standpoint, the intervention we study ­ provision of information
to migrants about their destinations ­ is widespread.4 Many governments and
NGOs in developing countries implement trainings of migrants (IOM, 2011),
but prior to our study there has been no causally well-identified assessment
of their impacts (Rinne, 2013; McKenzie and Yang, 2015). More generally,
our results suggest that the effectiveness of information interventions might
be attenuated due to offsetting reductions in social network links.
   4
    Past research has also examined migrant integration programs carried out in destination
countries (Joona and Nekby, 2012; Sarvim¨ aki and H¨ am¨al¨
                                                          ainen, 2016; Shrestha and Yang,
2019).


                                            5
2       Theory
We are interested in the interplay between information imperfections and ef-
forts to increase first-degree social network links. In particular, we are inter-
ested in the impact of interventions alleviating information imperfections. We
wrote down the following simple model after learning that our treatment had
a negative impact on new social network connections, which is the opposite of
what we had anticipated. The model allows for either a positive or negative
treatment effect on efforts to acquire new social network connections.5
Individuals have imperfect information about a variety of things in life that
matter to them, such as jobs, financial services, and government services. Peo-
ple also have social network connections ("friends", which includes acquain-
tances), which provide information, helping reduce information imperfections.
Network theory suggests that efficient information gathering typically requires
expansive networks with many short network paths (cf. Granovetter, 1973).
Thus, we use the number of first-degree friends as a proxy for network expan-
siveness. Because friends are valuable, people make efforts to acquire them,
but making friends is costly. Costs of friend acquisition may include effort and
monetary costs.
We focus on the benefits friends bring by reducing information imperfections.
We abstract away from other benefits of friends, which the network literature
typically refers to as cooperation capital, such as various forms of assistance
(transfers, informal insurance, and psychological support).6
Utility depends on baseline or starting-point information imperfections, , and
endogenous friend investment f  0. Individuals choose f to maximize the
benefits from friends B (, f ) minus the cost of friend acquisition C (f ):

                                  U = B (, f ) - C (f )
    5
      This is related to models where individuals endogenously form social contacts (Calv´  o-
Armengol, 2004; Jackson and Wolinsky, 1996; Jackson and Rogers, 2007) and where social-
izing takes effort (Cabrales, Calv´
                                  o-Armengol and Zenou, 2011; Canen, Jackson and Trebbi,
2019; Currarini, Jackson and Pin, 2009).
    6
      These other non-information benefits of friends could be thought of as entering the cost
term in the maximization problem we write down below, reducing the net cost of friends.


                                              6
People acquire friends only up to the point at which the marginal cost does
not exceed the marginal benefit of friends.
Simple assumptions and functional forms generate useful possibilities. In-
formation imperfections  range from 0 to 1 (  [0, 1]). Individuals have
both exogenous friends (those that are given at baseline without cost), e, and
endogenous friends, f , which they acquire at a cost. Let e  1.7 Let an in-
dividual's amount of information I be a function of information imperfections
, exogenous friends e, and endogenous friends f as follows:

                                                  
                                      I =1-
                                                 e+f
One's amount of information can range from 0 (no information) to 1 (full infor-
mation). If baseline information imperfections  are 0, then one starts with full
information. A higher number of friends e + f reduces the importance of one's
baseline information imperfections and raises one's amount of information I .
For simplicity, let the cost of endogenous friends be linear with a per-friend
cost c, so the total cost of friend acquisition is cf .
We analyze three cases: constant, decreasing, and increasing returns to infor-
mation. Analysis of the different cases makes clear that reductions in infor-
mation imperfections have indeterminate impacts on friend acquisition.
When returns to information I (in utility) are either constant or decreasing, a
reduction in information imperfections  (e.g., our information treatment for
new immigrants) always reduces friend acquisition. We flesh out this case in
Appendix A.
By contrast, when there are increasing returns to information (for example,
if better information allows one to search more efficiently for additional infor-
mation), the impact of information imperfections is ambiguous. We capture
increasing returns to information simply by letting the benefit function include
   7
     For new immigrants, the exogenous friend could be the individual who officially sponsors
their immigration visa.




                                             7
a quadratic term in information:

                                                    2
                      B (, f ) = 1 -       + (1 -     )
                                       e+f        e+f

The parameter  measures the strength of increasing returns to information
(if  = 0, we have constant returns to information).
We analyze this case graphically in Figure 1. The parameter values used
in the figure are e = 1 and  = 5. The marginal benefit functions for the
control and treatment groups are M BC (green curve) and M BT (orange curve),
with  = 0.9 and  = 0.6 respectively. The marginal benefit functions can
have upward-sloping (increasing returns) and downward-sloping (decreasing
returns) sections.
Consider, first, optimal decisions when marginal costs are "high" (c = 2.4),
represented by the upper horizontal black line, M CH . The optimum is found
at the intersection of the marginal cost function and the downward-sloping
part of the relevant marginal benefit function.
When marginal costs are "high", for the control group (blue curve, M BC ) there
is no amount of friend investments for which the marginal benefit of friends
exceeds marginal costs. This is a corner solution with zero friend acquisition.
From this starting point, a reduction in  (from 0.9 to 0.6) can lead the
marginal benefit function to shift so that there is an interior solution with
positive friend acquisition (f  > 0), where M BT and M CH intersect. In this
case, an information treatment that lowers  leads to more friend acquisition.
There is also the possibility, for lower values of the cost of friends c, that reduc-
tions in  reduce friend acquisition. This would be the case if the marginal cost
of friends was lower, such as at M CL (assuming c = 1.2), so that the marginal
cost function (the horizontal dashed line) would intersect both the control
group and treatment group marginal benefit functions on their downward-
sloping portions. If this were the case, a reduction in  would lead to a reduc-
tion in friend acquisition, from f ' to f ".
Overall, therefore, it is possible for an intervention that reduces information


                                         8
imperfections to either raise or lower efforts to build one's social network.
(The prediction that the treatment effect on friends becomes more negative
as marginal costs fall also holds for the case where returns to information are
constant or decreasing.)
In Appendix A, we examine the impact of a treatment that reduces information
imperfections for a continuous range of marginal cost levels, from high to low.
Starting from the highest marginal costs, reductions in marginal costs make
the treatment effect on friend acquisition even more positive, because this
is the region where information and friends are complements. As we lower
marginal costs further, we enter the region where friends and information are
substitutes. The treatment effect on friends becomes negative, and becomes
even more negative as marginal costs fall further.
The treatment effect on utility follows a similar pattern. Starting from the
highest marginal costs, reductions in marginal costs make the treatment effect
on utility even more positive, as long as one remains in the region where
information and friends are complements. As we lower marginal costs further,
friends and information become substitutes, the treatment effect on utility
declines, and eventually can be even lower than when marginal costs were
very high.
In our empirical analyses, we ask whether a treatment that reduces information
imperfections reduces or increases friend acquisition. We also examine the
heterogeneity in the treatment effect with respect to a proxy for the marginal
cost of friend acquisition.



3    Context, Treatments, and Hypotheses
The Philippines is a major emigration country. In 2013, 4.8 million Filipino-
born individuals were permanent migrants, 4.2 million temporary migrants,
and 1.2 million undocumented migrants in other countries. By comparison, the
Philippine population was 98.5 million in that year (CFO, 2013; World Bank,
2019). The U.S. is by far their largest destination, accounting for 64.4% of


                                      9
Filipino permanent migrants in 2015 (CFO, 2015). From the U.S. standpoint,
the Philippines is the fourth-largest immigrant origin, after Mexico, China and
India (L´opez, Ruiz and Patten, 2017).
The Philippine government implements a number of policies related to interna-
tional migration of its citizens. Our collaborator on this study, the Commission
on Filipinos Overseas (CFO), enacts policies related to permanent migrants.
Pre-departure orientation seminars (PDOS) are one of the government's most
prominent migration policies. Filipinos intending to leave the country with a
permanent migration visa must register with CFO and attend a PDOS before
departure. Attendees already have their immigration visa and are about to
leave the Philippines. Individuals lacking proof of PDOS attendance may be
denied departure at airports. Seminar content is tailored to the destination.
We recruited our study participants among individuals attending the PDOS
for permanent migrants to the U.S., which were attended annually by roughly
40,000 individuals from 2005-2015 (CFO, 2015).
The migration policies of the Philippines are regarded as a model for other
migrant-sending countries that have PDOS in place or are considering intro-
ducing them (Testaverde et al., 2017). As a major destination country, Canada
also provides a PDOS for migrants moving to Canada known as Canadian Ori-
entation Abroad.


Treatments
Figure 2 shows the treatment conditions. We randomly assign study partici-
pants to either a control group attending the original PDOS ("old PDOS") or
to a treatment group attending the "new PDOS". The old PDOS focused on
travel and immigration procedures, only briefly covering issues such as cultural
differences, settlement, and employment, and not covering financial literacy or
engagement with Filipino associations. An instructor conveyed the informa-
tion in a presentation lasting 1.5 hours on average. Participants took away
with them a short 30-page paper booklet with related but not very practical
information.

                                      10
The new PDOS was developed collaboratively by the CFO and our research
team from scratch and goes significantly beyond the content of the old PDOS
in terms of both topics and depth of coverage. It comes with a much more
comprehensive and practical paper handbook. New PDOS development drew
upon interviews with past and prospective migrants, the International Organi-
zation for Migration's Canadian Orientation Abroad program, and input from
TIGRA, a U.S. Filipino immigrant NGO. The new PDOS covered an extended
set of topics related to longer-term socio-economic integration: (i) preparing
for departure and entering the U.S., (ii) getting settled in the U.S., (iii) build-
ing a support network, (iv) finding a job, (v) managing one's finances, and
(vi) maintaining and strengthening ties with the Philippines. Participants
attended a longer presentation (2.5 hours on average) and took away a com-
prehensive 116-page paper handbook, which covers the above topics in detail
and provides easy-to-follow checklists as well as links to online resources.
Compared to the old PDOS, the new PDOS shifts the focus from topic (i) to
topics (ii)-(vi). Figure 3 documents this shift in focus. It shows the number
of slides and handbook pages of the old and the new PDOS by topic. In ad-
dition, the delivery of the new PDOS centers around the handbook. During
the PDOS, the instructor provides an overview of the topics covered by the
handbook and shows migrants where to find which information. The primary
objective of the new PDOS is hence to improve migrants' ability to find in-
formation, rather than their knowledge of different topics. This makes the
handbook an important part of the new PDOS as it gives migrants the possi-
bility to look up information when they actually need it. While the old PDOS
provides written information in the form of a booklet, the handbook of the
new PDOS offers much richer and practical information. Figures B.3 and B.4
in Appendix B illustrate this difference in terms of both quantity and quality
for information provided on opening a bank account.
Our primary analyses compare control group individuals to treatment group
individuals exposed to the new PDOS. We implemented the new PDOS in
two different versions. One version contained all components listed above
(henceforth "new PDOS with employment module"), another version omit-

                                        11
ted the employment section from both the presentation and handbook ("new
PDOS without employment module"). The distinction allows us to measure
the specific impact of topic area (iv) on employment, as most migrants in the
preparatory interviews identified finding a job in the U.S. as the single most
important challenge after arrival.
Among migrants who attended the new PDOS, we also randomly assigned
an intervention ("association email") aimed at facilitating social network con-
nections in the U.S. CFO sent emails (at one and two months after arrival
in the U.S.) to randomly selected new PDOS study participants encouraging
them join Filipino associations, providing contact details of associations in the
migrant's U.S. state. The email could have reduced the cost of network for-
mation and should therefore expand the social network. Appendix B shows an
example of the association email for migrants moving to Northern California.
All material used in the different treatment conditions including the presen-
tation slides and handbooks can be downloaded at https://sites.google.com/
view/tomanbarsbai/pdos.


Random Assignment
To identify causal effects, we randomly assigned migrants to the different treat-
ment conditions (Figure 2). We randomized PDOS versions across 112 calen-
dar dates. From April 21 to October 3, 2014, the PDOS session of each cal-
endar date was randomly assigned to either the new or old PDOS. Out of five
weekly working days, two were randomly assigned to the old PDOS, and three
to the new PDOS. New PDOS sessions were then randomly assigned to having
the employment module (or not) with equal probability. The association email
was separately randomly assigned at the individual level to study participants
in the new PDOS who had a valid email address and were migrating to a state
with a CFO-approved association.
On April 1, 2014, we randomized the PDOS dates and informed CFO leader-
ship of the treatment schedule. Our staff confirmed by direct, in-person ob-
servation on each date that instructors implemented the treatments correctly.

                                       12
We randomized the association email on a rolling basis, twice a month as ad-
ditional batches of study participants were enrolled. CFO sent new batches
of emails twice a month to study participants on lists we provided with 2-3
days' advance notice. For further details on treatment implementation, see
Appendix B.


Sampling and Survey Data Collection
Enrollment of study participants took place at CFO's Manila PDOS location.
Immediately prior to the start of a PDOS, study staff approached prospective
migrants, inviting them to participate in the study. Screening criteria were: 1)
being 20-50 years of age on the enrollment date, 2) not ever having lived in the
U.S. for longer than three months, 3) planning to depart for the U.S. within
three months, and 4) not migrating to the U.S. as a spouse of a non-Filipino
(marriage migrants), as such migrants attend a cross-cultural marriage coun-
seling session rather than a PDOS. No more than one member per family was
enrolled in the study. Screened-in individuals were invited to participate in
the study, including permission to contact them and their Philippines-based
families for future surveys. In total, enumerators approached 2,639 migrants,
out of which they successfully interviewed 1,273 migrants who met the screen-
ing criteria (or about eleven migrants per PDOS date). 1,042 migrants did not
meet the screening criteria and 324 migrants refused to be interviewed before
screening. The refusal rate is hence relatively low (324/2639 = 12%).
Individual study participants themselves chose the date they would show up
for a PDOS (no appointments were necessary), but could not know in advance
the type of PDOS they would be exposed to. Prior to the start of the PDOS on
that date, enrolled migrants were administered a baseline survey on the spot
by our survey staff. Migrants are on average 33 years old. 55% are female.
47% have college or more education. 18% have a job waiting for them in the
U.S. Half migrated alone, and the remainder migrated with family members.
California (41%) and Hawaii (17%) were the two most important destination
states. The vast majority of study participants (93.5%) obtained their U.S.


                                      13
green cards via family sponsorship, i.e. they have family already in the U.S.8
Balance checks reveal no major differences between observable characteris-
tics of study participants across treatment conditions. For balance tests and
summary statistics, see Appendix E, Tables E.1-E.3. Out of ten baseline vari-
ables, only one (indicator for female) is statistically significantly related to
treatment status. This is approximately what would be expected to occur
by chance. These baseline characteristics are also included as controls in all
regressions (as pre-specified).
Analyses of treatment effects use data from follow-up phone interviews of mi-
grants and direct interviews with their Philippine households at about seven,
15, and 30 months after arrival in the U.S. For further details on survey im-
plementation, see Appendix B.


Pre-Analysis Plan
This study is registered with the AEA RCT Registry.9 We submitted our
first pre-analysis plan (PAP) on September 17, 2014 before completion of the
baseline phase and availability of any post-treatment data. We submitted
subsequent PAPs to guide analysis of the mid-term survey data (submitted
July 19, 2015) and final survey data (submitted July 28, 2016). These lat-
ter two PAPs add additional hypotheses related to employment and network
characteristics.
For simplicity, all analysis in this paper will be based on the first PAP of
September 2014, the only PAP that was submitted before the collection of any
outcome data. Analyses based on subsequent PAPs are provided in Appendix
E. All conclusions are robust to estimating longer-run impacts using methods
from longer-run PAPs.
In a few ways, we deviate from the pre-analysis plan. Most importantly, we
correct test statistics to address multiple hypothesis concerns, following List,
   8
     Of the 6.5% of study participants not reporting family sponsorship, about two-thirds
report obtaining their green cards through an employer, and the remainder do not clearly
specify the nature of their sponsor.
   9
     https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/1389/


                                           14
Shaikh and Xu (2019). We had not pre-specified that we would do this for
tests on the main outcome domains. Our inferences are therefore (correctly)
more conservative. Also more conservatively than the PAP, we report standard
errors clustered by PDOS date, rather than unclustered robust standard errors.
In addition, we did not anticipate large outliers in the number of new friends
and acquaintances outcome variable in later survey waves. In the longer-term
surveys, this variable has a mean of 67, a median of 40, a minimum of 0,
90th percentile of 120, and a maximum of 2,500. In retrospect, such numbers
may reflect the fact that some study participants are reporting "weak" social
network links as well as stronger connections (Granovetter, 1973). In the PAP,
we said we would examine the simple count of new friends and acquaintances.
Instead, to reduce the influence of these unexpected outliers, we take the
inverse hyperbolic sine (IHS) transformation (Bellemare and Wichman, 2019).
Results are robust to alternate approaches, as discussed below.


Outcomes and Hypotheses
We examine outcomes and hypotheses as specified in our pre-analysis plan.
We are interested in outcomes in several domains. In each domain, we con-
struct an aggregate index or a standardized treatment effect (STE). When we
construct a STE, we follow Kling, Liebman and Katz (2007).10 Details on the
construction of indices are in Appendix C.
Our pre-specified hypotheses are as follows.

Hypothesis 1: Treatment reduces problems experienced during travel to
           the U.S. (Fraction of the following travel problems experienced:
  10
     We normalize each outcome by subtracting the mean of the control group and dividing
by the control group standard deviation. Let Yk be the k th of K outcomes of a given outcome
domain, µk be the control group mean and k the control group standard deviation. The
                          
normalized outcome is Yk    = (Yk - µk )/k . The summary index is Y  =                  
                                                                                    K Yk /K .
We reverse the sign for adverse outcomes, so that higher values indicate more beneficial
outcomes. Treatment effect estimates based on the STE quantify the difference between
means in the treatment and control groups in standard deviation units.




                                             15
           missed a flight, overweight luggage, problems with immigration
           authorities.)

Hypothesis 2: Treatment leads to faster completion of administrative matters
           related to settlement in the U.S. (Fraction of the following ob-
           tained: Social Security number, health insurance, driver's license,
           bank account.)

Hypothesis 3A: Treatment improves employment outcomes in the U.S.
           (STE of the following: indicator for having paid employment,
           IHS of monthly income, expected probability of having a job in
           9 months, expected probability of having a job that corresponds
           to one's educational level.)

Hypothesis 3B: The new PDOS with employment module treatment has larger
           positive effects on employment outcomes than the new PDOS with-
           out employment module treatment. (Outcome same as Hypothesis
           3A.)

Hypothesis 4A: Treatment leads to increases in new social network connec-
           tions in the U.S. (STE of the following: number of new friends
           and acquaintances, indicator for having received support from a
           Filipino club or organization in the U.S.)

Hypothesis 4B: The new PDOS with association email treatment has more
           positive effects on social network in the U.S. than the new
           PDOS without association email treatment. (Outcome same as
           Hypothesis 4A.)

Hypothesis 5: Treatment improves individual wellbeing. (STE of the follow-
           ing: mental health index [sum of scores on five questions], migrant-
           specific wellbeing [sum of scores on two questions].)

To reiterate, Hypothesis 4A ­ that the treatment increases new social network
connections ­ reflects our initial expectation before we had seen our empirical


                                      16
results. We originally expected the treatment to increase new social network
connections because the new PDOS explicitly encourages migrants to reach
out and build a support network in the U.S.



4      Empirical Analyses
We use the following regression specification to estimate treatment effects on
outcomeYi :
                          Yi =  + Ti + Xi  + i                             (1)

Ti is an indicator for attending any new PDOS. Xi is a vector of pre-specified
baseline controls, which improve precision and help address chance imbalances
(including age, age squared, gender, level of education, log days since arrival in
the U.S., an indicator for migrating alone, indicators for migrating to Hawaii
and California, indicator for daily internet use, self-assessed English skills,
indicator for having a U.S. job prior to departure, and an indicator that the
outcome was reported in a proxy interview). For each outcome domain, we also
pre-specified that we would include controls relevant to the specific domain.11
Standard errors are clustered at the level of 112 daily PDOS sessions.
 is the causal effect of treatment. This treatment effect is the average effect
of the different sub-treatments, and will be the basis for testing Hypotheses 1,
2, 3A, 4A, and 5.
By direct observation, we confirmed perfect adherence to treatment assign-
ment (attendance at the assigned PDOS, and receipt of the corresponding
handbook).  therefore captures the average treatment effect (ATE). In our
case, the ATE is equivalent to the average treatment effect on the treated
(ATT) for migrants satisfying our screening criteria.
We use the following regression specification to estimate the differential effect
  11
     For example, the regression for the network size index includes baseline controls for
knowing a Filipino association in the U.S., for wanting to join a Filipino association in the
U.S., and wanting to join other clubs/associations in the U.S. See the PAP for complete
details.



                                             17
of the new PDOS with employment module:

                      Yi =  + Ti + TEmpi + Xi  + i                          (2)

This regression equation modifies equation (1) by adding TEmpi , an indicator
for being assigned to the new PDOS with employment module. The coefficient
 is the treatment effect of the new PDOS without the employment module,
and the coefficient  is the incremental impact of adding the employment mod-
ule to the new PDOS. The total effect of the new PDOS with the employment
module (compared to the control group) is  +  . The coefficient  will be the
basis for testing Hypothesis 3B.
In addition, we estimate the following regression specification to determine the
differential effect of the new PDOS with the association email:

                      Yi =  + Ti + TAssoci + Xi  + i                        (3)

Compared to equation (1), this equation adds TAssoci , an indicator for assign-
ment to the new PDOS with association email treatment. The coefficient 
is the treatment effect of the new PDOS without the association email, and
the coefficient  is the incremental impact of adding the association email to
the new PDOS. The total effect of the new PDOS with the association email,
compared to the control group, is  +  . The test of Hypothesis 4B refers to
the coefficient .


Multiple Hypothesis Corrections
We examine multiple hypotheses. To conduct correct statistical inference, we
follow Finkelstein et al. (2010) and Almeida et al. (2014). As discussed above,
we construct indices for different outcome domains. We provide details on
the construction of indices in Appendix C. Then, across regressions for the
different outcome domains, we build on the method of List, Shaikh and Xu
(2019) to correct for multiple hypotheses, and report the resulting p-value
adjusted for the familywise error rate on the treatment coefficient for each

                                      18
domain. We modified the List, Shaikh and Xu (2019) method to be regression-
based and allow for inclusion of control variables. We provide details on the
modifications of the procedure, simulations, and access to our Stata command
mhtreg in Appendix D.


Attrition
Attrition over time was a key challenge as the entire migrant sample moved
from the Philippines to the U.S. and changed their contact details between the
baseline and follow-up interviews. To minimize attrition, we asked study par-
ticipants to provide contact information for the household in the Philippines
they would remain most closely connected to after their departure, which we
then also surveyed. We also fully informed migrants of expectations of multi-
ple follow-up surveys at time of consent and provided financial incentives for
completed surveys. We regularly updated and intensively used contact data of
multiple types (phone, email, Skype, and social media) and solicited household
assistance in contacting migrants if necessary. We used Philippine-household
proxy reports on migrant outcomes if migrants could not be surveyed. Proxy
reports account for about 40 percent of the outcomes collected in the short-
term survey and 50 percent in the long-term survey.12
Our re-interview rates reach 87 percent in the short-term survey and 61 percent
in the long-term survey. These success rates are comparable to those of other
studies that survey and track migrants from their origin to their destination
countries. Ambler (2015) successfully tracked 73 percent of migrants from
El Salvador to Washington DC, Ashraf et al. (2015) 57 percent of migrants
from El Salvador to Washington DC, Shrestha and Yang (2019) 60 percent of
Filipino maids to Singapore, and Gibson et al. (2019) 64 percent of migrants
from Tonga to New Zealand.
We examine a range of potential attrition problems. A crucial question is
whether attrition from the follow-up survey sample is related to treatment
  12
    Our results hold when we restrict the analysis to directly reported data from migrants,
which might be more reliable (Appendix Tables E.7 and E.17).


                                            19
status. If so, concerns arise about selection bias in treatment effect estimates.
We do not find that attrition is related to treatment status in different sur-
vey rounds (Appendix Tables E.4 and E.14). Because attrition is specific to
given outcome measures, we also examine this outcome by outcome (Appendix
Tables E.5 and E.15).13 Again, this analysis raises no concerns. Likewise,
treatment status cannot explain whether an interview is conducted directly
with the migrant or indirectly with a family member in the Philippines via
a proxy survey (Appendix Tables E.6 and E.16). Across the large number of
tests where we check whether treatment predicts attrition, in only very few
cases are coefficients statistically significant at conventional levels, no more
than would be expected to occur by chance.
Throughout, baseline characteristics have little power to predict re-interview
status (attrition or proxy survey status). The R-squared of the corresponding
regressions is low (<0.03) suggesting that baseline characteristics do not sys-
tematically correlate with re-interview status. There is no indication that our
sample loses specific types of migrants over time.



5     Results
Table 1 presents regression results for our primary hypothesis tests, using data
from the short-term survey. Panel A presents coefficients from Equation (1) on
the indicator for receiving the new PDOS (either version) for the five outcome
indices, testing Hypotheses 1, 2, 3A, 4A, and 5. The treatment leads to sub-
stantial reductions in the number of travel related problems (column 1), with
multiple-hypothesis-corrected p-value 0.30. This result points to the impor-
  13
     Attrition varies across different outcomes, depending on a number of factors: (i) whether
an interview was conducted as a direct interview with the migrant or a proxy interview
with a family member (as some outcomes could not be collected in proxy interviews), (ii)
whether a family member was knowledgeable on a given outcome (as the share of "don't
know"-responses was considerable higher in proxy interviews), (iii) the common number of
observations for the individual indicators used to build aggregate indices, (iv) whether we
analyze the new PDOS with association email (as the email could only be randomized among
the subset of those with a valid email address migrating to a state with a CFO-approved
association).


                                             20
tance of the enhanced handbook as the new PDOS featured considerably less
travel-related content than the old PDOS. The treatment also leads to a lower
network size index (column 4). This is the sole outcome that is statistically
significant after multiple-hypothesis correction (p-value 0.03). The coefficients
on the treatment indicator in regressions for the other outcomes are small in
magnitude, and none are statistically significantly different from zero.
Panel B presents coefficients from estimating Equation (2) on the employment
index for receiving the new PDOS (either version) and the new PDOS with
employment module. The latter coefficient, testing Hypothesis 3B, is negative
but not statistically significant at conventional levels.
Panel C presents coefficients from estimating Equation (3) on the network size
index for receiving the new PDOS (either version) and the new PDOS with as-
sociation email. The latter coefficient, testing Hypothesis 4B, is not precisely
estimated. But the economically meaningful positive coefficient is consistent
with the email reducing the cost of acquiring social network connections. In
this regression, the coefficient on the indicator for new PDOS (either version)
is interpreted as the effect of receiving the new PDOS without the associa-
tion email. This coefficient is negative, large in magnitude, and statistically
significant after multiple-hypothesis correction (p-value 0.05).
Using data from the long-term survey, Table 2 presents similar regression re-
sults. (The travel-related problems regression is excluded; it was pre-specified
only as a short-term outcome.) As pre-specified in the long-term PAP, we
replace a missing long-term value with the mid-term or short-term value, in
that order. Because observations missing from the short-term survey may be
found in a later survey, the samples in Table 2 have higher sample sizes (lower
attrition) than Table 1.
Table 2's results are very similar to Table 1's. In Panel A, of the four outcome
areas, the treatment has a statistically significant impact on only the network
size index; the multiple-hypothesis-corrected p-value is 0.07. In Panels B and
C, neither the coefficient on the new PDOS with employment module nor that
on the new PDOS with association email are statistically significantly different
from zero. In Panel C of Table 2, as in the corresponding panel of Table 1, the

                                       21
coefficient on the indicator for new PDOS (either version) is negative, large
in magnitude, and statistically significant after multiple-hypothesis correction
(p-value 0.03).
The stability of the findings in Table 2's expanded sample and longer time
frame provides an indication of the robustness of the empirical findings. In
Appendix Tables E.7 and E.17, we also show that our results hold when we
exclude proxy reports from household members and restrict the analysis to
directly reported data from migrants.
These results suggest that better-informed immigrants invest less in developing
social networks in their new societies, thus attenuating the overall gains from
the new information. From the perspective of our simple theoretical model,
information and social network links are substitutes. The suggestive evidence
in favor of fewer travel-related problems and no treatment effects on settle-
ment, employment, and wellbeing is consistent with this interpretation. The
new PDOS could affect migrants' travel experience before they had formed
networks in the U.S. In contrast to post-arrival outcomes, endogenous reduc-
tions in social network connections could hence not attenuate the effects on
travel-related problems.
Appendix Table E.9 shows short-term treatment effects on the component
variables of the network size index. The treatment has negative effects on
both components. Treatment causes the number of friends to fall by 28%,14
the rate of receiving support from associations to fall by 3.2 percentage points
(control mean 4.9%). It also lowers the rate of contacting an association by 5
percentage points (control mean 12.3% ).
Short-term results are robust to different ways of dealing with outliers in the
friends variable (including doing nothing). This is true for the long-term results
as well, except when we do not deal with outliers at all (using the raw count of
friends for which later survey waves include extreme values); in this case, the
treatment effect on the number of friends is close to zero with standard errors
nine times larger than in the short-run (Appendix Table E.18). We also show
  14
     We use the method of (Bellemare and Wichman, 2019) to convert IHS coefficients into
percentage changes.


                                          22
robustness to defining the network measure as specified in the long-term PAP
(Appendix Table E.22).
Density plots of the number of friends provide an alternate view of the treat-
ment effects. Figure 4 presents probability density functions of the number
of friends for the control group (old PDOS) and the treatment group (new
PDOS, any version). The PDF for the treatment group lies to the left of
the control group's PDF. The PDF of the treatment group has substantially
greater probability mass under 30 friends, and less mass above 30 friends.
The treatment might induce migrants to invest in fewer, but different types
of social network connections. In the long-run PAP, we distinguish between
Filipino and non-Filipino friends and acquaintances as well as close friends (we
did not collect these outcomes in the short-term survey). Appendix Table E.23
shows that the new PDOS particularly reduces the number of Filipino friends
and acquaintances and close friends. The effect is negative for non-Filipino
friends, but not statistically significant. In addition, we do not find that the
new PDOS affects other network characteristics (Appendix Table E.24). The
corresponding index is defined as a STE that summarizes whether the two
closest new contacts in the U.S. have a college degree or higher and whether
they are of non-Filipino ethnicity, whether the migrant has visited people of
U.S. origin in their home, whether the migrant has received visitors of U.S.
origin, and how often the migrant has received everyday favors from non-
Filipino individuals. The new PDOS has no effect on the index or any of its
components. Overall, our results suggest a reduction in the number of network
links across the board with few changes in the type of links.
However, in exploratory and not pre-specified analyses, we find evidence that
the new PDOS affects whether migrants use social networks to find a job.
Overall, as the first three columns of Table 3 show, none of our treatments
influences migrants' propensity to have a job. Yet, migrants who attended the
new PDOS with employment module are 7.8 percentage points (control mean
70.2%) less likely to have found their current job through social networks
(column 5). This finding reflects that the employment module significantly
improves migrants' job-search knowledge (see column 2 of Appendix Table

                                      23
E.13), which reduces their reliance on social networks. By contrast, migrants
who received the association email, which explicitly encourages them to expand
their social network to find a job, are 9.6 percentage points more likely to have
found a job through social networks (column 6). The opposing effects of the
sub-treatments explain why the overall treatment effect of the new PDOS on
having found a job through social networks is close to zero and not statistically
significant (column 4).
In additional exploratory and not pre-specified analyses, we test a theoreti-
cal possibility highlighted above in Section 2. When friend-acquisition costs
are lower, information and friends are more likely to be substitutes. In this
case, the treatment leads to greater reduction in friends and has a less posi-
tive impact on wellbeing because utility gains from better treatment-provided
information are offset by reductions in friend-provided information. When
friend-acquisition costs are higher, information and friends are more likely
to be complements. In this case, the treatment may lead to an increase in
friend acquisition, as well as an increase in well-being because utility gains
from friend-provided information are added to gains from treatment-provided
information.
We estimate Equation (1) when including an interaction term between treat-
ment and a proxy for lower friend-acquisition costs: the number of Filipino-
born individuals in one's county of destination (in inverse hyperbolic sine trans-
formation and demeaned).15 The main effect of number of Filipinos is also
included in the regression. The results, in Panel D, Table 2, are consistent
with the prediction. The treatment causes friend acquisition, and wellbeing,
to fall more in counties with more Filipinos.
  15
      One might worry that the number of Filipinos in the destination is endogenous to treat-
ment. We therefore use the U.S. destination county stated by the study participant in their
baseline interview, ignoring any subsequent moves. The original U.S. destination county is
often determined by the location of the immigrant's visa sponsor, so is more plausibly exoge-
nous. We also find no empirical evidence that the number of Filipinos in one's destination
county is endogenous to treatment. When estimating equation 1 with the inverse hyper-
bolic sine of number of Filipinos in the destination county as the dependent variable, the
coefficient on treatment is small in magnitude and is not statistically significantly different
from zero.



                                              24
There is no corresponding heterogeneity in regressions for the settlement and
employment indices. This may reflect that there are factors important for over-
all wellbeing that are not related to, or well-measured by, our rather coarse
settlement or employment indices. For example, immigrants with better infor-
mation may have lower stress levels, perhaps because they feel more confident
in their ability to respond to unexpected future shocks or changes in circum-
stances.
These patterns also reveal themselves in the nonparametric estimation of Fig-
ure 5. In the figure we plot on the vertical axis a nonparametric regression
estimate of the treatment effect of the new PDOS (any version) for study
participants in destination counties with different-sized Filipino populations
(horizontal axis). The nonparametric estimate uses a Gaussian kernel. We
show 90% confidence intervals of the nonparametric regression estimate, based
on 200 bootstrap replications. To give a sense of ranges of the horizontal axis
accounting for more of our study population, we also present the density in
our study sample of the inverse hyperbolic sine of the number of Filipinos in
their destination county (the light gray solid line). The figure suggests that in
counties with the fewest Filipinos (those below the 15th percentile, or a value
on the horizontal axis of 6), the impact of the treatment on the social network
size index is zero, and the impact on wellbeing is positive.


6    Conclusion
We study an intervention that provides immigrants with information about
their new societies, with the aim of facilitating settlement and improving
their socioeconomic outcomes. We find that when new immigrants are better-
informed, they acquire fewer new social network connections. At the same
time, we find no evidence of positive impacts of the information intervention
on immigrant settlement, employment, or overall well-being. In the context
of a simple model, these findings suggest that information and social network
connections are substitutes. Exogenously-provided information (such as from
an information intervention) may be beneficial in itself, but its impact on over-

                                       25
all well-being may be attenuated if beneficiaries respond to the information
provided by reducing their acquisition of information from social networks.
The intervention we study is widespread and important in and of itself. Many
national governments and NGOs seek to provide information to migrants and
other populations more broadly. Thus, the results may also be relevant for
understanding the impacts of other interventions that involve provision of
information, such as financial education or health information programs. The
empirical record of the effectiveness of such programs is mixed (Kaiser and
Menkhoff 2017, Fernandes, Lynch Jr and Netemeyer 2014). In future research,
it will be important to examine whether information interventions in other
contexts also lead to offsetting reductions in social networks, thus attenuating
the overall gains from these interventions.
We do find evidence that the impact of the information intervention we study
is heterogeneous in our study population. The intervention has less negative
effects on social network connections, and positive effects on well-being, for
those in localities with relatively few prior immigrant co-nationals. This could
be due to the fact that acquisition of social network connections is costlier in
such localities. From the standpoint of the theoretical model, the higher the
cost of acquiring social network connections, the less likely it is that informa-
tion and social network connections are substitutes, and the more positive can
be the impact of the information intervention on well-being. This finding has
a policy implication: information interventions may have the highest positive
impacts on the well-being of beneficiaries ­ and therefore should be considered
more seriously ­ in situations where beneficiaries have high costs of acquiring
new (or maintaining pre-existing) social network connections (e.g., immigrants
arriving in locations with relatively few prior immigrant compatriots).




                                       26
References
Almeida, Rita, Sarojini Hirshleifer, David McKenzie, Cristobal
 Ridao-Cano, and Ahmed Levent Yener. 2014. "The Impact of Voca-
 tional Training for the Unemployed: Experimental Evidence from Turkey."
 Economic Journal, 126(597): 2115­2146.

Ambler, Kate. 2015. "Don't Tell on Me: Experimental Evidence of Asym-
 metric Information in Transnational Households." Journal of Development
 Economics, 113: 52­69.

Amuedo-Dorantes, Catalina, and Kusum Mundra. 2007. "Social Net-
 works and Their Impact on the Earnings of Mexican Migrants." Demogra-
 phy, 44(4): 849­863.

Ashraf, Nava, Diego Aycinena, Claudia Martinez, and Dean Yang.
 2015. "Savings in Transnational Households: A Field Experiment Among
 Migrants from El Salvador." Review of Economics and Statistics, 97: 332­
 351.

Banerjee, Abhijit, Arun G Chandrasekhar, Esther Duflo, and
 Matthew O Jackson. 2013. "The Diffusion of Microfinance." Science,
 341(6144).

Banerjee, Abhijit, Arun G Chandrasekhar, Esther Duflo, and
 Matthew O Jackson. 2018. "Changes in Social Network Structure in Re-
 sponse to Exposure to Formal Credit Markets." Available at SSRN 3245656.

Barr, Abigail, Marleen Dekker, and Marcel Fafchamps. 2015. "The
 Formation of Community-Based Organizations: An Analysis of a Quasi-
 Experiment in Zimbabwe." World Development, 66: 131­153.

Beaman, Lori A. 2012. "Social Networks and the Dynamics of Labour Mar-
 ket Outcomes: Evidence from Refugees Resettled in the US." Review of
 Economic Studies, 128­161.


                                   27
Beaman, Lori, and Jeremy Magruder. 2012. "Who Gets the Job Referral?
 Evidence from a Social Networks Experiment." American Economic Review,
 102(7): 3574­3593.

Bellemare, Marc F, and Casey J Wichman. 2019. "Elasticities and the
 Inverse Hyperbolic Sine Transformation." Oxford Bulletin of Economics and
 Statistics.

Blumenstock, Joshua, Guanghua Chi, and Xu Tan. 2019. "Migration
  and the Value of Social Networks." CEPR Discussion Papers 13611.

Bonferroni, Carlo E. 1935. Il Calcolo delle Assicurazioni su Gruppi di Teste.
 Tipigrafia del Senato.

Borjas, George J. 1985. "Assimilation, Changes in Cohort Quality, and the
 Earnings of Immigrants." Journal of Labor Economics, 3(4): 463­489.

Borjas, George J. 1992. "Ethnic Capital and Intergenerational Mobility."
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(1): 123­150.

Cabrales, Antonio, Antoni Calv´        o-Armengol, and Yves Zenou.
 2011. "Social Interactions and Spillovers." Games and Economic Behavior,
 72(2): 339­360.

Cai, Jing, and Adam Szeidl. 2018. "Interfirm Relationships and Business
 Performance." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133(3): 1229­1282.

Calv´
    o-Armengol, Antoni. 2004. "Job Contact Networks." Journal of Eco-
 nomic Theory, 115(1): 191­206.

Calv´
    o-Armengol, Antoni, and Matthew O Jackson. 2004. "The Effects
 of Social Networks on Employment and Inequality." American Economic
 Review, 94(3): 426­454.

Canen, Nathan, Matthew O Jackson, and Francesco Trebbi. 2019.
 "Endogenous Networks and Legislative Activity." Available at SSRN
 2823338. http://ssrn.com/abstract=2823338.

                                     28
Caria, Stefano, Simon Franklin, and Marc Witte. 2018. "Searching with
 Friends." CSAE Working Paper Series 14.

Carrington, William J, Enrica Detragiache, and Tara Vishwanath.
 1996. "Migration with Endogenous Moving Costs." American Economic Re-
 view, 909­930.

Carter, Michael, Rachid Laajaj, and Dean Yang. forthcoming. "Subsi-
 dies and the African Green Revolution: Direct Effects and Social Network
 Spillovers of Randomized Input Subsidies in Mozambique." American Eco-
 nomic Journal: Applied Economics.

Cecchi, Francesco, Jan Duchoslav, and Erwin Bulte. 2016. "Formal
 Insurance and the Dynamics of Social Capital: Experimental Evidence from
 Uganda." Journal of African Economies, 25(3): 418­438.

CFO. 2013. "Stock Estimate of Overseas Filipinos." Commission on Filipinos
 Overseas. https://www.cfo.gov.ph/downloads/statistics/stock-estimates.
 html, accessed 23.10.2019.

CFO. 2015. "CFO Statistics on Philippine International Migration." Com-
 mission on Filipinos Overseas. https://www.cfo.gov.ph/images/pdf/2017/
 2015compendiumstats-insidepages-2017-06-29.pdf, accessed 23.10.2019.

Chuang, Yating, and Laura Schechter. 2015. "Social Networks in Devel-
 oping Countries." Annual Review of Resource Economics, 7(1): 451­472.

Comola, Margherita, and Mariapia Mendola. 2015. "Formation of Mi-
 grant Networks." Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 117(2): 592­618.

Comola, Margherita, and Silvia Prina. forthcoming. "Treatment Effect
 Accounting for Network Changes: Evidence from a Randomized Interven-
 tion." Review of Economics and Statistics.

Currarini, Sergio, Matthew O Jackson, and Paolo Pin. 2009. "An
 Economic Model of Friendship: Homophily, Minorities, and Segregation."
 Econometrica, 77(4): 1003­1045.

                                   29
Docquier, Fr´
            ed´eric, Giovanni Peri, and Ilse Ruyssen. 2014. "The Cross-
 Country Determinants of Potential and Actual Migration." International
 Migration Review, 48(1 suppl): 37­99.

Dolfin, Sarah, and Garance Genicot. 2010. "What Do Networks Do? The
 Role of Networks on Migration and `Coyote' Use." Review of Development
 Economics, 14(2): 343­359.

Dupas, Pascaline. 2011. "Do Teenagers Respond to HIV Risk Information?
 Evidence from a Field Experiment in Kenya." American Economic Journal:
 Applied Economics, 3(1): 1­34.

Dupas, Pascaline. 2014. "Short-Run Subsidies and Long-Run Adoption of
 New Health Products: Evidence from a Field Experiment." Econometrica,
 82(1): 197­228.

Dustmann, Christian, Albrecht Glitz, Uta Sch¨     onberg, and Herbert
 Br¨ucker. 2016. "Referral-Based Job Search Networks." Review of Economic
 Studies, 83: 514­546.

Einav, Liran, and Amy Finkelstein. 2018. "Moral Hazard in Health In-
  surance: What We Know and How We Know It." Journal of the European
  Economic Association, 16(4): 957­982.

Fernandes, Daniel, John G Lynch Jr, and Richard G Netemeyer.
  2014. "Financial Literacy, Financial Education, and Downstream Financial
  Behaviors." Management Science.

Finkelstein, A, S Taubman, H Allen, J Gruber, JP Newhouse, B
  Wright, and K Baicker. 2010. "The Short-Run Impact of Extending
  Public Health Insurance to Low-Income Adults: Evidence from the First
  Year of the Oregon Medicaid Experiment." Analysis plan.

Foster, Andrew D, and Mark R Rosenzweig. 2010. "Microeconomics of
  Technology Adoption." Annual Review of Economics, 2(1): 395­424.



                                   30
Gibson, John, David McKenzie, Halahingano Rohorua, and Steven
 Stillman. 2019. "The Long-Term Impact of International Migration on Eco-
 nomic Decision-Making: Evidence from a Migration Lottery and Lab-in-the-
 Field Experiments." Journal of Development Economics, 138: 99­115.

Granovetter, Mark. 1973. "The Strength of Weak Ties." American Journal
 of Sociology, 78(6): 1360­1380.

Heß, Simon H, Dany Jaimovich, and Matthias Sch¨     undeln. forthcom-
 ing. "Development Projects and Economic Networks: Lessons From Rural
 Gambia." Review of Economic Studies.

Holm, Sture. 1979. "A Simple Sequentially Rejective Multiple Test Proce-
 dure." Scandinavian Journal of Statistics, 6: 65­70.

IOM. 2011. "IOM Migrant Training Programmes Overview 2010­
  2011."       www.iom.int/jahia/webdav/shared/shared/mainsite/activities/
  facilitating/IOM Migrant Training Programmes Overview 2010 2011.pdf,
  accessed 23.10.2019.

Jackson, Matthew O. 2019. "A Typology of Social Capital and Associated
  Network Measures." Social Choice and Welfare, 1­26.

Jackson, Matthew O, and Asher Wolinsky. 1996. "A Strategic Model of
  Social and Economic Networks." Journal of Economic Theory, 71(1): 44­74.

Jackson, Matthew O, and Brian W Rogers. 2007. "Meeting Strangers
  and Friends of Friends: How Random are Social Networks?" American
  Economic Review, 97(3): 890­915.

Jones, Damon, David Molitor, and Julian Reif. 2019. "What do Work-
  place Wellness Programs do? Evidence from the Illinois Workplace Wellness
  Study." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 134(4): 1747­1791.

Joona, Pernilla Andersson, and Lena Nekby. 2012. "Intensive Coaching
  of New Immigrants: An Evaluation Based on Random Program Assign-
  ment." Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 114(2): 575­600.

                                    31
Kaiser, Tim, and Lukas Menkhoff. 2017. "Does Financial Education Im-
 pact Financial Literacy and Financial Behavior, and If So, When?" World
 Bank Economic Review, 31(3): 611­630.

Kling, Jeffrey R, Jeffrey B Liebman, and Lawrence F Katz. 2007.
 "Experimental Analysis of Neighborhood Effects." Econometrica, 75(1): 83­
 119.

List, John A, Azeem M Shaikh, and Yang Xu. 2019. "Multiple Hy-
  pothesis Testing in Experimental Economics." Experimental Economics,
  22(4): 773­793.

L´
 opez, Gustavo, Neil G Ruiz, and Eileen Patten. 2017. "Key Facts
  about Asian Americans, A Diverse and Growing Population." Pew Research
  Center.

Lubotsky, Darren. 2007. "Chutes or Ladders? A Longitudinal Analysis of
 Immigrant Earnings." Journal of Political Economy, 115(5): 820­867.

Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S Mitchell. 2014. "The Economic Im-
 portance of Financial Literacy: Theory and Evidence." Journal of Economic
 Literature, 52(1): 5­44.

Mahajan, Parag, and Dean Yang. 2020. "Taken by Storm: Hurricanes,
 Migrant Networks, and US Immigration." American Economic Journal: Ap-
 plied Economics, 12(2): 250­277.

Massey, Douglas S. 1988. "Economic Development and International Mi-
 gration in Comparative Perspective." Population and Development Review,
 383­413.

McKenzie, David, and Dean Yang. 2015. "Evidence on Policies to Increase
 the Development Impacts of International Migration." World Bank Research
 Observer, 30(2): 155­192.




                                   32
Munshi, Kaivan. 2003. "Networks in the Modern Economy: Mexican
 Migrants in the US Labor Market." Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 118(2): 549­599.

National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. 2015.
 The Integration of Immigrants into American Society. National Academies
 Press, Washington, DC.

Orrenius, Pia M, and Madeline Zavodny. 2005. "Self-Selection Among
 Undocumented Immigrants from Mexico." Journal of Development Eco-
 nomics, 78(1): 215­240.

Orrenius, Pia M, et al. 1999. "The Role of Family Networks, Coyote Prices
 and the Rural Economy in Migration from Western Mexico: 1965-1994."
 Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Research Paper, , (99­10): 2­11.

Portes, Pia, and Leif Jensen. 1989. "The Enclave and the Entrants: Pat-
 terns of Ethnic Enterprise in Miami before and after Mariel." American
 Sociological Review, 54(6): 929­949.

Rinne, Ulf. 2013. "The Evaluation of Immigration Policies." In International
 Handbook on the Economics of Migration. Edward Elgar Publishing.

Romano, Joseph P, and Michael Wolf. 2010. "Balanced Control of Gen-
 eralized Error Rates." Annals of Statistics, 38(1): 598­633.

Sacerdote, Bruce. 2014. "Experimental and Quasi-Experimental Analysis of
  Peer Effects: Two Steps Forward?" Annual Review of Economics, 6(1): 253­
  272.

Sarvim¨aki, Matti, and Kari H¨  am¨al¨
                                     ainen. 2016. "Integrating Immigrants:
  The Impact of Restructuring Active Labor Market Programs." Journal of
  Labor Economics, 34(2): 479­508.

Shrestha, Slesh A, and Dean Yang. 2019. "Facilitating Worker Mobil-
  ity: A Randomized Information Intervention among Migrant Workers in
  Singapore." Economic Development and Cultural Change, 68(1): 63­91.

                                    33
Testaverde, Mauro, Harry Moroz, Claire H. Hollweg, and Achim
  Schmillen. 2017. "Migration Policy in Sending Countries." Migrating to
  Opportunity: Overcoming Barriers to Labor Mobility in Southeast Asia,
  Chapter 7, 203­246. Washington, DC:World Bank.

Westfall, Peter H, and S Stanley Young. 1993. Resampling-based Multiple
 Testing: Examples and Methods for P-value Adjustment. Vol. 279, Hoboken,
 NJ: John Wiley & Sons.

World Bank. 2019. World Development Indicators.




                                   34
Figures and Tables

     Marginal Benefit, Marginal Cost




                                                                                              M CH




                                                                                              M CL

                                                                                              M BC
                                                                                              M BT




                                       f                        f         f          Friends (f)


                                           Figure 1: Increasing returns to information




                                                               35
                      Migrants to the U.S.
                            N=1,273
                                           60%

           40%                              New PDOS
                                              N=772
                                     50%                    50%


Old PDOS                New PDOS w/o                     New PDOS with
  N=501               employment module                 employment module
                 Subset of those with a valid email address migrating to a state with
                                     a CFO-approved association
                                               N=544
                                     50%                    50%


                       w/o association email            with association email

                       Figure 2: Treatment conditions




                                      36
              Getting set               16             31                                                   Getting set           15              32
Preparing f           27                14                                                   Preparing f             4            12
              Preparing f               27             14                                                   Preparing f            4              12


                               (a) Presentation (in number of slides)                            (b) Booklet/handbook (in number of pages)
   100
                  100                                                                  100
                                                                                                      100
    80                                                      14                                                                               12
                   80                                                   14              80                                                                  12
                                                                                                       80
    60                                                      31                                                                               32
                   60                                                   31              60                                                                  32
                                                                                                       60
    40                                                      8                                                                                 5
                   40   27                                               8              40                                                                   5
                                        27                                                             40                                    18
                                                            16                                                                                              18
    20                                                                  16
                   20   16                                  10                          20                    4                              14
                                        16                              10                             20                  4                                14
                         5          1                       8                                                 15
     0                                   5         1                    8                                              0.5 15                12
                    Old
                    0 PDOS                             New PDOS                          0                                             0.5                  12
                                    Old PDOS                        New PDOS                            Old
                                                                                                        0 PDOS                            New PDOS
              Preparing for departure and entering the US                                                               Old PDOS                        New PDOS
                             Preparing for departure and entering the US                          Preparing for departure and entering the US




         37
              Getting settled in the US                                                                          Preparing for departure and entering the US
                             Getting settled in the US                                            Getting settled in the US
              Building a support network                                                                         Getting settled in the US
                             Building a support network                                           Building a support network
              Finding a job                                                                                      Building a support network
                             Finding a job                                                        Finding a job
              Managing one's finances                                                                            Finding a job
                             Managing one's finances                                              Managing one's finances
              Maintaining and strengthening ties with the Philippines                                            Managing one's finances
                             Maintaining and strengthening ties with the Philippines              Maintaining and strengthening ties with the Philippines
                                                                                                                 Maintaining and strengthening ties with the Philippines

                                 Figure 3: Differences in coverage of topics between the old and new PDOS (in terms of quantity)
               Note: The number of pages in the handbook is not directly comparable as the format of the old PDOS handbook is much smaller (it
               is a booklet). The old PDOS does not cover "Building a support network" and "Managing one's finances". The presentation of the
               old PDOS has one slide on "Maintaining and strengthening ties with the Philippines" and the booklet half a page on "Finding a job".
               Compared to the old PDOS, the new PDOS shifts the focus from "Preparing for departure and entering the U.S." to the other topics,
               which are more relevant for longer-term socio-economic integration. Another major difference is that the new PDOS offers much
               richer and practical information. Figures B.3 and B.4 in Appendix B illustrate this difference in terms of both quantity
               and quality for information provided on opening a bank account. All presentation slides and handbooks can be downloaded at
               https://sites.google.com/view/tomanbarsbai/pdos.
              .02
                                                              Old PDOS (with median value)
                                                              New PDOS (with median value)


              .015
           Density
            .01
              .005
              0




                     0        20            40               60            80                100
                                      Nr of friends and acquaintances



Figure 4: Density plot of number of friends after 30 months in the U.S. by treatment status
Note: Number of friends is from long-term survey. Missing data replaced with value from mid-term
survey or short-term survey (in that order).




                                                38
                                                                                (a) network size index




                                                        .6




                                                                                                                                       .2
             Effect of PDOS on network size index (STE)
                                               .4




                                                                                                                                       .15
                                     .2




                                                                                                                                       Density
                                                                                                                                         .1
                             0




                                                                                                                                       .05
           -.4       -.2




                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                2     4             6              8             10            12
                                                                                 IHS nr of Filipinos in county

                                                                    Non-parametric estimate of treatment effect (with 90 percent CI)
                                                                    Density of ihs nr of Filipinos in county


                                                                          (b) subjective wellbeing index
           Effect of PDOS on subjective wellbeing index (STE)




                                                                                                                                       .2
                                                        .6




                                                                                                                                       .15
                                             .4




                                                                                                                                       Density
                                                                                                                                         .1
                        0         .2




                                                                                                                                       .05
              -.2




                                                                                                                                       0




                                                                2     4             6              8             10            12
                                                                                 IHS nr of Filipinos in county

                                                                    Non-parametric estimate of treatment effect (with 90 percent CI)
                                                                    Density of ihs nr of Filipinos in county



Figure 5: Nonparametric treatment effects of PDOS on network size index and subjective
wellbeing index by size of Filipino community
Note: Gaussian kernel. Bootstrapped standard errors with 200 replications.



                                                                                             39
          Table 1: Short-term effects (after about seven months in the U.S.)

                                             (1)               (2)            (3)           (4)          (5)
                                                                                                     Subjective
                                           Travel-          Settlement   Employment      Network     wellbeing
                                      related problems        index        index          index        index
                                            (0-1)              (0-1)       (STE)          (STE)        (STE)
 PANEL A
 New PDOS (either                           -0.012            0.028          -0.012        -0.169       -0.020
 version)                                  (0.006)           (0.017)        (0.070)       (0.056)      (0.076)
 MHT-adjusted p-value                       0.300             0.435          0.864         0.029        0.987
 Mean outcome control group                 0.020             0.590          -0.000        0.000        0.000
 R2                                         0.021             0.223          0.130         0.166        0.072
 Observations                               1077               728            362           614          578
 PANEL B
 New PDOS (either                                                             0.016
 version)                                                                   (0.090)
 New PDOS with emp.                                                          -0.053
 module                                                                     (0.095)
 MHT-adjusted p-value treatment                                              0.967
 MHT-adjusted p-value
 interacted treatment                                                        0.939
 R2                                                                          0.130
 Observations                                                                 362
 PANEL C
 New PDOS (either                                                                          -0.223
 version)                                                                                 (0.078)
 New PDOS with ass.                                                                         0.092
 email                                                                                    (0.077)
 MHT-adjusted p-value treatment                                                            0.052
 MHT-adjusted p-value
 interacted treatment                                                                      0.698
 R2                                                                                        0.165
 Observations                                                                               436
 Note: The table reports OLS estimates. The column title shows the dependent variable. All regressions include
the standard set of baseline control variables. Additional outcome-specific control variables are specified in the
PAP. Standard errors clustered at the PDOS session level in parentheses. Panel A/B/C refer to specifications
based on equations 1/2/3, which we present in our empirical approach. P-values adjusted for multiple hypothesis
testing are computed using the procedure described in Appendix D.




                                                       40
  Table 2: Long-term effects (after about 30 months in the U.S.)

                                           (1)             (2)           (3)          (4)
                                                                      Network     Subjective
                                       Settlement     Employment        size      wellbeing
                                         index          index          index        index
                                          (0-1)         (STE)          (STE)        (STE)
 PANEL A
 New PDOS (either                         -0.009         -0.065         -0.136       0.035
 version)                                (0.016)        (0.087)        (0.053)      (0.049)
 MHT-adjusted p-value treatment           0.918           0.916        0.072         0.920
 Mean outcome control group               0.797          -0.027        -0.067       -0.009
 R2                                       0.234           0.134        0.108         0.032
 Observations                              989             601          751           917
 PANEL B
 New PDOS (either                                        -0.050
 version)                                               (0.098)
 New PDOS with emp.                                      -0.028
 module                                                 (0.088)
 MHT-adjusted p-value treatment                          0.830
 MHT-adjusted p-value
 interacted treatment                                    0.751
 R2                                                      0.135
 Observations                                             601
 PANEL C
 New PDOS (either                                                       -0.238
 version)                                                              (0.080)
 New PDOS with ass.                                                      0.095
 email                                                                 (0.079)
 MHT-adjusted p-value treatment                                         0.032
 MHT-adjusted p-value
 interacted treatment                                                   0.726
 R2                                                                     0.139
 Observations                                                            533
 PANEL D
 New PDOS (either                         -0.007         -0.042         -0.127        0.041
 version)                                (0.015)        (0.092)        (0.053)      (0.051)
 IHS nr of Filipinos                      -0.001         -0.015          0.043        0.026
 in county (demeaned)                    (0.005)        (0.026)        (0.018)      (0.017)
 New PDOS x IHS nr of                     -0.001         0.010          -0.042       -0.044
 Filipinos in county                     (0.006)        (0.032)        (0.020)      (0.021)
 R2                                       0.243          0.141          0.133        0.040
 Observations                              938            570            710          871
 Note: The table reports OLS estimates. The column title shows the dependent variable. All
regressions include the standard set of baseline control variables. Additional outcome-specific
control variables are specified in the PAP. Standard errors clustered at the PDOS session
level in parentheses. Panel A/B/C refer to specifications based on equations 1/2/3, which
we present in our empirical approach. P-values adjusted for multiple hypothesis testing are
computed using the procedure described in Appendix D.




                                              41
Table 3: Long-term effects (after about 30 months in the U.S.): Has a job and found job
through social network
                                         (1)          (2)            (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)
                                                                              Found job   Found job    Found job
                                                                               through     through      through
                                      Has a job    Has a job      Has a job    network     network      network
      New PDOS (either                  -0.007       -0.013         -0.015      -0.013       0.028       -0.026
      version)                         (0.022)      (0.023)        (0.028)     (0.031)     (0.039)      (0.047)
      New PDOS with emp.                              0.011                                 -0.078
      module                                        (0.023)                                (0.040)
      New PDOS with ass.                                            0.050                                0.096
      email                                                        (0.030)                              (0.050)
      Mean outcome control group        0.860        0.860          0.850       0.702       0.702        0.655
      R2                                0.130        0.130          0.150       0.095       0.099        0.086
      Observations                      1162         1162            810         892         892          616
      Note: The table reports OLS estimates. The column title shows the dependent variable. All regressions
     include the standard set of baseline control variables. Standard errors clustered at the PDOS session level in
     parentheses.




                                                             42
APPENDIX (NOT FOR PRINT PUBLICATION)

 Information and the Acquisition of Social Network Connections

Authors

Toman Barsbai (University of Bristol and IfW Kiel)
Victoria Licuanan (AIM Manila)
Andreas Steinmayr (LMU Munich, CESifo, IZA, IPL, and IfW Kiel)
Erwin Tiongson (Georgetown University)
Dean Yang (University of Michigan, NBER, and BREAD)


Appendices

Appendix A: A Simple Model of social network investment
Appendix B: Further details on treatment and survey implementation
Appendix C: Construction of indices
Appendix D: Multiple hypothesis testing
Appendix E: Further figures and tables
A       A Simple Model of Social Network Investment
We present here a simple model of social network investment in the context of imperfect
information. We are interested in the interplay between information imperfections and indi-
vidual efforts to expand one's social network. In particular, we are interested in the potential
impact of interventions to alleviate information imperfections. If an intervention reduces in-
formation imperfections, does this raise or reduce individual efforts to expand one's social
network? We will see that it is theoretically possible for reductions in information imperfec-
tions to either raise or lower optimal choice of social network size.
Individuals have imperfect information about a variety of things in life that matter to them,
such as jobs (how to find them and what jobs are available), financial services, government
services, and the like. People also have social networks ("friends"), which provide infor-
mation, helping to reduce information imperfections. This can come about simply in the
process of friends conversing and sharing information with one another about topics relevant
to their lives. Network theory suggests that efficient information gathering typically requires
expansive networks with many short network paths (cf. Granovetter, 1973). Thus, we use
the number of first-degree friends as a proxy for network expansiveness.
Because friends are valuable, people make efforts to acquire them, but making friends is to
some degree costly. The costs of friend acquisition may include effort costs of socializing,
as well as monetary costs incurred to facilitate networking, such as travel costs to meetings
and social events, costs of membership in clubs or organizations, and the like.
We focus on the benefits friends bring by reducing information imperfections. We abstract
away from other benefits of friends that the network literature typically refers to as co-
operation capital, such as various forms of assistance (transfers, informal insurance, and
psychological support).1
We model individual utility as depending on baseline or starting-point information imperfec-
tions (prior to any reduction in information imperfections resulting from friend investments),
, and endogenous friend investment f  0. For simplicity, we abstract from other deter-
minants of utility that are independent of friends. Individuals choose f to maximize the
benefits from friends B (, f ) net of the cost of friend investment C (f ):

                                        U = B (, f ) - C (f )

People therefore acquire friends only up to the point at which the marginal cost does not
  1
    These other non-information benefits of friends could be thought of as entering the cost term in the
maximization problem we write down below, reducing the net cost of friends.


                                                   2
exceed the marginal benefit of friends. With reasonable assumptions on functional forms
one can obtain an interior solution for the optimal number of friends. A corner solution
is also possible of course, if the cost of friend investments is so high relative to benefits
that the optimal number of friends is zero. Once functional forms are posited, we can make
statements about the responsiveness of friend investments to changes in baseline information
imperfections .
Some simple assumptions and functional forms generate useful possibilities. Let information
imperfections  range from 0 to 1 (  [0, 1]), and allow individuals to have both exogenous
friends (those that are given at baseline without cost), e, and endogenous friends, f , which
they acquire at a cost. Let e  1.2 Let one's amount of information I be a function of
information imperfections , exogenous friends e, and endogenous friends f as follows:

                                                           
                                                 I =1-
                                                          e+f
In this setup, one's amount of information can range from 0 (no information) to 1 (full infor-
mation). If baseline information imperfections  are 0, then one starts with full information.
A higher number of friends e + f reduces the importance of one's baseline information im-
perfections and raises one's amount of information I .
For simplicity, let the cost of endogenous friends be linear with a per-friend cost c, so the
total cost of friend acquisition is cf .3 As mentioned, exogenous friends e, as part of one's
endowment, are costless.
We now analyze three distinct cases: constant, decreasing, and increasing returns to infoma-
tion. Analysis of the different cases makes clear that reductions in information imperfections
(increases in information) have indeterminate impacts on friend investments.
Case 1: Constant Returns to Information
Let the benefit B (, f ) be constant or linear in the amount of information I . The individual's
maximization problem is as follows:

                                                      
                                           max 1 -       - cf
                                             f       e+f

The first order condition is:
                                                     
                                                           =c
                                                 (e + f )2
   2
     In our empirical context, assuming that individuals start with at least one friend is reasonable. For new
immigrants to the U.S., the exogenous friend could be the individual who officially sponsors the immigrant
for their immigration visa.
   3
     The main predictions of the model are robust to the assumption of increasing per-friend net cost, which
might result from decreasing per-friend assistance benefits in larger networks.

                                                      3
The individual chooses endogenous friends f so that the marginal benefit of friends equals
their marginal cost. Solving for f gives the optimal number of friends f  :

                                                                  
                                                      f =           -e
                                                                  c

(Checking the second order condition confirms this is a maximum.)
Now we can ask: what effect do baseline information imperfections have on the optimal
number of friends? We can take the partial derivative of f  with respect to :

                                                    f       1
                                                       =               >0
                                                         2c        
                                                                   c


This partial derivative is always positive. Therefore a reduction in information imperfections
 (e.g., our information treatment for new immigrants) should reduce friend investments.
     Marginal Benefit, Marginal Cost




                                                                                                   MC


                                                                                                   M BC
                                                                                                   M BT

                                                          
                                           f1            f0                          Friends (f)


                                       Figure A.1: Constant returns to information

Figure A.1 graphically shows the impact of reducing information imperfections when returns

                                                              4
to information are constant. Parameter values used in the figure are: e = 1, c = 0.25.
The red line is the marginal cost function, which is horizontal because the cost of friends is
constant. The green curve is the marginal benefit function for the control group (without
the information treatment), with  = 0.9. The orange curve is the marginal benefit function
for the information treatment group, which due to the treatment has lower information
imperfections ( = 0.6). The reduction in information imperfections due to treatment lowers
the marginal benefit of friends (the orange curve is always lower than the green curve).
The optimal number of friends is given by the intersection of the marginal benefit and
                                                                                     
marginal cost functions. In the control group, the optimal number of friends is f0    . In the
                                                                            
treatment group, the optimal number of friends is f1 , which is lower than f0 . The reduction
in information imperfections due to treatment lowers the marginal benefit of friends, lowering
the optimal number of friends.
Case 2: Decreasing Returns to Information
The case of decreasing returns to information is very similar to the constant-returns case. We
modify the benefit function so that benefits are a function of the square root of information,
so the migrant's optimization problem is:

                                                    1
                                    max (1 -          ) 2 - cf
                                      f           e+f
The first order condition is:
                                                  
                                                   
                                                             =c
                                          2(1 -   e+f
                                                      )f 2
Aside from the change in the benefit function and thus the marginal benefit functions,
assumptions are otherwise the same as for the constant-returns case in Figure A.1. As in
Figure A.1, the reduction in information imperfections due to treatment lowers the marginal
benefit of friends (the orange curve is always lower than the green curve).
Case 3: Increasing Returns to Information
Assuming increasing returns to information leads to ambiguous predictions regarding the
impact of information imperfections on friend investments. We modify the benefit function
to add a quadratic term in information, allowing for increasing returns to information. So
the migrant's optimization problem is:

                                                   2
                            max 1 -       + (1 -     ) - cf
                                f     e+f        e+f

The parameter  measures the strength of increasing returns to information. The first order


                                                     5
condition is now:
                                            2               
                                      2
                                        +         2
                                                    (1 -          )=c
                             (e + f )     (e + f )       (e + f )

These marginal benefit and cost curves now allow an information treatment (that lowers )
to either raise or lower optimal friend investments.
We analyze this case graphically in Figure 1. The parameter values used in the figure are e =
1, c = 2.4, and  = 5. As in Figure A.1, the horizontal red line is the marginal cost function.
The green and orange curves are the marginal benefit functions for the control group and
treatment groups with,  = 0.9 and  = 0.6 respectively. The marginal benefit functions
can have upward-sloping (increasing returns to friends) and downward-sloping (decreasing
returns to friends) sections. The optimum is found at the intersection of the marginal cost
function and the downward-sloping part of the relevant marginal benefit function. (The
optimum would not be at the intersection with the upward-sloping part of the marginal
benefit function, because at that intersection the marginal benefit of friends is increasing, so
the individual could continue to increase utility by raising friend investments.)
The figure depicts the case where the cost of friend investments is high enough that for the
control group (blue marginal benefit curve), there is a corner solution where f  = 0 (utility is
maximized with no friend investments.) For the control group, there is no amount of friend
investments for which the marginal benefit of friends is positive, so the individual makes no
friend investments.
From this starting point, a reduction in (in this figure, from 0.9 in the control group to 0.6
in the treatment group) can lead the marginal benefit function to shift so that there is an
interior solution with positive friend investments (f  > 0).


There is also of course the possibility, for lower values of the cost of friends c, that reductions
in  lead to reductions in the optimal number of friends. This would be the case if the
marginal cost of friends was lower, so that the marginal cost function (the horizontal red
line) would intersect both the control group and treatment group marginal benefit functions
on their downward-sloping portions. If this were the case, a reduction in  would have effects
similar to those depicted in Figure A.1: a reduction in optimal friend investments.
Overall, therefore, depending on parameter values and functional forms, it is possible for an
information intervention, such as the one we implemented among new U.S. immigrants from
the Philippines, to either raise or lower investments made in building one's social network.
This possibility arises when there are increasing returns to information (Case 2 above), but
not when returns to information are constant (Case 1 above).


                                                6
In Figure A.2, we examine the impact of the information treatment on friend acquisition
and on utility for a range of marginal cost levels, from the highest (on the left of the x-axis)
to the lowest (to the right of the x-axis).
In the upper panel of Figure A.2, we show optimal friends in the treatment group (orange
line) and control group (green line). In the control group, there is no friend acquisition for
the highest cost levels. Friend acquisition only becomes positive as costs fall below a certain
threshold, and increase as marginal costs continue to fall. In the treatment group, on the
other hand, there is always (for these cost values) positive friend acquisition, and optimal
friends rise continuously as costs fall.




                                               7
                    Optimal number of friends f 
                                                                                               
                                                                                              fC
                                                                                               
                                                                                              fT




                                                         0
                     
                    fT - fC
                          
                        Impact of treatment on utility




                                                                                    -cf 

                                                                                              U (f  )
                                                                                   B (f  )

                                                             high                              low
                                                                    Cost per new friend (c)

               Figure A.2: Effect heterogeneity by cost per new friend (c)



In the central panel of Figure A.2, we examine the treatment effect on friend acquisition
(optimal friends in the treatment group minus optimal friends in the control group). Ini-

                                                                            8
tially, reductions in marginal costs make the treatment effect on friend acquisition even more
positive, because we are in the region where information and friends are complements. As
we lower marginal costs further into the zone where there is now positive friend acquisition
in the control group, friends and information are now substitutes. The treatment effect on
friends becomes negative, and increasingly so as marginal costs fall more.
In the lower panel of Figure A.2, we examine the treatment effect on utility. The treatment
effect on utility (solid line) follows a pattern similar to the central panel. Starting from the
highest marginal costs, reductions in marginal costs make the treatment effect on utility
even more positive, as long as one remains in the region where information and friends are
complements. As we lower marginal costs further, friends and information become substi-
tutes, and the treatment effect on utility declines, and eventually can be even lower than
when marginal costs were very high.
All told then, the impact of the treatment on friend acquisition and on utility is not mono-
tonic. There is a range (when marginal costs start from a "high" level) where information
and friends are complements, during which the treatment effect on friends and on utility
rises as marginal costs fall. Then as marginal costs continue to fall, we transition to a region
where information and friends are substitutes. In this region, the treatment effect on friends
becomes negative, and the treatment effect on both friends and utility declines as marginal
costs continue to fall.



B     Further Details on Treatments and Survey Imple-
      mentation

Content of the New PDOS
The new PDOS and the corresponding handbook consist of the following components.
Travel ­ This short module helps migrants to prepare for the journey to the U.S.. It covers
travel-related issues such as travel documents, airport and immigration procedures, luggage,
and restricted items. The new module is considerably shorter than the previous module, but
the new expanded handbook provides comprehensive information on these matters.
Settlement ­ This is the broadest of all modules and covers issues related to migration
in general and migration to the U.S. in particular. The module addresses topics such as
cultural differences and culture shock, rights and obligations of U.S. permanent residents,
important things to take care of after arrival (such as obtaining a social security number,
health insurance, a driver's license, etc.) as well as information about health care, education,

                                               9
and housing.
Associations in the U.S. ­ Filipino associations, but also non-Filipino associations such
as neighborhood associations, may be an important provider of post-arrival support for
migrants. The module informs migrants about the potential benefits of associations for
expanding their social network. Such contacts may ultimately help migrants to integrate
into the U.S. and find a decent job.
Employment ­ This module aims to help migrants to find a decent job in the U.S., which
our preparatory interviews identified as the single most important challenge for Filipino
migrants. It informs about the U.S. labor market and addresses important issues such as
the recognition of certificates and diplomas, job search strategies, how to prepare a CV and
cover letter, and behave in a job interview. There are two versions of the new PDOS, one
with and one without employment module.
Financial literacy ­ This module is based on the fact that migrants often experience a
substantial increase in income when starting a job abroad. The module teaches basic rules
of thumb on opening a bank account, financial planning, savings, sending remittances, and
making a joint financial plan with the family in the Philippines on the amount and use of
remittances.
Diaspora engagement ­ This module aims to strengthen the links between Filipino mi-
grants and the Philippines. It covers Filipino culture and values, overseas voting rights, the
right to re-acquire Filipino citizenship and government programs such as BalinkBayan and
Linkapil, which help migrants to stay in touch with their home country and give them the
possibility to contribute to development causes in the Philippines.
The new PDOS provides each migrant with a comprehensive 116-page paper handbook,
which covers the above topics in detail and provides easy-to-follow checklists as well as
links to online resources. While the old PDOS provides written information in the form of
a booklet, the handbook of the new PDOS offers much richer and practical information.
Figures B.3 and B.4 below illustrate this difference in terms of both quantity and quality for
information provided on opening a bank account.
All material used in the different treatment conditions including the presentation slides and
handbooks can be downloaded at https://sites.google.com/view/tomanbarsbai/pdos.




                                             10
      Opening a Bank Account


      One of your first steps in the US should be opening a US bank
      account. Having an account allows you to manage your day-
      to-day financial transac ons, which may involve buying daily
      necessi es, or ren ng or purchasing a new home. Moreover,
      with an account, you are a step closer to fully realizing your
      financial goals ­ may it be short, mid-, or long term.                                                          Note: For joint bank accounts, consult with the bank if both signatories need to be
                                                                                                                      present when opening the account.
           Below are the general steps to be taken in opening an
           account:

                 Do your research. Since banks come in various types and sizes and offer a diverse
                 range of services and fees, it is best to do research on which bank is suitable to
                 your goals, needs, and lifestyle. You may want to ask around, read online, or speak
          1      directly to a bank representa ve to have your ques ons answered.
                                                                                                       Remember:
                                                                                                         ·    Prepare your questions in advance and do not hesitate to ask them.
                                                                                                         ·    Consult with a bank representative who can walk you through the various
                 Know more about your prospecve bank. Consult the website of your preferred
                                                                                                              products, offers, and services available.
                 bank or call a bank representa ve for the complete requirements. Factor in              ·    Decide on what is convenient for you ­ telephone, mobile, or online banking.
                 considera ons such as banking hours, distance, fees, interest rates, etc. Ask about
          2      ATM related bank services like loca on, customer protec on, fees, withdrawing
                                                                                                         ·
                                                                                                         ·
                                                                                                              Do not sign up for a bank account without comparing several options.
                                                                                                              Do not sign the terms and agreements unless you have read and understood
                 limit, etc. For you it might be of par cular importance what the fees are for                the document.
                 interna onal transac ons to or from the Philippines. Some banks have special
                 rela onships with foreign banks that reduce fees for interna onal transac ons--
                 this will be listed on their websites.




11
                 Determine what type of account you want. Familiarize yourself with the various        Finding a Place to Live (Housing)
                 types of accounts and know what suits your needs best. The two common kinds
          3      of bank accounts are: Savings Account and Checking Account. Compare your
                 op ons.
                                                                                                       The decision whether to rent or buy a home is greatly influenced by your personal consideraon,
                                                                                                       for instance your preferences, suitability, and financial situaon.

                 Gather the requirements. Make sure you have the complete requirements with            The US Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) website (hp://portal.hud.
                 you before heading to the bank. Each financial ins tu on has its own requirements,    gov/hudportal/HUD) provides an exhausve list of tools that can guide you in your decision.
          4                                                                                            You will see vast number of services, checklists, and informaon by state.
                 but the standard requirement includes:
                                                                                                       The first decision to make is whether buying a home or renng is the best opon for you.
                    ·   Social Security Number                                                         Below is a guide to help you evaluate your opons. 19
                    ·   Iden fica on Card with Photo (Passport, Driver's License, etc.)
                    ·   Individual Taxpayer Iden fica on Number (for some banks)
                                                                                                                                Buying                                                      Renting
                                                                                                       If you plan to stay in one location                          If you plan to move around and don't want to be tied in
                        Note: Banks some mes require an addi onal deposit. Many banks also wave                                                                     one location
                        the fees if you keep a minimum balance in the account. Consult your bank       If you have funds for a down payment and closing             If you don't have the funds for a down payment and
                                                                                                       costs                                                        closing costs
                        for the exact amount.
                                                                                                       If you can afford the maintenance costs of owning            If you can't afford the potential maintenance costs of
                                                                                                       (repairs, lawn care, etc.)                                   owning (repairs, lawn care, etc.)
                 Head to the Bank. Present addi onal documents and fill out the provided               If you want to build equity over the long-term               If you are saving for the future

                 forms. Schedule an appointment, if necessary. Check with the bank for online          If you want the potential tax advantages
          5      applica ons.
                                                                                                       19. Decide what's right--rent or buy? (n.d.). Retrieved from FannieMae KnowYourOptions: http://knowyouroptions.
                                                                                                       com/rent/overview/decide-whats-right-rent-or-buy

     32
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              33




             Figure B.3: Information on how to open a bank account provided in the handbook of the new PDOS
                           to present your social security number and
                           other documents to confirm your identity.

                Bank Account

                Open a bank account to safe keep your money. It will
                also help facilitate your financial transactions. Before
                opening bank accounts, compare the services, fees,
                working hours and location of banks so you can choose
                the one that best meets your needs.

                Taxes

                As permanent residents, you will be taxed by the U.S.
                Government for your income inside and outside of the
                U.S. You must file your income tax statements at the
                Internal Revenue Service regardless of whether you are
                earning an income or not.

                For more information, please visit the website
                http://www.irs.gov/localcontacts/index.html , or
                call 1-800-829-1040.

                U.S. Military Selective Service

                All male permanent resident aliens aged 18 to 25 years
                must register with the Selective Service System (SSS).
                Registration must be accomplished within 30 days before
                and after the 18th birthday. If the age upon arrival in the
                U.S. is between 18 and 25 years, registration must be
                done within 30 days upon arrival. There are no
                exceptions to the said age bracket. Even mentally or
                physically disabled persons must register.

                                               12


Figure B.4: Information on how to open a bank account provided in the booklet of the old
PDOS



                                          12
Association Email
Below is the template for the association email. Each email provides contact details of
Filipino associations in the migrant's U.S. state. The email below is for migrants moving to
Northern California.




                                            13
Be part of the community. Join a Filipino association near you!             http://us8.campaign-archive1.com/?u=2c07729e0394ce149dcca5c11&...



            Subscribe                Share                  Past Issues                                                           Translate

                  An invitation to get in touch with Filipino Association




                      Dear <<Salutation>> <<First Name>> <<Last Name>> ,              To start your search, we invite you to
                                                                                      browse and contact the following
                      Greetings from the Commission on Filipinos Overseas             organizations in Northern
                                                                                      California:
                      (CFO)!
                                                                                      Transnational Institute for
                      Kamusta na po kayo? We hope you are doing well. By              Grassroots Research and Action
                      now, you are most likely in the midst of preparing for your     (TIGRA)
                      new life in the US. We recognize that post-arrival support      900 Alice Street #400, Oakland, CA 94607
                      for newly-settled migrants like you is very important to        Contact person: Francis Calpotura
                                                                                      Email: tigra@transnationalaction.org
                      help you in your adjustment period ­ from learning about
                                                                                      Website ­ Facebook
                      job opportunities, expanding social networks, accessing
                                                                                      Phone: (510) 338-4915
                      government services including social security benefits, to
                      enrolling children in school.                                   Filipina Women's Network
                                                                                      P.O Box 192143, San Francisco, CA 94119
                                                                                      Contact person: Marily Mondejar
                      The good news is that several Filipino associations in the      Email: marilym@ffwn.org or
                      US have long been providing such support by linking             filipina@ffwn.org
                      newly arrived Filipinos to other Filipinos in the area. These Website ­ Facebook
                      contacts open great opportunities in getting guidance on        Phone: (415) 935-4396

                      how to make the best of your new life in the US, find a job,    Filipino American Development
                      locate the best schools in the area and available               Development Foundation /
                      scholarships, or simply, discover new activities to try,        Bayanihan Community Center
                      places to explore, and make new friends!                        1010 Mission St Ste. B, San Francisco, CA
                                                                                      94103 Bernadette Sy
                      We therefore strongly encourage you and your                    Contact person: MC Canlas
                                                                                      Email: b_sy@att.net or
                      family to get in touch with Filipino associations to
                                                                                      mccanlast@aol.com
                      find out about their programs and advocacies that
                                                                                      Website
                      could potentially suit you.                                     Phone: (415)348-8042 / (415) 974-0349




1 of 2                                                                                                                              05.05.2016 20:26
Be part of the community. Join a Filipino association near you!          http://us8.campaign-archive1.com/?u=2c07729e0394ce149dcca5c11&...



            Subscribe            Share           Past Issues                                                                  Translate

                     may still want to get in touch with them through email or      Northern California
                                                                                    2195 Cobblehill Pl, San Mateo, CA 94402
                     phone. They have a large network and may recommend
                                                                                    Contact person: Marife Sevilla
                     you to another association close to your place of residence.   Email: msevilla2195@hotmail.com
                     These associations are dedicated in helping migrants such      Website ­ Facebook
                     as yourself and may help you a great deal in transitioning     Phone: (650) 3020210 / 5788508
                     to your new home.
                                                                                    This map provides information on many
                                                                                    more Filipino organizations in the US.
                     If you get to connect with a Filipino association in
                     your area, please do tell us how it went and how
                     else we can assist you. Feel free to reach us
                     through Filsupport@cfo.gov.ph.

                     Hangad namin na maiayos sa madaling panahon ang
                     inyong bagong buhay sa America. Sa pamamagitan ng
                     mga grupong ito, maaari kang makatanggap ng suporta
                     at tulong na iyong kinakailangan. Bukod dito, maaari ka
                     ding makatulong sa ibang migranteng Pilipino na tulad
                     mo.

                     Maraming salamat po!




                     Very truly yours,




                     Chairperson
                     Commission on Filipinos Overseas




2 of 2                                                                                                                          05.05.2016 20:26
Treatment Implementation
Our protocols were designed to minimize spillover of information from treatment to control
study participants. Scheduling the new and old PDOS on different dates minimizes the
possibility of interaction between the two groups. The CFO leadership did not share the
full schedule or email list with instructors or other implementation staff. Instructors were
informed one week in advance of the PDOS version to be given on a particular day. Prospec-
tive PDOS participants were never informed that different PDOS versions were given on
different dates, and would have had great difficulty discovering the schedule in advance.
To avoid control group contamination through instructors, different groups of instructors
conducted the new and old PDOS. Instructors of the old PDOS were not informed about
the content of the new PDOS and had no access to the new training materials, including the
handbook. To assign instructors to the new or old PDOS and balance their characteristics,
we ranked them by instruction quality and used paired random assignment. Distribution of
the new, enhanced handbook was also tightly controlled. No new handbooks were available
on "old PDOS" dates, and only the matching version (with and without employment module)
for the corresponding new PDOS was available on each date. In addition, handbooks were
not available for download on the internet during the randomized implementation period.
CFO instructors gave the old and new PDOS presentations at a central location in Manila.
The delivery of both the new and the old PDOS was highly standardized. Written instruc-
tions specified the content to be delivered for each presentation slide, and we gave instructors
substantial advance training prior to study initiation.


Survey Data Collection
Due to the complexity of data collection involving face-to-face interviews across the Philip-
pines and phone interviews with migrants in the U.S., we hired the Philippine branch of
TNS, a large international survey firm, to conduct the fieldwork of the project. TNS could
provide field staff in all parts of the Philippines and the infrastructure needed for phone
interviews.
Preparation for fieldwork followed standard practice including pre-tests of the survey instru-
ment and extensive training of enumerators. In all survey rounds, training, data collection,
and monitoring were the same across treatment and control groups. In addition, field staff
was blind to both the treatment status of each respondent and the content of the inter-
ventions. All interviews were computer-assisted and administered on tablets. Computer
assistance facilitated tracking individuals over time and improved data quality through au-


                                              16
tomated routing and error checks. To further improve data quality, a supervisor monitored
all phone interviews. Field supervisors audited ten percent of the interviews conducted with
household members in the Philippines. In addition, backchecks, with a focus on non-changing
information, were conducted on 20 percent of the interviews.
There was a modest compensation for participation in the survey. For completed baseline
interviews, migrant respondents received PHP 200 gift certificates and household respondents
bags worth PHP 110. For completed follow-up interviews, migrant respondents received
phone credit worth PHP 100 to be sent to a person of their choice in the Philippines.
Household respondents received phone credit worth PHP 200 and an additional PHP 100
for completed proxy interviews. To maximize response rate, we increased compensation
for migrant interviews in the endline survey. In this final round, migrants received a gift
certificate worth USD 10, which they could choose to keep or donate to the Red Cross. To
further increase response rates, we also experimented with higher tokens. In the very last
weeks of the endline survey, we offered PHP 1,000 for completed migrant and household
interviews. This strategy led to the completion of about three dozen additional interviews.



C      Construction of Indices
We use indices for different outcomes domains to reduce the number of outcomes to examine.
Here we provide more details on how we construct the different indices (as pre-specified in
the first PAP). We also reprint the exact survey questions and answer options in italics.
Travel-related problems ­ Average of having (i) missed a flight, (ii) had luggage problems,
(iii) had customs problems, (iv) had problems with authorities in the Philippines, (v) had
problems with authorities in the U.S.. Ranges from 0 to 1.
Please think back to your travel from the Philippines to the U.S.. Did you experience the
following problems: (i) Missed flight from the Philippines or connecting flight, (ii) problems
with airline because of too much luggage or prohibited items in luggage, (iii) problems with
custom authorities because of prohibited items in luggage, (iv) problems with authorities in
the Philippines because of wrong/missing documents, (v) problems with authorities in the
U.S. because of wrong/missing documents? Yes / No
Settlement index ­ Average of having (i) a social security number, (ii) health insurance,
(iii) a driver's license, (iv) a bank account. Ranges from 0 to 1.
Do you have a Social Security number in the United States? Yes / No, but I have already
applied / No, I have not applied yet
Do you have health insurance in the United States? Yes / No, but I have already applied /

                                             17
No, I have not applied yet
Do you have a U.S. driver's licence? Yes / No, but I am planning to get one / No, I am not
planning to get one
Do you have a bank account in the United States? Yes, I have my own bank account / Yes,
I have a joint account with my spouse/partner / No, but I am planning to get one / No, I
am not planning to get one
Employment index ­ Standardized treatment effect4 (STE) of (i) having a job, (ii) inverse
hyberbolic sine of monthly earnings, (iii) perceived chance of having a job in the near future,
(iv) perceived chance of having a job that matches the qualification in the future. We exclude
(iii) and (iv) when estimating long-term effects as these outcomes were not collected in later
interviews. We deviate from the PAP and do not include the number of invitations to a job
interview since arrival in the U.S.. Due to a routing error in the script, this indicator was
unfortunately not systematically collected.
Do you currently work or have a job or business? Yes / No
How much are your monthly earnings from that job? Please state the amount before tax.
What would you say is the probability that you will have a job half a year from now? Please
give me a percentage number, 0 means you think it is impossible, 100 means you are sure
that you will have a job.
And what would you say is the probability that you will have a job that corresponds to your
qualification half a year from now? Please give me a percentage number, 0 means you think
it is impossible, 100 means you are sure that you will have a job that corresponds to your
qualification.
Network size index ­ STE of (i) having received support from an association in the U.S.
and (ii) inverse hyperbolic sine of the number of friends and acquaintances made in the U.S.
since arrival. We replace (i) with having had contact with an association in the U.S. when
estimating long-term effects as this outcome was not collected in later interviews.
Have you received any support (information, help to find housing or work, etc.) from a
Filipino community or diaspora association in the U.S.? Yes / No
How many new people in the U.S. have you got to know on a personal basis since your arrival
in the U.S.?
   4
     We normalize each outcome by subtracting the mean of the control group and dividing by the standard
deviation of the control group. Let Yk be the k th of K outcomes of a given outcome domain, µk be
the control group mean and k the control group standard deviation of Yk . The normalized outcome is
  
Yk  = (Yk - µk )/k . The summary index is Y  = K Yk      
                                                          /K . We reverse the sign for adverse outcomes, so
that higher values indicate more beneficial outcomes. Treatment effect estimates based on the STE quantify
the difference between means in the treatment and control groups in standard deviation units.


                                                    18
Subjective wellbeing index ­ STE of (i) mental wellbeing index and (ii) migrant wellbeing
index. The mental wellbeing index is the sum of five five-point items. It measures how often
during the past month the respondent (i) was happy, (ii) felt calm and peaceful, (iii) was
not very nervous, (iv) did not feel downhearted and blue, (v) did not feel so down in the
dumps that nothing could cheer her/him up. The migrant wellbeing index is the sum of two
five-point items. It measures how often during the past month the respondent did not feel
(i) homesick and (ii) overwhelmed by the challenges faced in the U.S..
During the past month, how much of the time (i) were you a happy person, (ii) did you feel
calm and peaceful, (iii) were you a very nervous person, (iv) did you feel down-hearted and
blue, (v) did you feel so down in the dumps that nothing could cheer you up, (vi) did you
feel homesick, (vii) did you feel overwhelmed by the challenges you face in the U.S.? None
of the time / A little of the time / Some of the time / Most of the time / All of the time


D       Multiple Hypothesis Testing
We estimate treatment effects using variants of the following regression specification:


                        Yi,k = 0 + 1 Di,1 + . . . + L Di,L + Xi  + ui,k ,                  (D.4)

where Yi,k denotes the k th outcome of interest for the ith unit, Di,1 . . . Di,L the independent
variables of interest (treatments), 1 . . . L the parameters of interest and Xi a set of further
independent variables (baseline covariates). We might further estimate these parameters in
subgroups formed by the values of variables Zi . Note that the set of variables in Xi and Zi
might be overlapping. Testing multiple hypotheses simultaneously arises due to investigating
the effects on multiple outcomes of interest, the effects of multiple independent variables of
interest (in the same regression specification or in different ones), the effects in multiple
subgroups, or any combination thereof. In other words, we make simultaneous inference on
the elements of a parameter vector  = (1 , ..., S ) with individual null hypothesis of the
form HS : s = 0. In these situations, we want to control for the familywise error rate
(FWER) ­ the probability of one or more false rejections.
List, Shaikh and Xu (2019) provide a bootstrap-based stepwise procedure for simultaneously
testing null hypotheses from settings with multiple outcomes, treatments, and subgroups.
The procedure is based on the results in Romano and Wolf (2010). It asymptotically con-
trols the FWER and is asymptotically balanced in that the marginal probabilities of rejecting
true null hypotheses are approximately equal in large samples. Information about the de-
pendence structure between hypotheses yields greater statistical power to reject truly false

                                               19
null hypotheses compared to procedures such as the Bonferroni (1935) and Holm (1979)
corrections that assume independence between hypotheses. However, the procedure and the
Stata package introduced in List, Shaikh and Xu (2019) are designed for experimental data
in which simple random sampling is used to assign a discrete treatment status to units. It is
not designed for hypothesis testing of parameters from regressions with multiple independent
variables.
We modify the procedure of List, Shaikh and Xu (2019) to make it suitable for regression
analysis.5 Below, we describe the procedure and indicate where we deviate from the setup
of List, Shaikh and Xu (2019). Our key modification is how we define the "unbalanced"
studentized test statistic for Hs . For samples of size n, the test statistic is

                                                       |^n,s |
                                             stud
                                            Ts,n  =
                                                      se(^n,s )

and it's re-centered version is6

                                                      ^
                                        ~stud (P ) = |n,s - s | .
                                        Ts,n
                                                      se( ^n,s )

The regression framework does not require Di , Xi , and Zi to be discrete as required by
Assumption 2.3 in List, Shaikh and Xu (2019). We consider the observed data (Yi , Di , Xi , Zi ),
i = 1, ..., n i.i.d. but we discussion an extension that allows for deviations from the i.i.d.
assumption below. Denote by P      ^n the empirical distribution of the observed data. The
multiple testing procedure consists of the following steps (see Algorithm 3.1 in List, Shaikh
and Xu, 2019):

Step 0. Set S1 = S .
.
.
.

Step j. If Sj =  or

                                      stud
                              maxJn (Ts,n       ^n )  L-
                                           , s, P        1          ^
                                                       n (1 - , Sj, Pn ),
                              sSj

    5
     We implement this procedure in Stata.                     It can be applied to other regres-
sion based settings.           The module can be installed by typing net install mhtreg,
from(https://sites.google.com/site/andreassteinmayr/mhtreg) in the Stata prompt.                         The
Stata procedure is based on modifications of the code provided by Joseph Seidel (https:
//github.com/seidelj/mht-source). We thank Azeem Shaikh for helpful suggestions for the modifica-
tions.
   6
     The corresponding test statistics in List, Shaikh and Xu (2019) are in Equations (6) and (7) and Remark
3.4.


                                                    20
                                             stud
then stop. Otherwise reject any Hs with Jn (Ts,n       ^n ) > L-1 (1 - , Sj , P
                                                  , s, P                      ^n ), set
                                                               n


                                          stud
                      Sj +1 = {sSj : Jn (Ts,n       ^n )  L-1 (1 - , Sj , P
                                               , s, P                     ^n )},
                                                           n

and continue to the next step.
.
.
.
The adjusted p-value for HS , p^adj
                                s,n can be computed as the smallest value of  for which HS
is rejected in Algorithm 3.1. Furthermore, the procedure allows calculating an unadjusted
                                                    ^n ).
                           ^s,n = 1 - Jn (Ts,n , s, P
bootstrap p-value for HS , p
                                                   s,n
We use bootstrap resamples to approximate J n (x, s, P ^n ) and Ln (x, S , P
                                                                           ^n ). For b = 1, ..., B
                             ^n and denote by T
draw a sample of size n from P                 ~,b,stud (P
                                                         ^n ) the quantity T ~stud (Pn ) using the
                                                s,n                           s,n
                  ^
bth resample and Pn as an estimate of P . In our modified version this is

                                                         |^,b -  ^n,s |
                                     ~,b,stud (P
                                               ^n ) =      n,s
                                     Ts,n                       ,b
                                                           se( ^n,s )
                   s,n
                          ^n ) as
We approximate J n (x, s, P

                                      ^n ) = 1
                            ^n (x, s, P
                            J                         ~s,n
                                                   I {T ,b,stud ^
                                                               (Pn )  x}
                                             B 1bB

               ^n ) as
and Ln (x, S , P

                               ^n ) = 1
                   ^ n (x, S , P
                   L                             ^n (T
                                           I {maxJ   ~s,n
                                                       ,b,stud ^        ^n )  x}.
                                                              (Pn ), s, P
                                      B 1bB sS


Simulations
To evaluate the algorithm in terms of correct rejection rates and statistical power, we run
a set of simulations based on different data-generating processes (DGP).7 Let µ be a ten-
dimensional vector of zeros (0, 0, ..., 0) . Let I be a 10 × 10 identity matrix. Let  be a 10 × 10
covariance matrix where all off-diagonal elements are equal to 0.9. Let D = 1[N (0, 1) > 0]
be a binary indicator equal to one with probability 0.5 for all scenarios except scenario five.
The data-generating processes for each simulations are:

   1. Normal i.i.d errors (ten outcomes)
   7
    We base the structure of these simulations on similar simulations for a multiple-hypothesis procedure
based on Westfall and Young (1993) in the Appendix C of Jones, Molitor and Reif (2019).


                                                   21
         N (µ, I ); Y =

   2. Uniform i.i.d errors (ten outcomes)
         N (0, 1); Y =

   3. Normal i.i.d errors (one outcome, ten subgroups)
         U (0, 1); Y =

   4. Lognormal i.i.d. errors with balanced treatment (ten outcomes)
         eN (µ,I ) ; Y =

   5. Lognormal i.i.d. errors with unbalanced treatment (ten outcomes)
       D = 1[N (0, 1) > 1] ;  eN (µ,I ) ; Y =

   6. Correlated errors (ten outcomes)
         N (µ, ) ; Y = 0.2D +

We run 2,000 simulations based on these data-generating processes. In each simulation, we
estimate ten regressions of the form:


                                 Yk = 0,k + 1,k Dk + uk , k = 1..10.

The ten null hypothesis that correspond to these ten regressions are: 1,k = 0, k = 1..10.
These null hypotheses are true in scenarios one to five and false in scenario six. We use
samples of size 100 for each scenario, for scenario two that implies 10 subgroups with 100
observations each. For all scenarios, we estimate an unadjusted p-value, a p-value adjusted
with the procedure above, and adjustments based on the Bonferroni and Holm procedures.
We provide a comparison between the regression based version mhtreg and the original
procedure mhtexp for the unadjusted p-values and the adjustments based on Theorem 3.1
in List, Shaikh and Xu (2019).
Table D.1 present the results of this simulation. The first two rows of column (1) show the
unadjusted familywise (FW) rejection rates using mhtreg (0.378) and mhtexp (0.382).8 As a
comparison, the FW rejection rate using Theorem 3.1 is 0.047 with mhtreg and 0.049 using
mhtexp. Bonferroni and Holm adjustments result in a FW rejection rate of exactly 0.038.
Results are very similar in column (2), that uses a DGP with uniform errors. All methods
are overly conservative in the case of lognormal errors with 50% treatment share (column 3).
   8
    Remember that the probability of at least one false rejection at  = 0.05 is 1 - (1 - 0.05)10 = 0.401 for
ten independent hypotheses.


                                                    22
Using mhtreg, the unadjusted FW rejection rate is 0.263 and the adjusted is 0.009. Results
using mhtexp are almost identical. Bonferroni and Holm result in FW rejection rates of
0.009. In contrast, column (4) shows results for lognormal errors but with a share of treated
of only 16%. In such a scenario standard inference methods tend reject too often. Indeed,
we see unadjusted FW rejection rates to be 0.55 using mhtreg and 0.588 using mhtexp. The
adjusted rate is 0.095 using mhtreg and 0.205 using mhtexp, which suggests that the type of
test statistic matters in this scenario. Column (5) shows results for multiple subgroups. All
results are very close to the theoretical predictions with little differences between methods.

                    Table D.1: Familywise rejection rate at  = 0.05, n = 100

                               (1)          (2)              (3)             (4)              (5)             (6)
                                             Lognormal                   Lognormal
                             Normal Uniform    errors                      errors          Multiple Correlated
 Adjustment method           errors  errors (50% treat.)                (16% treat.)      subgroups   errors

 Unadjusted mhtreg            0.378        0.424            0.263           0.550            0.380          0.306
 Unadjusted mhtexp            0.382        0.427            0.269           0.586            0.382          0.304
 Thm. 3.1 mhtreg              0.047        0.062            0.009           0.095            0.057          0.178
 Thm. 3.1 mhtexp              0.049        0.060            0.010           0.205            0.058          0.180
 Bonferroni                   0.038        0.051            0.009           0.083            0.049          0.090
 Holm                         0.038        0.051            0.009           0.083            0.049          0.096
 Num. observations             100          100             100              100              100            100
 Num. hypotheses               10           10              10               10               10              10
 Hypotheses are true            Y            Y               Y                Y                Y              N
 Note: Table reports the fraction of 2,000 simulations where at least one null hypothesis in a family of 10 hypotheses
was rejected. All hypotheses are true for the simulations reported in columns (1) to (5), i.e., lower rejection rates
are better. All hypotheses are false for the simulation reported in column (6), i.e., higher rejection rates are better.
Bootstaps are performed with 2,000 replications.


Finally, column (6) shows results for the DGP with correlated errors when the null hypotheses
are not true. Thus, in this scenario higher FW rejection rates are better. In the unadjusted
case, the FW rejection rate is 0.306. Adjustment using Theorem 3.1 results in a FW rejection
rate of 0.178, which is substantially higher than Bonferroni (0.09) and Holm (0.096). Again,
results are similar for mhtreg and mhtexp.


Clustering

List, Shaikh and Xu (2019) do not take into account situations in which model errors are
correlated within clusters. To capture the dependence structure, we follow Romano and Wolf

                                                       23
(2010) who suggest using a block bootstrap in such situations. In addition, we allow the test
statistics to be computed with cluster-robust standard errors. We also allow using a com-
bination of the two strategies. The option cluster(cluster id) of the mhtreg command
identifies the cluster variable. The option cltype(t) specifies the type of clustering. Value
t=0 specifies no clustering at all, t=1 specifies the use of a clustered bootstrap, t=2 specifies
the use of cluster-robust standard errors for the model, and t=3 specifies the use of both.
We run a simulation to evaluate the performance of the different types of clustering. Again,
let µ be a ten-dimensional zero vector (0, 0, ..., 0) , and let I be a 10 × 10 identity matrix.
The data-generating process for this simulation scenario is

  1. Errors correlated within clusters (ten outcomes)
      c = 1...100 clusters
      i = 1...10 observations within clusters
      c  N (µ, I )

       ci    N (µ, I )
      Yci = c +     ci


We again simulate 2,000 datasets. In each simulation, we estimated the following ten regres-
sions:


                             Yk,ci = 0,k + 1,k Dc + uk,ci , k = 1..10.

where the dummy variable Dc = 1[N (µ, I ) > 0] varies only at the level of clusters.
Column (1) of Table D.2 shows the results without accounting for clustering. In the unad-
justed case, at least one out of ten hypotheses is rejected almost every time (0.993). The
adjustment methods also result in rejection proportions of more than 90%. Column (2) shows
results when a clustered bootstrap is used but model standard errors are not adjusted. FW
rejection rates are close to the theoretical predictions, 0.416 in the unadjusted case, 0.065
with Theorem 3.1 adjustment, and 0.058 using Bonferroni or Holm. Column (3) uses a non-
clustered bootstrap but cluster-robust model standard errors. Again, results are close to the
theoretical predictions with slightly smaller FW rejections rates. Finally, column (4) uses a
clustered bootstrap and cluster-robust model standard errors, which again delivers results
close to the theoretical predictions.
While it does not seem to make a difference, we use the double-clustering as presented in
column (4) for results where clustering appears to be appropriate.


                                                24
           Table D.2: Familywise rejection rate at  = 0.05, with clustered DGP

                                        (1)                 (2)               (3)           (4)

       Unadjusted mhtreg              0.993                0.416            0.394         0.393
       Thm. 3.1 mhtreg                0.933                0.065            0.054         0.054
       Bonferroni                     0.925                0.058            0.051         0.046
       Holm                           0.926                0.058            0.051         0.046
       Num. observations            1,000               1,000               1,000         1,000
       Num. hypotheses                10                 10                   10           10
       Model std. errors         Homoskedastic       Homoskedastic        Clustered     Clustered
       Cluster bootstrap              N                   Y                   N             Y
       Notes: Table reports the fraction of 2,000 simulations where at least one null hypothesis in a
      family of ten hypotheses was rejected. All hypotheses are true. Bootstaps are performed with
      2,000 replications.


E     Additional Figures and Tables
This section provides additional figures and tables that support our analysis. It also contains
all analyses that we pre-specify in the different PAPs. We briefly summarize the results here.


Figures
Figure E.1 shows how migrants evaluate the old and the new PDOS. Immediately after each
session, CFO asks migrants to complete a feedback form. All PDOS attendees, not only
those who were part of our sample, received these feedback forms. Feedback is anonymous,
so we cannot link it with survey responses. We analyze all feedback forms that CFO collected
during the randomized implementation period. The new PDOS receives higher ratings on
almost every aspect, in particular on the usefulness of various topics and the quality of the
slides and the written material.


Summary Statistics and Balance Tests
Tables E.1, E.2 and E.3 provide summary statistics and balance tests of baseline charac-
teristics and outcome variables by treatment status. They show that there are no major
differences in baseline characteristics of study participants between different treatment con-
ditions. Consistent with the main results, they also show that study participants in the
treatment group have fewer travel-related problems and a lower value of the network size


                                                    25
index.


Short-term Effects
Tables E.4-E.13 present additional results using data from the short-term survey. Tables
E.4, E.5 and E.6 examine a range of potential attrition problems. They show that treatment
status does not predict a migrant's re-interview status in various ways.
Tables E.7 shows that our main results hold when we exclude proxy reports and restrict the
analysis to directly reported data.
Tables E.8 and E.9 show short-term effects of the new PDOS on the component variables
of the travel and network size index. The incidence of travel-related problems is lower for
every single indicator in the treatment group, significantly so for having missed a flight
and problems with authorities in the Philippines. The new PDOS significantly reduces the
number of friends and also makes study participants less likely to have received support from
an association.
Tables E.10, E.11 and E.12 test for effect heterogeneity by education (below college degree
vs college degree or higher), gender, and baseline knowledge about the U.S. (share of correct
answers on different aspects of the U.S., split at the median). To do so, we interact the
treatment status with the respective variable of interest. We find limited evidence for effect
heterogeneity along these dimensions. The new PDOS improves settlement and subjective
wellbeing for study participants with a college degree. All other interaction coefficients do
not point towards statistically significant differences.
Table E.13 examines a few mechanisms through which the new PDOS might affect our main
outcomes. We first look at employment-related mechanisms. The employment module has
a negative effect on the job-search behavior of study participants. This result is surprising
because the employment module provides migrants with information on how to get their
qualifications recognized and explicitly encourages migrants to do so. At the same time,
the employment module improves the job-search knowledge of study participants. We also
find that the new PDOS affects how migrants establish networks in the U.S. (the index
summarizes whether a migrant has had contact with a Filipino or non-Filipino association
in the U.S. since arrival and whether the migrant has enrolled in an English language class).
There is no evidence that migrants attending the new PDOS are more likely to have discussed
the amount of remittances with their family and agreed on an amount. The new PDOS
explicitly encourages migrants to do so in order to manage financial expectations on both
sides.


                                             26
Long-term Effects
Tables E.14-E.28 present additional results using data from the long-term survey. When the
long-term datum is not available, we replace it with the mid-term or short-term value, in
that order. Our presentation follows the same structure as the presentation of short-term
effects. We start by examining potential attrition problems. As before, we do not find that
treatment status predicts a migrant's re-interview status (Tables E.14, E.15 and E.16).
Tables E.17 shows that our main results hold when we exclude proxy reports and restrict
the analysis to directly reported data.
Table E.18 shows long-term effects of the new PDOS on the component variables of the
network size index. We still find that the new PDOS significantly reduces the number of
friends. The effect on the rate of contacting an association remains negative but ceases to
be statistically significant.
Tables E.19, E.20 and E.21 test for effect heterogeneity along education, gender, and baseline
knowledge about the U.S.. Again, we find little effect heterogeneity. The only exception is
that the new PDOS improves subjective wellbeing for study participants with a college
degree.
Our main analysis is based on the first PAP of September 2014. We also registered subsequent
PAPs to guide analysis of the mid-term survey data (submitted July 19, 2015) and final
survey data (submitted July 28, 2016). These latter two PAPs add additional hypotheses
related to employment and the characteristics of networks. For completeness, we show
the main results from these two PAPs in this appendix. Our conclusions are robust to to
estimating longer-run impacts using methods from longer-run PAPs. Most importantly, we
also find that the new PDOS significantly reduces network size (column 3 of Table E.22).
However, the effect ceases to be significant after adjustment for multiple hypothesis testing
(adjusted p-value 0.21).
In the long-run PAP, we distinguish between Filipino and non-Filipino friends and acquain-
tances as well as close friends. Table E.23 shows long-term effects of the new PDOS on these
components of the network size index. The treatment particularly reduces the number of
Filipino friends and acquaintances and close friends. The effect is negative for non-Filipino
friends, but not statistically significant. We do not find that the new PDOS affects the type
of networks that migrants build in the U.S. (column 4 of Table E.22). The corresponding
index is defined as a STE that summarizes whether the two closest new contacts in the U.S.
have a college degree or higher and whether they are of non-Filipino ethnicity, whether the
migrant has visited people of U.S. origin in their home, whether the migrant has received vis-
itors of U.S. origin, and how often the migrant has received everyday favors from non-Filipino

                                             27
individuals. Similarly, the new PDOS has no effect on any other outcome domain.
Table E.25 tests for spillover effects on family members in the Philippines. We look at a range
of outcomes: (i) an index that summarizes the respondents' perceived situation of the migrant
in the U.S. in terms of meeting new people, social life, language skills, employment, degree
recognition, adjusting to culture in the U.S., adjusting to weather in the U.S., dealing with
U.S. authorities, housing, and finances, (ii) family members' intention to travel to the U.S.,
(iii) family members' intention to emigrate to the U.S., (iv) respondents' perception that it
would be good for young household members to live in the U.S., (v) respondents' perceived
ease of living and finding a job in the U.S. her/himself, (vi) an index that summarizes
respondents' perceived effect of migrant's emigration on the household in terms of financial
security, standard of living, housing, health, education, family life, social life, and social
status, (vii) the inverse hyperbolic sine amount of remittances received by the household.
We find no evidence for spillover effects.
Table E.26 looks at secondary outcomes and mechanisms. It shows that the new PDOS, with
or without employment module, does not affect the use of welfare programs in the U.S. or
employment quality. There is also no evidence that the treatment helps migrants to initiate
and complete the process of having their qualifications recognized.
Finally, we present results using data from the mid-term survey, following the short-term
PAP (Table E.27) and the medium-term PAP (E.28). When the medium-term datum is
not available, we replace it with the mid-term value. As before, we find that the new
PDOS significantly reduces network size. However, the effect ceases to be significant after
adjustment for multiple hypothesis testing.




                                              28
                 Overall usefulness
                Travel and customs
                            Housing
                  Education system
                      Health system
                Cultural differences
                      Migrant rights
              Remittances channels
    Philippine government services
         Discussion and interaction
                    Quality of slides
         Quality of written material
     Competence of PDOS officer
           Time allotment per topic
         Courtesy of PDOS officer
                     Physical set-up
         Cleanliness and orderliness

                                        0   10     20      30      40       50       60     70
                                            % of migrants who gave best possible feedback

                                                          Old PDOS
                                                          New PDOS (either version)



       Figure E.1: Share of migrants giving best possible feedback right after PDOS
Note: Based on administrative feedback forms that migrants complete immediately after each
PDOS. All PDOS attendees, not only those who are part of our sample, receive these feedback
forms. Migrants rate various aspects of the PDOS on a scale from 1 (very poor) to 5 (excellent).
On average, both the old and new PDOS receive very positive feedback. The figure therefore focuses
on the share of migrants who give the best possible rating.




                                                29
     Table E.1: Average baseline characteristics and main short- and long-term outcomes by treatment status (old PDOS vs new
     PDOS)

                                                                                                Old PDOS     New PDOS       All migrants    p-value
                     Baseline characteristics
                     Age                                                                          33.073        33.391         33.266        0.558
                     Male                                                                         0.415         0.478           0.453        0.027
                     Vocational degree                                                            0.072         0.082           0.078        0.521
                     College degree                                                                0.465        0.473          0.470         0.787
                     Migrates alone                                                               0.511         0.491           0.499        0.485
                     Migrates to California                                                       0.383         0.429           0.411        0.106
                     Migrates to Hawaii                                                            0.186        0.154           0.167        0.147
                     Daily internet user                                                           0.641        0.601           0.617        0.153
                     English skills (0-1)                                                         0.728         0.728           0.728        0.971
                     Has job in the US                                                             0.202        0.170           0.182        0.156
                     Outcomes at first follow-up interview (after about 7 months in the US)
                     Reinterviewed1                                                               0.866          0.868          0.867        0.934




30
                     Proxy interview                                                              0.387          0.415          0.404        0.332
                     Log days in the US                                                            5.210        5.222          5.217         0.601
                     Travel-related problems (0-1)                                                 0.020         0.008          0.013        0.025
                     Settlement index (0-1)                                                        0.590         0.611          0.603        0.314
                     Employment index (STE)                                                       -0.000        -0.057         -0.035        0.468
                     Network size index (STE)                                                      0.000        -0.175         -0.105        0.002
                     Subjective wellbeing index (STE)                                              0.000        -0.022         -0.013        0.769
                     Outcomes at endline interview (after about 30 months in the US)
                     Reinterviewed2                                                               0.625         0.605          0.613         0.477
                     Proxy interview                                                              0.493         0.512          0.504         0.516
                     Log days in the US                                                            6.429        6.455          6.445         0.440
                     Settlement index (0-1)                                                        0.797         0.793         0.795         0.855
                     Employment index (STE)                                                       -0.027        -0.119         -0.082        0.265
                     Network size index (STE)                                                     -0.067        -0.188         -0.139        0.033
                     Subjective wellbeing index (STE)                                             -0.009        0.026          0.012         0.502
                     Note: The last column provides p-values from an F-test on equality of means of the respective variable between the two groups in
                    columns 1 and 2.
     Table E.2: Average baseline characteristics and main short-term and long-term outcomes by treatment status (old PDOS vs
     new PDOS with and without employment module)

                                                                               Old PDOS      New PDOS with emp module         New PDOS without emp module   All migrants   p-value
      Baseline characteristics
      Age                                                                        33.073                  33.193                            33.620             33.266       0.704
      Male                                                                       0.415                   0.467                              0.490              0.453       0.072
      Vocational degree                                                          0.072                   0.070                              0.095             0.078        0.408
      College degree                                                              0.465                   0.504                            0.437              0.470        0.177
      Migrates alone                                                             0.511                   0.521                              0.457              0.499       0.164
      Migrates to California                                                     0.383                   0.424                              0.435              0.411       0.258
      Migrates to Hawaii                                                          0.186                  0.143                              0.167             0.167        0.216
      Daily internet user                                                         0.641                  0.603                              0.599             0.617        0.359
      English skills (0-1)                                                       0.728                   0.736                              0.719             0.728        0.364
      Has job in the US                                                           0.202                  0.174                              0.164             0.182        0.339
      Outcomes at first follow-up interview (after about 7 months in the US)




31
      Reinterviewed1                                                              0.866                   0.850                            0.889                0.867      0.273
      Proxy interview                                                             0.387                   0.397                            0.435                0.404      0.362
      Log days in the US                                                           5.210                  5.206                            5.238                5.217      0.422
      Travel-related problems (0-1)                                                0.020                  0.007                             0.010              0.013       0.073
      Settlement index (0-1)                                                       0.590                 0.610                              0.612               0.603      0.602
      Employment index (STE)                                                      -0.000                 -0.096                            -0.014              -0.035      0.527
      Network size index (STE)                                                     0.000                 -0.150                            -0.204              -0.105      0.004
      Subjective wellbeing index (STE)                                             0.000                 -0.058                            0.019               -0.013      0.697
      Outcomes at endline interview (after about 30 months in the US)
      Reinterviewed2                                                              0.625                   0.588                            0.624                0.613      0.470
      Proxy interview                                                             0.493                   0.508                            0.515                0.504      0.796
      Log days in the US                                                           6.429                  6.439                            6.473                6.445      0.521
      Settlement index (0-1)                                                       0.797                 0.803                             0.782                0.795      0.654
      Employment index (STE)                                                      -0.027                 -0.146                            -0.090              -0.082      0.474
      Network size index (STE)                                                    -0.067                 -0.162                            -0.218              -0.139      0.063
      Subjective wellbeing index (STE)                                            -0.009                  0.030                            0.022                0.012      0.788
     Note: The last column provides p-values from an F-test on equality of means of the respective variable between the three groups in columns 1-3.
     Table E.3: Average baseline characteristics and main short-term and long-term outcomes by treatment status (old PDOS vs
     new PDOS with and without association email)

                                                                               Old PDOS      New PDOS with ass email      New PDOS without ass email   All migrants   p-value
      Baseline characteristics
      Age                                                                        33.073                31.598                         33.062             32.659       0.085
      Male                                                                       0.415                  0.474                          0.478              0.447       0.140
      Vocational degree                                                          0.072                  0.100                          0.063             0.078        0.269
      College degree                                                              0.465                 0.488                         0.530              0.487        0.246
      Migrates alone                                                             0.511                  0.467                          0.498              0.496       0.495
      Migrates to California                                                     0.383                  0.557                          0.498              0.459       0.000
      Migrates to Hawaii                                                          0.186                0.137                          0.190              0.173        0.134
      Daily internet user                                                         0.641                0.698                          0.648              0.658        0.235
      English skills (0-1)                                                       0.728                  0.735                          0.758             0.737        0.061
      Has job in the US                                                           0.202                0.179                          0.138              0.180        0.081
      Outcomes at first follow-up interview (after about 7 months in the US)




32
      Reinterviewed1                                                              0.866                 0.876                          0.838               0.862      0.431
      Proxy interview                                                             0.387                 0.395                          0.415               0.396      0.764
      Log days in the US                                                           5.210               5.225                           5.232              5.219       0.725
      Travel-related problems (0-1)                                                0.020               0.005                           0.012               0.014      0.010
      Settlement index (0-1)                                                       0.590                0.596                          0.656               0.607      0.067
      Employment index (STE)                                                      -0.000               -0.118                          0.022              -0.027      0.403
      Network size index (STE)                                                     0.000               -0.136                         -0.184              -0.080      0.034
      Subjective wellbeing index (STE)                                             0.000               0.040                          -0.133              -0.018      0.327
      Outcomes at endline interview (after about 30 months in the US)
      Reinterviewed2                                                              0.625                 0.608                         0.569               0.607       0.342
      Proxy interview                                                             0.493                 0.464                         0.502               0.487       0.631
      Log days in the US                                                           6.429               6.428                          6.439               6.431       0.974
      Settlement index (0-1)                                                       0.797                0.796                         0.813               0.800       0.752
      Employment index (STE)                                                      -0.027                0.003                         -0.090              -0.032      0.755
      Network size index (STE)                                                    -0.067               -0.145                         -0.196              -0.119      0.236
      Subjective wellbeing index (STE)                                            -0.009               -0.027                         0.057               0.002       0.515
     Note: The last column provides p-values from an F-test on equality of means of the respective variable between the three groups in columns 1-3.
                                          Table E.4: First follow-up interview: Attrition and mode of re-interview
                                                (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)            (8)            (9)
                                            Successful     Successful     Successful       Direct         Direct         Direct         Proxy          Proxy          Proxy
                                           re-interview   re-interview   re-interview   re-interview   re-interview   re-interview   re-interview   re-interview   re-interview
      New PDOS (either                        0.001          0.019          -0.030         -0.025         -0.047         -0.034         0.025           0.047         0.034
      version)                               (0.021)        (0.024)        (0.027)        (0.028)        (0.035)        (0.041)        (0.028)        (0.035)        (0.041)
      New PDOS with emp.                                     -0.034                                        0.042                                       -0.042
      module                                                (0.029)                                      (0.039)                                      (0.039)
      New PDOS with ass.                                                     0.033                                        0.028                                       -0.028
      email                                                                (0.027)                                      (0.037)                                      (0.037)
      Age                                     -0.004         -0.004         -0.015          0.009          0.009          0.008         -0.009         -0.009         -0.008
                                             (0.008)        (0.008)        (0.011)        (0.013)        (0.013)        (0.014)        (0.013)        (0.013)        (0.014)
      Age squared                              0.000          0.000          0.000         -0.000         -0.000         -0.000          0.000          0.000          0.000
                                             (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)
      Male                                    -0.002         -0.003         -0.002          0.001          0.002         -0.000         -0.001         -0.002          0.000
                                             (0.018)        (0.018)        (0.022)        (0.029)        (0.029)        (0.033)        (0.029)        (0.029)        (0.033)
      Vocational education                    0.061           0.060          0.119         -0.023         -0.021         -0.047          0.023          0.021          0.047
                                             (0.029)        (0.029)        (0.026)        (0.055)        (0.055)        (0.061)        (0.055)        (0.055)        (0.061)
      College education                       0.006           0.007          0.019         -0.008         -0.009          0.008          0.008          0.009         -0.008
                                             (0.022)        (0.022)        (0.026)        (0.031)        (0.031)        (0.035)        (0.031)        (0.031)        (0.035)




33
      Migrates alone                          -0.015         -0.014         -0.022         -0.015         -0.016         -0.023         0.015          0.016          0.023
                                             (0.018)        (0.018)        (0.023)        (0.025)        (0.025)        (0.031)        (0.025)        (0.025)        (0.031)
      California                               0.002          0.002          0.019          0.011          0.012          0.016         -0.011         -0.012         -0.016
                                             (0.021)        (0.021)        (0.028)        (0.029)        (0.029)        (0.034)        (0.029)        (0.029)        (0.034)
      Hawaii                                  0.010           0.009         0.024           0.118          0.120          0.097         -0.118         -0.120         -0.097
                                             (0.029)        (0.029)        (0.035)        (0.037)        (0.037)        (0.043)        (0.037)        (0.037)        (0.043)
      Daily internet use                      -0.000         -0.001         -0.004          0.013         0.013           0.028         -0.013         -0.013         -0.028
                                             (0.019)        (0.019)        (0.024)        (0.036)        (0.036)        (0.042)        (0.036)        (0.036)        (0.042)
      English skills                          -0.010         -0.010         -0.010          0.001          0.000         -0.001         -0.001         -0.000          0.001
                                             (0.005)        (0.005)        (0.007)        (0.008)        (0.008)        (0.009)        (0.008)        (0.008)        (0.009)
      Has job in US                           0.033           0.033         0.037          -0.078         -0.079         -0.060          0.078          0.079          0.060
                                             (0.027)        (0.027)        (0.034)        (0.040)        (0.040)        (0.050)        (0.040)        (0.040)        (0.050)
      Constant                                1.026           1.025          1.176          0.467          0.468          0.454          0.533          0.532          0.546
                                             (0.150)        (0.150)        (0.193)        (0.216)        (0.215)        (0.253)        (0.216)        (0.215)        (0.253)
      F-statistic treatment variables=0       0.001          0.758          0.942          0.754          0.963          0.396          0.754          0.963          0.396
      p-value                                 0.975          0.471          0.393          0.387          0.385          0.674          0.387          0.385          0.674
      R2                                      0.011          0.012          0.024          0.014          0.015          0.011          0.014          0.015          0.011
      Observations                            1273           1273            902           1273           1273            902           1273           1273            902
     Note: The table reports OLS estimates. The column title shows the dependent variable. Standard errors clustered at the PDOS session level in parentheses. */**/***
     denote statistical significance at the 10/5/1 percent level.
                  Table E.5: First follow-up interview: Attrition by outcome domain
                                              (1)           (2)         (3)            (4)           (5)          (6)
                                                          Travel-
                                                          related
                                           Successful    problems    Settlement   Employment      Networks    Wellbeing
                                          re-interview   observed     observed     observed       observed    observed
      PANEL A
      New PDOS (either                       0.001         0.002       -0.033         -0.010        -0.018       -0.035
      version)                              (0.021)       (0.010)     (0.026)        (0.025)       (0.028)      (0.030)
      F-statistic treatment variables=0      0.001        0.030        1.687          0.170         0.391        1.395
      p-value                                0.975        0.862        0.197          0.681         0.533        0.240
      R2                                     0.011        0.014        0.017          0.121         0.017        0.019
      Observations                           1273         1104         1104           1104          1104         1104
      PANEL B
      New PDOS (either                        0.019         0.003      -0.044         -0.017        -0.039       -0.046
      version)                              (0.024)       (0.012)     (0.035)        (0.031)       (0.037)      (0.036)
      New PDOS with emp.                     -0.034        -0.003      0.020          0.013         0.041        0.021




34
      module                                (0.029)       (0.012)     (0.040)        (0.034)       (0.040)      (0.042)
      F-statistic treatment variables=0      0.758        0.040        0.901          0.159         0.635        0.841
      p-value                                0.471        0.961        0.409          0.853         0.532        0.434
      R2                                     0.012        0.014        0.017          0.121         0.018        0.019
      Observations                           1273         1104         1104           1104          1104         1104
      PANEL C
      New PDOS (either                       -0.030        -0.010      -0.079         -0.011        -0.038       -0.056
      version)                              (0.027)       (0.016)     (0.046)        (0.037)       (0.044)      (0.045)
      New PDOS with ass.                      0.033         0.012      0.050          -0.019        0.045         0.049
      email                                 (0.027)       (0.015)     (0.049)        (0.038)       (0.043)      (0.044)
      F-statistic treatment variables=0      0.942        0.321        1.465          0.388         0.572        0.840
      p-value                                0.393        0.726        0.236          0.680         0.566        0.435
      R2                                     0.024        0.016        0.020          0.121         0.014        0.018
      Observations                            902          777          777            777           777          777
      Note: The table reports OLS estimates. The column title shows the dependent variable. All regressions include the
     standard set of baseline control variables. Standard errors clustered at the PDOS session level in parentheses. Panel
     A/B/C refer to specifications based on equations 1/2/3, which we present in our empirical approach.
            Table E.6: First follow-up interview: Direct interview for observed outcome domain
                                                (1)               (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)
                                                                Direct
                                                             re-interview       Direct         Direct         Direct         Direct
                                                Direct          among        re-interview   re-interview   re-interview   re-interview
                                            re-interview    travel-related      among          among          among          among
                                               among          problems        settlement    employment       network       wellbeing
                                           re-interviewed      observed        observed       observed       observed       observed
      PANEL A
      New PDOS (either                         -0.029           -0.035          0.000          0.000          -0.028         0.000
      version)                                (0.031)          (0.030)         (0.032)          (.)          (0.021)          (.)
      F-statistic treatment variables=0        0.893            1.355           0.000            .            1.771            .
      p-value                                  0.347            0.247           0.996            .            0.186            .
      R2                                       0.018            0.019           0.013            .            0.032            .
      Observations                             1104             1077             728            362            614            578
      PANEL B
      New PDOS (either                         -0.044           -0.049          -0.008         0.000          -0.006         0.000
      version)                                (0.037)          (0.037)         (0.036)          (.)          (0.021)          (.)




35
      New PDOS with emp.                       0.028             0.026          0.016          0.000          -0.039         0.000
      module                                  (0.042)          (0.041)         (0.039)          (.)          (0.029)          (.)
      F-statistic treatment variables=0        0.716            0.903           0.081            .            1.360            .
      p-value                                  0.491            0.408           0.922            .            0.261            .
      R2                                       0.019            0.019           0.013            .            0.035            .
      Observations                             1104             1077             728            362            614            578
      PANEL C
      New PDOS (either                         -0.054           -0.050          0.001          0.000          -0.031         0.000
      version)                                (0.046)          (0.046)         (0.051)          (.)          (0.029)          (.)
      New PDOS with ass.                       0.048            0.042           0.044          0.000          0.004          0.000
      email                                   (0.043)          (0.042)         (0.049)          (.)          (0.033)          (.)
      F-statistic treatment variables=0        0.792            0.655           0.780            .            0.921            .
      p-value                                  0.456            0.521           0.461            .            0.401            .
      R2                                       0.018            0.017           0.009            .            0.053            .
      Observations                              777              755             515            263            436            411
     Note: The table reports OLS estimates. The column title shows the dependent variable. All regressions include the standard set of
     baseline control variables. Standard errors clustered at the PDOS session level in parentheses. Panel A/B/C refer to specifications
     based on equations 1/2/3, which we present in our empirical approach. Employment and wellbeing outcomes were only collected in
     direct interviews. Hence, we cannot report results for column 4 and 6.
36
     Table E.7: Short-term effects (after about seven months in the U.S.), direct interviews only

                                                       (1)               (2)            (3)           (4)          (5)
                                                                                                               Subjective
                                                     Travel-         Settlement    Employment      Network     wellbeing
                                                related problems       index         index          index        index
                                                      (0-1)             (0-1)        (STE)          (STE)        (STE)
           PANEL A
           New PDOS (either                           -0.010            0.038          -0.012        -0.181       -0.020
           version)                                  (0.007)           (0.019)        (0.070)       (0.059)      (0.076)
           MHT-adjusted p-value                       0.632             0.302          0.965         0.027        0.981
           Mean outcome control group                 0.021             0.535          -0.000        0.053        0.000
           R2                                         0.021             0.144          0.130         0.083        0.072
           Observations                                579               565            362           570          578
           PANEL B
           New PDOS (either                                                             0.016
           version)                                                                   (0.090)
           New PDOS with emp.                                                          -0.053
           module                                                                     (0.095)




37
           MHT-adjusted p-value treatment                                              0.868
           MHT-adjusted p-value
           interacted treatment                                                        0.927
           R2                                                                          0.130
           Observations                                                                 362
           PANEL C
           New PDOS (either                                                                          -0.232
           version)                                                                                 (0.081)
           New PDOS with ass.                                                                         0.076
           email                                                                                    (0.081)
           MHT-adjusted p-value treatment                                                            0.033
           MHT-adjusted p-value
           interacted treatment                                                                      0.844
           R2                                                                                        0.091
           Observations                                                                               406
           Note: The table reports OLS estimates. The column title shows the dependent variable. All regressions include
          the standard set of baseline control variables. Additional outcome-specific control variables are specified in the
          PAP. Standard errors clustered at the PDOS session level in parentheses. Panel A/B/C refer to specifications
          based on equations 1/2/3, which we present in our empirical approach. P-values adjusted for multiple hypothesis
          testing are computed using the procedure described in Appendix D.
     Table E.8: Short-term effects (after about 7 months in the U.S.): Components of travel-related-problems index

                                                        Index                                  Index components
                                                         (1)            (2)         (3)        (4)             (5)               (6)
                                                       Travel-
                                                  related problems    Missed     Luggage     Customs     PH authorities    US authorities
                                                        (0-1)         flight     problem     problem       problem           problem
                 PANEL A
                 New PDOS (either                       -0.012         -0.020     -0.015      -0.009          -0.009            -0.005




38
                 version)                              (0.006)        (0.011)    (0.010)     (0.007)         (0.005)           (0.005)
                 MHT-adjusted p-value                                  0.283      0.336       0.316           0.286             0.364
                 Mean outcome control group             0.020          0.038      0.024       0.019           0.012             0.009
                 R2                                     0.021          0.024      0.017       0.014           0.017             0.020
                 Observations                           1077           1077       1077        1077            1077              1077
                 Note: The table reports OLS estimates. The column title shows the dependent variable. All regressions include the
                standard set of baseline control variables. Additional outcome-specific control variables are specified in the PAP. Standard
                errors clustered at the PDOS session level in parentheses. Panel A/B/C refer to specifications based on equations 1/2/3,
                which we present in our empirical approach. P-values adjusted for multiple hypothesis testing are computed using the
                procedure described in Appendix D.
     Table E.9: Short-term effects (after about 7 months in the U.S.): Components of the network size index and alternative network
     measures
                                               Index                 Index components                                     Alternative network measures
                                                (1)              (2)                  (3)                  (4)                    (5)                 (6)              (7)
                                                           IHS nr of friends                       Logged nr of friends                        Nr of friends and
                                           Network size          and           Received support           and              Nr of friends and    acquaintances      Contacted
                                           index (STE)      acquaintances      from association      acquaintances          acquaintances      winsored at p90     association
       PANEL A
       New PDOS (either                        -0.169            -0.295              -0.032                -0.256                -3.437              -2.417           -0.050
       version)                               (0.056)           (0.124)             (0.014)               (0.102)               (1.035)             (0.757)          (0.025)
       MHT-adjusted p-value                                      0.104               0.123
       Mean outcome control group              0.000             2.424               0.049                 1.976                12.988              11.348            0.123
       R2                                      0.166             0.203               0.053                 0.199                0.124                0.147            0.056




39
       Observations                             614               614                 614                   614                  614                  614              608
       PANEL C
       New PDOS (either                        -0.223            -0.444              -0.035                -0.375                -3.677              -2.973           -0.106
       version)                               (0.078)           (0.181)             (0.021)               (0.149)               (1.286)             (0.991)          (0.029)
       New PDOS with ass.                      0.092             0.256               0.004                  0.210                 1.219              1.360            0.062
       email                                  (0.077)           (0.170)             (0.021)               (0.141)               (1.370)             (1.080)          (0.029)
       MHT-adjusted p-value treatment                            0.093               0.256
       MHT-adjusted p-value
       interacted treatment                                      0.233               0.848
       R2                                      0.165             0.206               0.064                 0.202                 0.134               0.156            0.102
       Observations                             436               436                 436                   436                   436                 436              431
       Note: The table reports OLS estimates. The column title shows the dependent variable. All regressions include the standard set of baseline control variables. Additional
      outcome-specific control variables are specified in the PAP. Standard errors clustered at the PDOS session level in parentheses. Panel A/B/C refer to specifications based
      on equations 1/2/3, which we present in our empirical approach. P-values adjusted for multiple hypothesis testing are computed using the procedure described in Appendix
      D. IHS is short for inverse hyperbolic sine.
     Table E.10: Short-term effects (after about 7 months in the U.S.): Impact heterogeneity by college degree

                                                         (1)              (2)            (3)          (4)          (5)
                                                                                                               Subjective
                                                        Travel-       Settlement    Employment     Network     wellbeing
                                                   related problems     index         index         index        index
                                                         (0-1)           (0-1)        (STE)         (STE)        (STE)
                    PANEL A
                    New PDOS (either                    -0.012           -0.010         -0.086       -0.116      -0.186
                    version)                           (0.007)          (0.024)        (0.099)      (0.066)     (0.094)
                    New PDOS x college                  0.002            0.082           0.166       -0.122      0.379
                    degree                             (0.011)          (0.038)        (0.155)      (0.099)     (0.147)
                    MHT-adjusted p-value
                    interaction                         0.892            0.216         0.710         0.682       0.097
                    Mean outcome control group          0.020            0.590         -0.000        0.000       0.000
                    R2                                  0.021            0.228          0.133        0.168       0.083
                    Observations                        1077              728            362          614         578
                    PANEL B
                    New PDOS (either                                                    -0.123
                    version)                                                           (0.130)
                    New PDOS with emp.                                                  0.076
                    module                                                             (0.126)
                    New PDOS x college                                                   0.303
                    degree                                                             (0.204)
                    New PDOS with emp.                                                  -0.267
                    module x college degree                                            (0.180)




40
                    MHT-adjusted p-value
                    interaction 1                                                      0.523
                    MHT-adjusted p-value
                    interaction 2                                                      0.570
                    R2                                                                 0.138
                    Observations                                                        362
                    PANEL C
                    New PDOS (either                                                                 -0.143
                    version)                                                                        (0.111)
                    New PDOS with ass.                                                               0.053
                    email                                                                           (0.094)
                    New PDOS x college                                                               -0.163
                    degree                                                                          (0.157)
                    New PDOS with ass.                                                               0.076
                    email x college degree                                                          (0.144)
                    MHT-adjusted p-value
                    interaction 1                                                                    0.626
                    MHT-adjusted p-value
                    interaction 2                                                                    0.851
                    R2                                                                               0.167
                    Observations                                                                      436
                   Note: The table reports OLS estimates. The column title shows the dependent variable. All regressions
                  include the standard set of baseline control variables. Additional outcome-specific control variables are
                  specified in the PAP. Standard errors clustered at the PDOS session level in parentheses. Panel A/B/C
                  refer to specifications based on equations 1/2/3, which we present in our empirical approach. P-values
                  adjusted for multiple hypothesis testing are computed using the procedure described in Appendix D.
     Table E.11: Short-term effects (after about 7 months in the U.S.): Impact heterogeneity by gender

                                                      (1)              (2)            (3)          (4)          (5)
                                                                                                            Subjective
                                                     Travel-       Settlement    Employment     Network     wellbeing
                                                related problems     index         index         index        index
                                                      (0-1)           (0-1)        (STE)         (STE)        (STE)
                PANEL A
                New PDOS (either                     -0.007            0.043         -0.004       -0.155      -0.054
                version)                            (0.008)          (0.024)        (0.088)      (0.069)     (0.101)
                New PDOS x male                      -0.010           -0.034         -0.022       -0.032       0.079
                                                    (0.011)          (0.038)        (0.133)      (0.102)     (0.155)
                MHT-adjusted p-value
                interaction                          0.961            0.973         0.877         0.985       0.994
                Mean outcome control group           0.020            0.590         -0.000        0.000       0.000
                R2                                   0.022            0.224          0.130        0.166       0.072
                Observations                         1077              728            362          614         578
                PANEL B
                New PDOS (either                                                     -0.007
                version)                                                            (0.116)
                New PDOS with emp.                                                   0.006
                module                                                              (0.111)
                New PDOS x male                                                       0.047
                                                                                    (0.142)
                New PDOS with emp.                                                   -0.132
                module x male                                                       (0.157)




41
                MHT-adjusted p-value
                interaction 1                                                       0.992
                MHT-adjusted p-value
                interaction 2                                                       0.945
                R2                                                                  0.132
                Observations                                                         362
                PANEL C
                New PDOS (either                                                                  -0.255
                version)                                                                         (0.118)
                New PDOS with ass.                                                                0.109
                email                                                                            (0.116)
                New PDOS x male                                                                    0.073
                                                                                                 (0.165)
                New PDOS with ass.                                                                -0.034
                email x male                                                                     (0.155)
                MHT-adjusted p-value
                interaction 1                                                                     0.990
                MHT-adjusted p-value
                interaction 2                                                                     0.970
                R2                                                                                0.166
                Observations                                                                       436
                Note: The table reports OLS estimates. The column title shows the dependent variable. All regressions
               include the standard set of baseline control variables. Additional outcome-specific control variables are
               specified in the PAP. Standard errors clustered at the PDOS session level in parentheses. Panel A/B/C
               refer to specifications based on equations 1/2/3, which we present in our empirical approach. P-values
               adjusted for multiple hypothesis testing are computed using the procedure described in Appendix D.
     Table E.12: Short-term effects (after about 7 months in the U.S.): Impact heterogeneity by baseline knowledge

                                                                        (1)              (2)            (3)           (4)          (5)
                                                                                                                               Subjective
                                                                      Travel-        Settlement    Employment      Network     wellbeing
                                                                 related problems      index         index          index        index
                                                                       (0-1)            (0-1)        (STE)          (STE)        (STE)
                 PANEL A
                 New PDOS (either                                      -0.011           0.056           0.002        -0.268       -0.015
                 version)                                             (0.008)          (0.029)        (0.114)       (0.092)      (0.115)
                 New PDOS x                                            -0.000           -0.049         -0.025        0.171        -0.010
                 below-median baseline knowledge                      (0.009)          (0.036)        (0.161)       (0.107)      (0.143)
                 MHT-adjusted p-value
                 interaction                                           0.980            0.683          0.998         0.605        0.996
                 Mean outcome control group                            0.020            0.590          -0.000        0.000        0.000
                 R2                                                    0.021            0.226          0.135         0.174        0.075
                 Observations                                          1077              728            362           614          578
                 PANEL B
                 New PDOS (either                                                                       0.056
                 version)                                                                             (0.141)
                 New PDOS with emp.                                                                    -0.100
                 module                                                                               (0.145)
                 New PDOS x                                                                            -0.067
                 below-median baseline knowledge                                                      (0.190)
                 New PDOS with emp.                                                                     0.078
                 module x below-median baseline knowledge                                             (0.193)




42
                 MHT-adjusted p-value
                 interaction 1                                                                         0.990
                 MHT-adjusted p-value
                 interaction 2                                                                         0.998
                 R2                                                                                    0.136
                 Observations                                                                           362
                 PANEL C
                 New PDOS (either                                                                                    -0.263
                 version)                                                                                           (0.129)
                 New PDOS with ass.                                                                                  -0.023
                 email                                                                                              (0.113)
                 New PDOS x                                                                                           0.064
                 below-median baseline knowledge                                                                    (0.173)
                 New PDOS with ass.                                                                                   0.203
                 email x below-median baseline knowledge                                                            (0.144)
                 MHT-adjusted p-value
                 interaction 1                                                                                       0.996
                 MHT-adjusted p-value
                 interaction 2                                                                                       0.683
                 R2                                                                                                  0.178
                 Observations                                                                                         436
                 Note: The table reports OLS estimates. The column title shows the dependent variable. All regressions include the
                standard set of baseline control variables. Additional outcome-specific control variables are specified in the PAP. Standard
                errors clustered at the PDOS session level in parentheses. Panel A/B/C refer to specifications based on equations 1/2/3,
                which we present in our empirical approach. P-values adjusted for multiple hypothesis testing are computed using the
                procedure described in Appendix D.
             Table E.13: Short-term effects (after about 7 months in the U.S.): Mechanisms

                                           (1)                  (2)                        (3)                      (4)
                                        Job search           Job search           Network establishment      Agreed with hh on
                                       index (STE)     knowledge index (STE)          index (STE)           amount of remittances
      PANEL A
      New PDOS (either                    -0.133                -0.029                     -0.082                    -0.023
      version)                           (0.103)               (0.062)                    (0.043)                   (0.028)
      Mean outcome control group          -0.000                0.000                     -0.000                     0.213
      R2                                   0.163                0.156                      0.064                     0.036
      Observations                          280                  579                        788                      1077
      PANEL B
      New PDOS (either                    -0.033                -0.125
      version)                           (0.127)               (0.070)




43
      New PDOS with emp.                  -0.184                 0.179
      module                             (0.110)               (0.071)
      R2                                  0.172                 0.163
      Observations                         280                   579
      PANEL C
      New PDOS (either                                                                     -0.081
      version)                                                                            (0.064)
      New PDOS with ass.                                                                   -0.003
      email                                                                               (0.055)
      R2                                                                                   0.077
      Observations                                                                          552
      Note: The table reports OLS estimates. The column title shows the dependent variable. All regressions include the standard set
     of baseline control variables. Additional outcome-specific control variables are specified in the PAP. Standard errors clustered
     at the PDOS session level in parentheses. Panel A/B/C refer to specifications based on equations 1/2/3, which we present in
     our empirical approach.
                                            Table E.14: Endline interview: Attrition and mode of re-interview
                                               (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)            (8)            (9)
                                           Successful     Successful     Successful       Direct         Direct         Direct         Proxy          Proxy          Proxy
                                          re-interview   re-interview   re-interview   re-interview   re-interview   re-interview   re-interview   re-interview   re-interview
      New PDOS (either                       -0.017         -0.010         -0.031         -0.036         -0.037         -0.025         0.022           0.025         0.027
      version)                              (0.015)        (0.018)        (0.022)        (0.025)        (0.033)        (0.036)        (0.030)        (0.035)        (0.044)
      New PDOS with emp.                                    -0.013                                        0.003                                       -0.005
      module                                               (0.022)                                      (0.036)                                      (0.037)
      New PDOS with ass.                                                    0.015                                        0.004                                       -0.041
      email                                                               (0.024)                                      (0.035)                                      (0.040)
      Age                                     0.013          0.013          0.004          0.011          0.011         0.008          0.005           0.005          0.005
                                            (0.007)        (0.007)        (0.009)        (0.012)        (0.012)        (0.014)        (0.012)        (0.012)        (0.014)
      Age squared                            -0.000         -0.000         -0.000         -0.000         -0.000         -0.000         -0.000         -0.000         -0.000
                                            (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)
      Male                                   -0.020         -0.021         -0.017         0.004           0.004          0.003         -0.052         -0.052         -0.048
                                            (0.014)        (0.014)        (0.019)        (0.027)        (0.027)        (0.031)        (0.028)        (0.028)        (0.035)
      Vocational degree                       0.019         0.019           0.044         -0.007         -0.007         -0.018         -0.012         -0.012         -0.013
                                            (0.019)        (0.019)        (0.022)        (0.050)        (0.050)        (0.056)        (0.058)        (0.058)        (0.067)
      College degree                         -0.017         -0.016         -0.016          0.008          0.008          0.015         -0.066         -0.066         -0.055
                                            (0.017)        (0.017)        (0.021)        (0.029)        (0.029)        (0.035)        (0.030)        (0.031)        (0.037)




44
      Migrates alone                         -0.004         -0.003         -0.017         -0.026         -0.026         -0.028         0.034          0.034          0.031
                                            (0.015)        (0.015)        (0.019)        (0.025)        (0.025)        (0.031)        (0.031)        (0.030)        (0.034)
      California                              0.019          0.019          0.032          0.027          0.027          0.026         -0.010         -0.010         -0.016
                                            (0.017)        (0.017)        (0.024)        (0.025)        (0.025)        (0.030)        (0.029)        (0.029)        (0.037)
      Hawaii                                 0.038           0.038          0.055          0.095          0.095          0.076         -0.049         -0.049         -0.025
                                            (0.021)        (0.021)        (0.030)        (0.036)        (0.036)        (0.045)        (0.045)        (0.045)        (0.054)
      Daily internet use                     -0.021         -0.021         -0.019         -0.021         -0.021         -0.020         -0.036         -0.036         -0.023
                                            (0.016)        (0.016)        (0.021)        (0.032)        (0.032)        (0.037)        (0.036)        (0.036)        (0.043)
      English skills                         -0.097         -0.096         -0.093         -0.007         -0.007         -0.054         -0.095         -0.095         -0.058
                                            (0.055)        (0.055)        (0.074)        (0.088)        (0.088)        (0.107)        (0.099)        (0.098)        (0.124)
      Has job in US                          0.040           0.040          0.044         -0.043         -0.043         -0.019          0.037          0.037          0.034
                                            (0.020)        (0.020)        (0.025)        (0.034)        (0.034)        (0.036)        (0.037)        (0.037)        (0.042)
      Constant                                0.798          0.798          0.911          0.557          0.557          0.598          0.525          0.525          0.503
                                            (0.125)        (0.125)        (0.164)        (0.204)        (0.203)        (0.239)        (0.192)        (0.192)        (0.240)
      F-statistic treatment variables=0      1.249          0.709          0.961          2.105          1.053          0.310          0.530          0.283          0.531
      p-value                                0.266          0.495          0.386          0.150          0.352          0.734          0.468          0.754          0.590
      R2                                     0.024          0.025          0.027          0.011          0.011          0.008          0.013          0.013          0.008
      Observations                           1273           1273            902           1273           1273            902           1273           1273            902
     Note: The table reports OLS estimates. The column title shows the dependent variable. Standard errors clustered at the PDOS session level in parentheses. */**/***
     denote statistical significance at the 10/5/1 percent level.
                  Table E.15: Endline interview: Attrition by outcome domain
                                               (1)           (2)           (3)             (4)            (5)
                                           Successful    Settlement    Employment      Network size    Wellbeing
                                          re-interview    observed      observed        observed       observed
      PANEL A
      New PDOS (either                        -0.017        -0.019         -0.021          -0.015         -0.005
      version)                               (0.015)       (0.021)        (0.024)         (0.026)        (0.024)
      F-statistic treatment variables=0       1.249         0.851          0.785           0.325         0.037
      p-value                                 0.266         0.358          0.378           0.570         0.848
      R2                                      0.024         0.008          0.249           0.010         0.021
      Observations                            1273          1176           1176            1176          1176
      PANEL B
      New PDOS (either                        -0.010        -0.038         -0.019          -0.016         0.006
      version)                               (0.018)       (0.027)        (0.031)         (0.035)       (0.027)
      New PDOS with emp.                      -0.013         0.035         -0.003           0.003        -0.020
      module                                 (0.022)       (0.029)        (0.036)         (0.036)       (0.027)




45
      F-statistic treatment variables=0       0.709         1.045          0.399           0.163         0.276
      p-value                                 0.495         0.355          0.672           0.850         0.759
      R2                                      0.025         0.009          0.249           0.010         0.021
      Observations                            1273          1176           1176            1176          1176
      PANEL C
      New PDOS (either                        -0.031        0.001          -0.056          -0.031         -0.011
      version)                               (0.022)       (0.033)        (0.035)         (0.041)        (0.033)
      New PDOS with ass.                       0.015        -0.040         0.074            0.035          0.006
      email                                  (0.024)       (0.035)        (0.035)         (0.039)        (0.034)
      F-statistic treatment variables=0       0.961         0.996          2.397           0.429         0.050
      p-value                                 0.386         0.373          0.096           0.652         0.951
      R2                                      0.027         0.009          0.235           0.013         0.023
      Observations                             902           823            823             823           823
      Note: The table reports OLS estimates. The column title shows the dependent variable. All regressions
     include the standard set of baseline control variables. Standard errors clustered at the PDOS session level in
     parentheses. Panel A/B/C refer to specifications based on equations 1/2/3, which we present in our empirical
     approach.
        Table E.16: Endline interview: Direct interview for observed outcome domain
                                                (1)              (2)            (3)             (4)           (5)
                                                                                              Direct
                                                               Direct         Direct       re-interview      Direct
                                                Direct      re-interview   re-interview       among       re-interview
                                            re-interview       among          among          network         among
                                               among         settlement    employment           size       wellbeing
                                           re-interviewed     observed       observed        observed       observed
      PANEL A
      New PDOS (either                         -0.046           -0.023         -0.031         -0.018         -0.040
      version)                                (0.026)          (0.025)        (0.026)        (0.014)        (0.024)
      F-statistic treatment variables=0        3.193            0.859          1.513          1.621          2.775
      p-value                                  0.077            0.356          0.221          0.206          0.099
      R2                                       0.017            0.012          0.020          0.016          0.010
      Observations                             1176              989            601            751            917
      PANEL B
      New PDOS (either                         -0.045            0.003         -0.011         -0.000         -0.042
      version)                                (0.034)          (0.033)        (0.029)        (0.015)        (0.031)




46
      New PDOS with emp.                       -0.002           -0.048         -0.038         -0.033         0.005
      module                                  (0.037)          (0.034)        (0.033)        (0.018)        (0.036)
      F-statistic treatment variables=0        1.616            1.618          1.309          2.049          1.390
      p-value                                  0.203            0.203          0.274          0.134          0.253
      R2                                       0.017            0.014          0.022          0.019          0.010
      Observations                             1176              989            601            751            917
      PANEL C
      New PDOS (either                         -0.039           -0.039         -0.008         -0.006         -0.028
      version)                                (0.038)          (0.037)        (0.038)        (0.020)        (0.035)
      New PDOS with ass.                       0.010            0.055          -0.024         -0.012         -0.007
      email                                   (0.040)          (0.039)        (0.045)        (0.026)        (0.040)
      F-statistic treatment variables=0        0.639            1.010          0.433          0.434          0.719
      p-value                                  0.530            0.368          0.650          0.649          0.490
      R2                                       0.015            0.018          0.018          0.027          0.010
      Observations                              823              696            428            533            637
      Note: The table reports OLS estimates. The column title shows the dependent variable. All regressions include
     the standard set of baseline control variables. Standard errors clustered at the PDOS session level in parentheses.
     Panel A/B/C refer to specifications based on equations 1/2/3, which we present in our empirical approach.
     Table E.17: Long-term effects (after about 30 months in the U.S.), direct interviews only

                                                           (1)             (2)           (3)          (4)
                                                                                      Network     Subjective
                                                       Settlement     Employment        size      wellbeing
                                                         index          index          index        index
                                                          (0-1)         (STE)          (STE)        (STE)
                 PANEL A
                 New PDOS (either                         0.018          0.050          -0.134       0.051
                 version)                                (0.021)        (0.094)        (0.065)      (0.062)
                 MHT-adjusted p-value treatment           0.877          0.844         0.264         0.805
                 Mean outcome control group               0.750          0.031         -0.021        0.005
                 R2                                       0.337          0.113         0.092         0.044
                 Observations                              527            399           526           527
                 PANEL B
                 New PDOS (either                                         0.057
                 version)                                               (0.107)
                 New PDOS with emp.                                      -0.015
                 module                                                 (0.098)




47
                 MHT-adjusted p-value treatment                          0.847
                 MHT-adjusted p-value
                 interacted treatment                                    0.876
                 R2                                                      0.113
                 Observations                                             399
                 PANEL C
                 New PDOS (either                                                       -0.252
                 version)                                                              (0.103)
                 New PDOS with ass.                                                      0.139
                 email                                                                 (0.105)
                 MHT-adjusted p-value treatment                                         0.105
                 MHT-adjusted p-value
                 interacted treatment                                                   0.669
                 R2                                                                     0.121
                 Observations                                                            381
                 Note: The table reports OLS estimates. The column title shows the dependent variable. All
                regressions include the standard set of baseline control variables. Additional outcome-specific
                control variables are specified in the PAP. Standard errors clustered at the PDOS session
                level in parentheses. Panel A/B/C refer to specifications based on equations 1/2/3, which
                we present in our empirical approach. P-values adjusted for multiple hypothesis testing are
                computed using the procedure described in Appendix D.
     Table E.18: Long-term effects (after about 30 months in the U.S.): Components of the network size index and alternative
     network measures
                                                      Index              Index components                            Alternative network measures
                                                       (1)              (2)               (3)               (4)                    (5)                 (6)
                                                                  IHS nr of friends                 Logged nr of friends                        Nr of friends and
                                                  Network size          and           Contacted            and              Nr of friends and    acquaintances
                                                  index (STE)      acquaintances      association     acquaintances          acquaintances      winsored at p90
              PANEL A
              New PDOS (either                        -0.136            -0.176           -0.015             -0.160                0.373               -4.377
              version)                               (0.053)           (0.097)          (0.036)            (0.086)               (9.081)             (2.554)
              MHT-adjusted p-value                                      0.336            0.892
              Mean outcome control group              -0.067            4.001            0.657              3.398                55.350              46.238
              R2                                       0.108            0.383            0.192              0.383                 0.089              0.280




48
              Observations                              751              751              751                751                   751                751
              PANEL C
              New PDOS (either                        -0.238            -0.206           -0.038             -0.193                12.190              -7.468
              version)                               (0.080)           (0.122)          (0.050)            (0.110)              (21.668)             (3.401)
              New PDOS with ass.                      0.095             -0.079            0.014             -0.053               -15.175              4.254
              email                                  (0.079)           (0.137)          (0.056)            (0.122)              (17.220)             (3.114)
              MHT-adjusted p-value treatment                            0.368            0.857
              MHT-adjusted p-value
              interacted treatment                                      0.925            0.813
              R2                                      0.139             0.405            0.221              0.405                 0.105               0.303
              Observations                             533               533              533                533                   533                 533
              Note: The table reports OLS estimates. The column title shows the dependent variable. All regressions include the standard set of baseline control
             variables. Additional outcome-specific control variables are specified in the PAP. Standard errors clustered at the PDOS session level in parentheses.
             Panel A/B/C refer to specifications based on equations 1/2/3, which we present in our empirical approach. P-values adjusted for multiple hypothesis
             testing are computed using the procedure described in Appendix D.
     Table E.19: Long-term effects (after about 30 months in the U.S.): Impact heterogeneity by college degree

                                                               (1)             (2)           (3)         (4)
                                                                                          Network    Subjective
                                                            Settlement    Employment        size     wellbeing
                                                              index         index          index       index
                                                               (0-1)        (STE)          (STE)       (STE)
                           PANEL A
                           New PDOS (either                    0.002         -0.128        -0.067       -0.074
                           version)                          (0.024)        (0.106)       (0.069)      (0.061)
                           New PDOS x college                 -0.023         0.148         -0.154       0.247
                           degree                            (0.029)        (0.146)       (0.113)      (0.105)
                           MHT-adjusted p-value
                           interaction                        0.669          0.683          0.644        0.139
                           Mean outcome control group         0.797          -0.027        -0.067       -0.009
                           R2                                 0.235           0.136         0.110        0.038
                           Observations                        989             601           751          917
                           PANEL B
                           New PDOS (either                                  -0.113
                           version)                                         (0.123)
                           New PDOS with emp.                                -0.030
                           module                                           (0.123)
                           New PDOS x college                                 0.149
                           degree                                           (0.171)
                           New PDOS with emp.                                -0.000
                           module x college degree                          (0.158)




49
                           MHT-adjusted p-value
                           interaction 1                                     0.750
                           MHT-adjusted p-value
                           interaction 2                                     0.997
                           R2                                                0.136
                           Observations                                       601
                           PANEL C
                           New PDOS (either                                                -0.103
                           version)                                                       (0.113)
                           New PDOS with ass.                                              -0.015
                           email                                                          (0.114)
                           New PDOS x college                                              -0.278
                           degree                                                         (0.169)
                           New PDOS with ass.                                               0.225
                           email x college degree                                         (0.176)
                           MHT-adjusted p-value
                           interaction 1                                                   0.472
                           MHT-adjusted p-value
                           interaction 2                                                   0.610
                           R2                                                              0.144
                           Observations                                                     533
                           Note: The table reports OLS estimates. The column title shows the dependent vari-
                          able. All regressions include the standard set of baseline control variables. Additional
                          outcome-specific control variables are specified in the PAP. Standard errors clustered
                          at the PDOS session level in parentheses. Panel A/B/C refer to specifications based
                          on equations 1/2/3, which we present in our empirical approach. P-values adjusted for
                          multiple hypothesis testing are computed using the procedure described in Appendix D.
     Table E.20: Long-term effects (after about 30 months in the U.S.): Impact heterogeneity by gender

                                                           (1)             (2)           (3)         (4)
                                                                                      Network    Subjective
                                                        Settlement    Employment        size     wellbeing
                                                          index         index          index       index
                                                           (0-1)        (STE)          (STE)       (STE)
                       PANEL A
                       New PDOS (either                    0.014         -0.152        -0.209        0.075
                       version)                          (0.021)        (0.113)       (0.076)      (0.070)
                       New PDOS x male                    -0.051          0.228        0.172        -0.092
                                                         (0.032)        (0.160)       (0.114)      (0.107)
                       MHT-adjusted p-value
                       interaction                        0.535          0.510          0.562        0.770
                       Mean outcome control group         0.797          -0.027        -0.067       -0.009
                       R2                                 0.236           0.137         0.111        0.033
                       Observations                        989             601           751          917
                       PANEL B
                       New PDOS (either                                  -0.128
                       version)                                         (0.131)
                       New PDOS with emp.                                -0.044
                       module                                           (0.134)
                       New PDOS x male                                   0.200
                                                                        (0.203)
                       New PDOS with emp.                                0.051
                       module x male                                    (0.204)




50
                       MHT-adjusted p-value
                       interaction 1                                     0.773
                       MHT-adjusted p-value
                       interaction 2                                     0.808
                       R2                                                0.137
                       Observations                                       601
                       PANEL C
                       New PDOS (either                                                -0.360
                       version)                                                       (0.119)
                       New PDOS with ass.                                               0.129
                       email                                                          (0.111)
                       New PDOS x male                                                  0.267
                                                                                      (0.176)
                       New PDOS with ass.                                              -0.054
                       email x male                                                   (0.140)
                       MHT-adjusted p-value
                       interaction 1                                                   0.529
                       MHT-adjusted p-value
                       interaction 2                                                   0.912
                       R2                                                              0.144
                       Observations                                                     533
                       Note: The table reports OLS estimates. The column title shows the dependent vari-
                      able. All regressions include the standard set of baseline control variables. Additional
                      outcome-specific control variables are specified in the PAP. Standard errors clustered
                      at the PDOS session level in parentheses. Panel A/B/C refer to specifications based
                      on equations 1/2/3, which we present in our empirical approach. P-values adjusted for
                      multiple hypothesis testing are computed using the procedure described in Appendix D.
     Table E.21: Long-term effects (after about 30 months in the U.S.): Impact heterogeneity by baseline knowledge

                                                                            (1)             (2)           (3)          (4)
                                                                                                       Network     Subjective
                                                                        Settlement     Employment        size      wellbeing
                                                                          index          index          index        index
                                                                           (0-1)         (STE)          (STE)        (STE)
                        PANEL A
                        New PDOS (either                                   0.019            0.005        -0.118       0.080
                        version)                                          (0.021)         (0.136)       (0.093)      (0.083)
                        New PDOS x                                         -0.048          -0.121        -0.033       -0.081
                        below-median baseline knowledge                   (0.028)         (0.169)       (0.111)      (0.109)
                        MHT-adjusted p-value
                        interaction                                        0.483           0.929        0.764         0.958
                        Mean outcome control group                         0.797          -0.027        -0.067       -0.009
                        R2                                                 0.239          0.135         0.111         0.036
                        Observations                                        989             601          751           917
                        PANEL B
                        New PDOS (either                                                   -0.010
                        version)                                                          (0.149)
                        New PDOS with emp.                                                 0.031
                        module                                                            (0.131)
                        New PDOS x                                                         -0.066
                        below-median baseline knowledge                                   (0.195)
                        New PDOS with emp.                                                 -0.107
                        module x below-median baseline knowledge                          (0.204)




51
                        MHT-adjusted p-value
                        interaction 1                                                      0.934
                        MHT-adjusted p-value
                        interaction 2                                                      0.974
                        R2                                                                 0.136
                        Observations                                                        601
                        PANEL C
                        New PDOS (either                                                                 -0.160
                        version)                                                                        (0.137)
                        New PDOS with ass.                                                                0.054
                        email                                                                           (0.118)
                        New PDOS x                                                                       -0.144
                        below-median baseline knowledge                                                 (0.171)
                        New PDOS with ass.                                                                0.075
                        email x below-median baseline knowledge                                         (0.147)
                        MHT-adjusted p-value
                        interaction 1                                                                    0.937
                        MHT-adjusted p-value
                        interaction 2                                                                    0.938
                        R2                                                                               0.144
                        Observations                                                                      533
                        Note: The table reports OLS estimates. The column title shows the dependent variable. All regressions
                       include the standard set of baseline control variables. Additional outcome-specific control variables are
                       specified in the PAP. Standard errors clustered at the PDOS session level in parentheses. Panel A/B/C
                       refer to specifications based on equations 1/2/3, which we present in our empirical approach. P-values
                       adjusted for multiple hypothesis testing are computed using the procedure described in Appendix D.
       Table E.22: Long-term effects (after about 30 months in the U.S.) following long-term PAP

                                               (1)            (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)            (6)          (7)
                                                                                                                             Financial
                                                                         Network    Network      Diaspora      Subjective    decision-
                                           Settlement    Employment        size       type      engagement     wellbeing      making
                                             index         index          index      index         index         index         index
                                              (0-1)        (STE)          (STE)      (STE)        (STE)          (STE)        (STE)
      PANEL A
      New PDOS (either                        -0.003         -0.059       -0.154      -0.031       0.019          0.030        0.009
      version)                               (0.019)        (0.087)      (0.063)     (0.046)      (0.055)        (0.044)      (0.058)
      MHT-adjusted p-value                   0.983          0.991         0.209       0.998         1.000        0.990         0.881
      Mean outcome control group             0.765          -0.038        -0.072      0.013        -0.033        -0.014       -0.022
      R2                                     0.266          0.121         0.083       0.108         0.069        0.036         0.072
      Observations                            965            705           751         692           585          881           464
      PANEL B
      New PDOS (either                                       -0.048
      version)                                              (0.101)
      New PDOS with emp.                                     -0.021
      module                                                (0.093)




52
      MHT-adjusted p-value treatment                        0.996
      MHT-adjusted p-value
      interacted treatment                                  1.000
      R2                                                    0.121
      Observations                                           705
      PANEL C
      New PDOS (either                                                    -0.267 -0.052             0.016
      version)                                                           (0.094) (0.069)          (0.078)
      New PDOS with ass.                                                   0.142  -0.043           -0.119
      email                                                              (0.083) (0.064)          (0.091)
      MHT-adjusted p-value treatment                                      0.072       0.997        0.996
      MHT-adjusted p-value
      interacted treatment                                                0.615       0.995        0.888
      R2                                                                  0.119       0.091        0.084
      Observations                                                         533         494          412
      Note: The table reports OLS estimates. The column title shows the dependent variable. All regressions include the standard set
     of baseline control variables. Additional outcome-specific control variables are specified in the PAP. Standard errors clustered at
     the PDOS session level in parentheses. Panel A/B/C refer to specifications based on equations 1/2/3, which we present in our
     empirical approach. P-values adjusted for multiple hypothesis testing are computed using the procedure described in Appendix D.
     See long-term PAP for definition of indices.
     Table E.23: Long-term effects (after about 30 months in the U.S.): Components of the network size index following long-term
     PAP
                                                                   Index                             Index components
                                                                     (1)                (2)                    (3)                 (4)
                                                                                IHS nr of Filipino   IHS nr of non-Filipino
                                                                Network size       friends and            friends and            IHS nr of
                                                                index (STE)       acquaintances          acquaintances         close friends
                           PANEL A
                           New PDOS (either                         -0.154            -0.168                  -0.110              -0.182
                           version)                                (0.063)           (0.077)                 (0.102)             (0.090)
                           MHT-adjusted p-value                                       0.199                   0.295               0.224
                           Mean outcome control group              -0.072             3.903                   3.453               2.951
                           R2                                       0.083             0.109                   0.123               0.113
                           Observations                              751               591                     590                 474




53
                           PANEL C
                           New PDOS (either                         -0.267            -0.257                  -0.263              -0.315
                           version)                                (0.094)           (0.124)                 (0.135)             (0.153)
                           New PDOS with ass.                       0.142             0.160                    0.195               0.301
                           email                                   (0.083)           (0.121)                 (0.145)             (0.135)
                           MHT-adjusted p-value treatment                             0.201                   0.199               0.187
                           MHT-adjusted p-value
                           interacted treatment                                       0.351                   0.460               0.209
                           R2                                       0.119             0.132                   0.156               0.130
                           Observations                              533               419                     417                 341
                           Note: The table reports OLS estimates. The column title shows the dependent variable. All regressions include the
                          standard set of baseline control variables. Additional outcome-specific control variables are specified in the PAP.
                          Standard errors clustered at the PDOS session level in parentheses. Panel A/B/C refer to specifications based on
                          equations 1/2/3, which we present in our empirical approach. P-values adjusted for multiple hypothesis testing are
                          computed using the procedure described in Appendix D. IHS is short for inverse hyperbolic sine.
     Table E.24: Long-term effects (after about 30 months in the U.S.): Components of the network type index following long-term
     PAP
                                                              Index                                      Index components
                                                               (1)               (2)               (3)            (4)           (5)             (6)
                                                                                              Non-Filipino      Visited     Received        Frequency
                                                                           College degree       ethnicity      people of    visitors of     of favours
                                                          Network type       two closest       two closest     US origin    US origin     received from
                                                          index (STE)      contacts in US    contacts in US    at home       at home      non-Filipinos
                     PANEL A
                     New PDOS (either                         0.012            0.022             -0.003          0.006        -0.032          -0.068
                     version)                                (0.049)          (0.031)           (0.024)         (0.044)      (0.047)         (0.068)
                     MHT-adjusted p-value                                      0.997             1.000           1.000        0.997          0.979
                     Mean outcome control group               -0.012           0.767             0.134           0.549        0.539          1.455




54
                     R2                                        0.115           0.099             0.067           0.081        0.050          0.033
                     Observations                               584             604               672             668          666            522
                     PANEL C
                     New PDOS (either                         -0.018           -0.017            -0.004          -0.004       -0.048          -0.144
                     version)                                (0.071)          (0.042)           (0.031)         (0.063)      (0.064)         (0.101)
                     New PDOS with ass.                       -0.038           -0.001            -0.018          -0.003       -0.059          0.047
                     email                                   (0.063)          (0.039)           (0.032)         (0.058)      (0.053)         (0.097)
                     MHT-adjusted p-value treatment                            0.998             1.000           0.667        0.750          0.995
                     MHT-adjusted p-value
                     interacted treatment                                      0.989             0.997           0.961        0.979          0.959
                     R2                                       0.105            0.088             0.050           0.078        0.052          0.048
                     Observations                              423              433               470             471          471            370
                     Note: The table reports OLS estimates. The column title shows the dependent variable. All regressions include the standard set of
                    baseline control variables. Additional outcome-specific control variables are specified in the PAP. Standard errors clustered at the
                    PDOS session level in parentheses. Panel A/B/C refer to specifications based on equations 1/2/3, which we present in our empirical
                    approach. P-values adjusted for multiple hypothesis testing are computed using the procedure described in Appendix D.
     Table E.25: Long-term effects (after about 30 months in the U.S.): Spillovers on household members in the Philippines following
     long-term PAP
                                              (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)             (5)             (6)             (7)              (8)
                                                                                                                         Perceived ease
                                          Perception       Share of         Share of        Intends to      Young hh       of making         Perceived
                                                                                          migrate to US                                                   IHS amount of
                                         of how well     hh members       hh members                        members      the transition     benefits of    remittances
                                         migrant does    intending to     intending to        (main        should live   to US oneself       migration       received
                                         in US (0-1)     travel to US    migrate to US     respondent)       in US            (0-1)        for HH (0-1)     by migrant




55
         PANEL A
         New PDOS (either                    -0.013          0.000           -0.001           -0.004          0.028           -0.024          -0.012           -0.160
         version)                           (0.012)         (0.027)         (0.032)          (0.031)         (0.036)         (0.038)         (0.032)          (0.104)
         MHT-adjusted p-value                0.924           0.995           1.000            0.998           0.967           0.972           0.992            0.645
         Mean outcome control group          0.857           0.240           0.331            0.270           0.785           0.719           0.435            6.204
         R2                                  0.098           0.111           0.239            0.222           0.144           0.375           0.128            0.143
         Observations                         838             733             712              834             898             167             730              535
        Note: The table reports OLS estimates. The column title shows the dependent variable. All regressions include the standard set of baseline control variables as
        well as household-specific control variables as specified in the PAP. Standard errors clustered at the PDOS session level in parentheses. P-values are adjusted for
        multiple hypothesis testing within each panel. They are computed using the procedure described in Appendix D. IHS is short for inverse hyperbolic sine.
     Table E.26: Long-term effects (after about 30 months in the U.S.): Secondary outcomes and mechanisms following long-term
     PAP
                                             (1)                 (2)                  (3)                 (4)                (5)              (6)                  (7)
                                                                                                     Initiated the
                                          Use of                                                   process of having   Qualifications      Has had              Has had
                                        any type of     Employment quality                           qualifications     successfully    contact with a       contact with a
                                                                                IHS reservation
                                       public welfare     index (STE)                wage             recognized         recognized     US association    Filipino association
       PANEL A
       New PDOS (either                     0.048               -0.008               0.332               0.025              0.022            0.062                -0.017
       version)                            (0.040)             (0.054)              (0.233)             (0.028)            (0.028)          (0.066)              (0.031)
       Mean outcome control group           0.674               -0.025               8.289               0.454              0.374            0.642                0.313
       R2                                   0.061               0.066                0.590               0.128              0.131            0.092                0.103
       Observations                          660                 476                   35                 925                917              855                  864
       PANEL B




56
       New PDOS (either                     0.017               -0.028               0.146               0.008              0.007
       version)                            (0.048)             (0.068)              (0.251)             (0.031)            (0.031)
       New PDOS with emp.                   0.057               0.040                0.357               0.032              0.029
       module                              (0.046)             (0.071)              (0.266)             (0.031)            (0.026)
       R2                                   0.063               0.066                0.637               0.128              0.131
       Observations                          660                 476                   35                 925                917
       PANEL C
       New PDOS (either                                                                                                                       0.075               -0.055
       version)                                                                                                                             (0.095)              (0.048)
       New PDOS with ass.                                                                                                                    -0.058               0.058
       email                                                                                                                                (0.109)              (0.045)
       R2                                                                                                                                    0.105                0.127
       Observations                                                                                                                           590                  592
       Note: The table reports OLS estimates. The column title shows the dependent variable. All regressions include the standard set of baseline control variables. Additional
      outcome-specific control variables are specified in the PAP. Standard errors clustered at the PDOS session level in parentheses. Panel A/B/C refer to specifications based
      on equations 1/2/3, which we present in our empirical approach. IHS is short for inverse hyperbolic sine.
     Table E.27: Medium-term effects (after about 15 months in the U.S.)

                                                 (1)             (2)           (3)          (4)
                                                                            Network     Subjective
                                             Settlement     Employment        size      wellbeing
                                               index          index          index        index
                                                (0-1)         (STE)          (STE)        (STE)
       PANEL A
       New PDOS (either                         -0.001         -0.082         -0.090       0.132
       version)                                (0.016)        (0.087)        (0.052)      (0.065)
       MHT-adjusted p-value                     0.997           0.646        0.401         0.266
       Mean outcome control group               0.774          -0.037        -0.031       -0.028
       R2                                       0.190           0.106        0.119         0.052
       Observations                              899             525          697           660
       PANEL B
       New PDOS (either                                        -0.005
       version)                                               (0.096)
       New PDOS with emp.                                      -0.147
       module                                                 (0.106)




57
       MHT-adjusted p-value treatment                          0.958
       MHT-adjusted p-value
       interacted treatment                                    0.547
       R2                                                      0.110
       Observations                                             525
       PANEL C
       New PDOS (either                                                       -0.142
       version)                                                              (0.084)
       New PDOS with ass.                                                      0.100
       email                                                                 (0.085)
       MHT-adjusted p-value treatment                                         0.403
       MHT-adjusted p-value
       interacted treatment                                                   0.615
       R2                                                                     0.143
       Observations                                                            490
       Note: The table reports OLS estimates. The column title shows the dependent variable. All
      regressions include the standard set of baseline control variables. Additional outcome-specific
      control variables are specified in the PAP. Standard errors clustered at the PDOS session
      level in parentheses. Panel A/B/C refer to specifications based on equations 1/2/3, which
      we present in our empirical approach. P-values adjusted for multiple hypothesis testing are
      computed using the procedure described in Appendix D.
     Table E.28: Medium-term effects (after about 15 months in the U.S.): Main outcomes following medium-term PAP

                                                        (1)            (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)            (6)          (7)
                                                                                                                                      Financial
                                                                                  Network    Network      Diaspora      Subjective    decision-
                                                    Settlement    Employment        size       type      engagement     wellbeing      making
                                                      index         index          index      index         index         index         index
                                                       (0-1)        (STE)          (STE)      (STE)        (STE)          (STE)        (STE)
               PANEL A
               New PDOS (either                        0.004          -0.087       -0.147      -0.032       -0.035         0.088        -0.107
               version)                               (0.018)        (0.082)      (0.065)     (0.064)      (0.064)        (0.055)      (0.131)
               MHT-adjusted p-value                   0.969          0.930         0.307        0.988        0.994         0.676        0.994
               Mean outcome control group             0.719          -0.031        -0.031      -0.000       -0.000        -0.027       -0.000
               R2                                     0.221          0.117         0.101        0.088        0.096         0.047        0.052
               Observations                            875            607           697          550          496           660          335
               PANEL B
               New PDOS (either                                        0.007
               version)                                              (0.095)
               New PDOS with emp.                                     -0.179
               module                                                (0.106)




58
               MHT-adjusted p-value treatment                        0.942
               MHT-adjusted p-value
               interacted treatment                                  0.679
               R2                                                    0.121
               Observations                                           607
               PANEL C
               New PDOS (either                                                    -0.163      -0.046       -0.060
               version)                                                           (0.101)     (0.098)      (0.087)
               New PDOS with ass.                                                   0.037       0.055        0.140
               email                                                              (0.098)     (0.095)      (0.083)
               MHT-adjusted p-value treatment                                      0.697       0.979        0.988
               MHT-adjusted p-value
               interacted treatment                                                0.976       0.994        0.705
               R2                                                                  0.133       0.088        0.104
               Observations                                                         490         390          346
               Note: The table reports OLS estimates. The column title shows the dependent variable. All regressions include the standard set
              of baseline control variables. Additional outcome-specific control variables are specified in the PAP. Standard errors clustered at
              the PDOS session level in parentheses. Panel A/B/C refer to specifications based on equations 1/2/3, which we present in our
              empirical approach. P-values adjusted for multiple hypothesis testing are computed using the procedure described in Appendix D.
              See mid-term PAP for definition of indices.
