                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      EXCHANGE RATES AND ASSET PRICES IN A GLOBAL DEMAND SYSTEM

                                       Ralph S. J. Koijen
                                        Motohiro Yogo

                                      Working Paper 27342
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27342


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2020




Koijen acknowledges financial support from the Center for Research in Security Prices at the
University of Chicago Booth School of Business. We thank Bernadette Palogme, Florencia
Ferado, and Diego Rojas of MSCI for assistance on equity market data for countries in the MSCI
ACWI Index. For comments and discussions, we thank Wenxin Du, Charles Engel, Pierre-Olivier
Gourinchas, Oleg Itskhoki, and Helene Rey, Robert Richmond, and Simon Schmickler. We also
thank seminar participants at FRB of Minneapolis, FRB of New York, MIT, NYU, Princeton
University, University of Chicago, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, UNC, the 2019
FRIC Conference on Financial Frictions, the 2019 SITE Conference on Financial Regulation, and
the 2019 Wharton Conference on Liquidity and Financial Fragility. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Ralph S. J. Koijen and Motohiro Yogo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Exchange Rates and Asset Prices in a Global Demand System
Ralph S. J. Koijen and Motohiro Yogo
NBER Working Paper No. 27342
June 2020
JEL No. E52,F31,G12

                                          ABSTRACT

Using international holdings data, we estimate a demand system for financial assets across 36
countries. The demand system provides a unified framework for decomposing variation in
exchange rates, long-term yields, and stock prices; interpreting major economic events such as
the European sovereign debt crisis; and estimating the convenience yield on US assets. Macro
variables and policy variables (i.e., short-term rates, debt quantities, and foreign exchange
reserves) account for 55 percent of the variation in exchange rates, 57 percent of long-term yields,
and 69 percent of stock prices. The average convenience yield is 2.15 percent on US long-term
debt and 1.70 percent on US equity.


Ralph S. J. Koijen
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 S Woodlawn Ave
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
Ralph.koijen@chicagobooth.edu

Motohiro Yogo
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
myogo@princeton.edu
   Global investors hold financial assets across many countries and have exchange rate ex-
posure not only through short-term debt but also long-term debt and equity. The portfolio
decisions of these investors across countries and asset classes are important for exchange rates,
long-term yields, and stock prices. Government policies are also important. Conventional
monetary policy determines the short-term rate. Fiscal policy and unconventional monetary
policy affect the supply of domestic debt. Central banks hold foreign debt in foreign ex-
change reserves, affecting the residual supply of foreign debt. All of these forces determine
exchange rates and asset prices through market clearing of global financial markets.
   We develop an asset pricing model to study sources of variation in exchange rates, long-
term yields, and stock prices across 36 countries from 2002 to 2017. We model investors at
the country level to match international holdings of short-term debt, long-term debt, and
equity in the International Monetary Fund's (IMF) Coordinated Portfolio Investment Survey.
We start with market clearing identities for these three asset classes across all countries. The
supply of each asset must equal the demand across all investor countries and foreign exchange
reserves. Every asset pricing model is ultimately a model of asset demand that arises from
portfolio choice, combined with market clearing. This paper is the first attempt to take the
portfolio choice implications to their logical conclusion and to actually match international
holdings together with asset prices across all countries.
    Starting with a portfolio choice model, Koijen and Yogo (2019) show that an investor's
optimal portfolio weights could be expressed as a logit function of asset characteristics and
latent demand (i.e., characteristics unobserved by the econometrician). Following their ap-
proach, we specify the asset demand of investor countries and foreign exchange reserves
to depend on the market-to-book ratio (equivalently, yield in the case of debt), the real
exchange rate, and macro variables such as gross domestic product (GDP), real GDP per
capita, and inflation. Demand also depends on risk measures including equity volatility
and sovereign debt ratings. Bilateral variables including exports, imports, and the distance
between investor and issuer countries are important for explaining cross-country financial
investment (Portes, Rey, and Oh 2001; Portes and Rey 2005). We estimate the demand sys-
tem by instrumental variables because exchange rates, asset prices, and latent demand are
jointly endogenous. The demand for an asset depends directly on its own characteristics and
indirectly on the characteristics of other assets through market clearing. Therefore, market
clearing defines a particular nonlinear function of all asset characteristics as an instrument.
The estimated demand elasticities are 42 for short-term debt, 4.2 for long-term debt, and 1.9
for equity. That is, equity demand decreases by 1.9 percent per one percent price increase.
    Based on the estimated demand system and market clearing, we decompose the variance
of annual changes in exchange rates and asset prices. Macro variables account for 26 percent,


                                               2
short-term rates account for 8 percent, long-term debt quantities account for 2 percent, and
foreign exchange reserves account for 19 percent of the variation in exchange rates. These
fundamental sources jointly account for 55 percent of the variation in exchange rates. The
importance of latent demand that accounts for the remaining 45 percent is geographically
concentrated in large investor countries. In particular, latent demand of US and European
countries substituting across asset classes accounts for 16 percent of the variation in exchange
rates.
   While the macro variables account for 16 percent of the variation in long-term yields, the
policy variables are much more important. Short-term rates account for 9 percent, long-term
debt quantities account for 20 percent, and foreign exchange reserves account for 11 percent
of the variation in long-term yields. These policy variables jointly account for 40 percent of
the variation in long-term yields. In contrast, macro variables are the primary determinants
of stock prices, accounting for 57 percent of the variation.
   The demand system approach is also useful for interpreting major economic events, which
we illustrate through a case study of the European sovereign debt crisis. We decompose
sovereign yield spreads between Germany and the US as well as the southern euro countries
and Germany. On the one hand, the relative timing of monetary easing accounts for almost
all of the variation in the long-term yield spread between Germany and the US. Short-term
rates account for 53 percent, and long-term debt quantities account for 15 percent of the
variation in the long-term yield spread. On the other hand, the relative macro and fiscal
experiences account for most of the variation in the long-term yield spreads between the
southern euro countries and Germany. Macro variables account for 64 percent, and long-
term debt quantities account for 14 percent of the variation in the long-term yield spreads.
   US assets enjoy a special status in global financial markets because the US dollar is the
most important reserve currency (Gourinchas and Rey 2007). The demand system captures
the special status of US assets through fixed effects for US issuance interacted with year.
Based on the estimated demand system and market clearing, we estimate the convenience
yield on the US dollar, long-term debt, and equity. We also trace the investor origins of
the convenience yield into a sum of special-status demand by investor countries and foreign
exchange reserves. In the absence of special status, the expected annual appreciation of the
US dollar relative to a value-weighted portfolio of foreign currencies would be 1.28 percentage
points higher. The US long-term yield would be 2.15 percentage points higher, of which we
attribute 0.48 percent to foreign exchange reserves, 0.51 percent to European investors,
and 0.52 percent to Pacific investors. The US annual expected stock return would be 1.70
percentage points higher.



                                               3
A.       Related Literature

We relate this paper to the previous literature in the context of a two-country model of
financial markets. Each country has a short-term debt market and an equity market, so
there are four market clearing equations in total. There are five asset prices that enter the
market clearing equations: short-term rates in each country, stock prices in each country,
and the exchange rate. In traditional models of international finance, the consumption goods
market determines the exchange rate, so that financial markets do not directly determine the
exchange rate. Motivated by the empirical failure of traditional models, an alternative ap-
proach known as "portfolio balance models" relies entirely on financial markets for exchange
rate determination.
   In a model with only short-term debt, Kouri (1976) uses market clearing in the foreign
short-term debt market for exchange rate determination, assuming that the foreign short-
term rate is fixed.1 Kouri and De Macedo (1978) resolve the problem of five asset prices
in four market clearing equations by introducing a fifth equation for relative cash demand
with the exchange rate as the relative price. Hau and Rey (2006) and Camanho, Hau, and
Rey (2018) use market clearing in equity markets to jointly determine stock prices and the
exchange rate. They introduce a third equation for the spot exchange rate, which depends
on the imbalance between domestic demand for foreign equity and vice versa. Gabaix and
Maggiori (2015) assume segmentation in short-term debt markets. Only speculators can
hold both countries' debt, whose limited arbitrage capacity determines the exchange rate.
    We take this literature that focuses on bilateral models in a more empirical direction that
easily accommodates market clearing across multiple asset classes and many countries. We
add long-term debt markets to study long-term yields in conjunction with short-term rates
and stock prices. As in Hau and Rey (2006), we allow for substitution across asset classes so
that the demand for long-term debt and equity could feed back into exchange rates. We use
market clearing across all three asset classes for exchange rate determination, conditional on
central bank policy that determines short-term rates.
    Previous papers estimate demand elasticities of institutions and households for long-term
debt and equity. They find less elastic demand than what asset pricing models would imply
if assets were close substitutes within the same asset class. Krishnamurthy and Vissing-
Jørgensen (2007) estimate demand elasticities for US Treasury debt. Koijen et al. (2018)
estimate demand elasticities for sovereign debt in the euro area. Koijen and Yogo (2019)
estimate demand elasticities for the cross section of US equity, and Koijen, Richmond, and
     1
    Alternatively, Blanchard, Giavazzi, and Sa (2005) and Gourinchas (2008) use market clearing in the
domestic equity market for exchange rate determination, assuming that the domestic stock price is fixed.
This assumption is unappealing in our context because stock prices are direct objects of interest.


                                                   4
Yogo (2019) estimate demand elasticities for the cross-section of US and UK equity. These
papers use institutional and household holdings within a country, while we use aggregate
holdings at the country level. An advantage of our approach is that we estimate demand
elasticities for all countries and asset classes, based on a demand system that allows for all
substitution effects. The previous papers implicitly rule out substitution effects outside the
countries and asset classes that their data cover.
   Motivated by the arbitrage pricing theory or the intertemporal capital asset pricing
model, an empirical literature tests for a low-dimensional factor structure in global stock
(Fama and French 2012), bond (Dahlquist and Hasseltoft 2013; Jotikasthira, Le, and Lund-
blad 2015), and currency returns (Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan 2011). These pa-
pers find both common and local factors across countries within each asset class. Asness,
Moskowitz, and Pedersen (2013) find common factors in value and momentum returns across
countries and asset classes. Like this literature, we develop an asset pricing model that cov-
ers the three asset classes across all developed and many emerging markets. An important
difference is that our model matches international holdings together with asset prices. The
literature on factor models uses data on asset prices and factors only, ignoring the portfolio
choice implications of international holdings data. The demand system approach sheds light
on the sources of common factors in global stock, bond, and currency markets.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section I, we describe the data on
international holdings and asset prices. We also present some reduced-form facts that support
the formal analysis. In Section II, we present an asset demand system that matches observed
international holdings and implies flexible substitution within and across asset classes. We
also discuss how the asset demand system and market clearing determine exchange rates and
asset prices. In Section III, we discuss the identifying assumption, describe the estimation
procedure, and present the estimated demand system. In Section IV, we decompose exchange
rates and asset prices based on the estimated demand system and market clearing. We also
present a case study of the European sovereign debt crisis. In Section V, we estimate the
convenience yield on US assets. Section VI concludes.


I.   Data on International Holdings and Asset Prices

We briefly describe the data on international holdings and asset prices. We refer the reader
to Appendix A for further details. We then present some reduced-form facts that support
the formal analysis in the subsequent sections.




                                              5
A.       Data Construction

The Coordinated Portfolio Investment Survey contains each investor country's year-end hold-
ings of foreign financial assets in US dollars by asset class and issuer country. The three
asset classes are short-term debt (i.e., one year or less in maturity), long-term debt (i.e.,
greater than one year in maturity), and equity. The data also contain foreign exchange
reserves, which are central bank holdings of foreign financial assets. The IMF aggregates
foreign exchange reserves across all central banks for confidentiality. Therefore, we treat the
aggregate portfolio of foreign exchange reserves as an investor unit.
   We measure the supply of each asset by aggregating holdings across all investor countries
and foreign exchange reserves. For short- and long-term debt, our measure corresponds to
the total amount held by foreign investors. At the country level, domestically held debt is
both an asset and a liability, so it does not count towards supply or wealth according to the
national accounting identities. In contrast, domestically held equity is an asset that is part
of wealth. Therefore, we measure the supply of equity as total stock market capitalization
by country, published by the World Bank. We construct the amount of domestically held
equity by subtracting the aggregate foreign holdings from total stock market capitalization.
   Short-term rates are 3-month interbank rates from Thomson Reuters Datastream. We
use the 10-year benchmark government bond yields from Datastream and (in a few cases of
missing data) OECD's Monetary and Financial Statistics. We fit a Nelson and Siegel (1987)
zero-coupon yield curve for each country, assuming that the 10-year benchmark yield is the
par yield. Throughout the paper, the long-term yield refers to the 10-year zero-coupon
yield, which we assume is the representative yield of long-term debt in the international
holdings data.2 Stock returns and market-to-book equity for countries in the MSCI ACWI
Index are from Datastream and MSCI, respectively. Exchange rates are from the IMF's
International Financial Statistics. Throughout the paper, exchange rates are in US dollars
per local currency unit. We use year-end values of all exchange rates and asset prices to
align with the year-end values of international holdings.
    The merged sample of international holdings and asset prices covers 2002 to 2017. The
financial assets are held by 88 investor countries plus foreign exchange reserves. We refer to
Table A1 in Appendix A for a complete list of investor countries, which we group by MSCI
classification for presentation purposes. There are 36 issuer countries with complete data
on asset prices and characteristics. This covers all 22 countries in the MSCI World Index
and 14 of 21 countries in the MSCI Emerging Markets Index. Ten of the 36 countries are in
     2
    The important point of this simplifying assumption is that the 3-month rate and the 10-year yield capture
the level and the slope of the term structure of interest rates. We use the 10-year maturity to estimate the
slope because the data on the benchmark government bond yields are most complete at that maturity.


                                                     6
the euro area, and the Hong Kong dollar is pegged to the US dollar. Therefore, the sample
contains 25 independent exchange rates relative to the US dollar. We aggregate all issuer
countries outside the 36 countries as an "outside asset" for each asset class.

B. Summary of Global Financial Markets

Table 1 summarizes financial markets across 36 countries in 2017. The US short-term debt
market was $822.7 billion, of which central banks held 34 percent in foreign exchange reserves.
The US long-term debt market was $7,402 billion, of which central banks held 28 percent in
foreign exchange reserves. The US equity market was $32,121 billion, of which central banks
held 1 percent in foreign exchange reserves. Thus, foreign exchange reserves account for a
significant share of US debt but not equity.
    Foreign exchange reserves also account for a significant share of debt in the euro area and
Japan, which are important reserve currencies. Central banks held 26 percent of short-term
debt in the euro area, 31 percent of German long-term debt, and 22 percent of Japanese
long-term debt in foreign exchange reserves. Among the emerging markets, foreign exchange
reserves are important in China. Central banks held 17 and 25 percent of Chinese short- and
long-term debt, respectively, in foreign exchange reserves. The large size of foreign exchange
reserves suggests that central banks play an important role in managing exchange rates and
the term structure of interest rates globally.
    Table 2 reports the top ten investors by asset class in 2017. Foreign exchange reserves are
the largest investor unit in both short- and long-term debt markets. Central banks held $912
billion of short-term debt and $4,381 billion of long-term debt in foreign exchange reserves
across all countries. Unsurprisingly, large developed countries such as Germany, Japan, the
UK, and the US appear in the top ten list. Ireland, Luxembourg, and the Cayman Islands
also appear in the top ten list for both short- and long-term debt. These countries are offshore
financial centers through which other countries invest because of favorable regulation and
taxes. We refer to Appendix A for a further discussion of offshore financial centers and how
we construct the international holdings data to avoid double counting.

C. Notation

We define the notation here and use it consistently throughout the paper. We index the
N = 36 issuer countries as n = 1, . . . , N . Within each country, there are three asset classes:
1) short-term debt, 2) long-term debt, and 3) equity. We index the three asset classes as
l = 1, 2, 3. Pt (n, l) is the market-to-book ratio for asset class l in country n at time t. Qt (n, l)
is the total book value in country n's currency unit of asset class l in country n at time t.


                                                  7
In the case of debt, Pt (n, l) is the price per unit of face value, and Qt (n, l) is the total face
value in local currency unit. We refer to Pt (n, l) and Qt (n, l) as the price and quantity of
asset class l in country n, respectively. Et (n) is the nominal exchange rate in US dollars per
country n's currency unit at time t. Zt (n) is the US consumer price index (CPI) in dollars
relative to country n's CPI in its currency unit. Thus, Et (n)/Zt (n) is the real exchange rate.
    To clarify the notation, consider an example of UK long-term debt. Pt (n, 2) is the market
price in pounds per pound of face value (or equivalently, in US dollars per dollar of face
value). Qt (n, 2) is the total face value of debt in pounds. Et (n) is the exchange rate in US
dollars per pound. Thus, Pt (n, 2)Qt (n, 2) is the total market value of debt in pounds, and
Pt (n, 2)Et (n)Qt (n, 2) is the total market value of debt in US dollars.
    We use lowercase letters to denote the logarithm of the corresponding uppercase variables.
For example, pt (n, l) = log(Pt (n, l)), qt (n, l) = log(Qt (n, l)), et (n) = log(Et (n)), and zt (n) =
log(Zt (n)). We use bold letters to denote column vectors or matrices, whose elements are
the corresponding variables. For example, Pt is a matrix whose (n, l)th element is Pt (n, l),
and Et is a column vector whose nth element is Et (n).

D. Relative Asset Quantities and Prices

Figure 1 is a scatter plot of relative long-term debt quantity versus price for the euro area,
Japan, Switzerland, and the UK. The horizontal axis measures each region's long-term debt
quantity relative to the US in logarithms (i.e., qt (n, 2) - qt (US, 2)). The vertical axis measures
each region's long-term bond price in US dollars relative to the US long-term bond price
in logarithms (i.e., pt (n, 2) + et (n) - pt (US, 2)). We subtract the time-series mean so that
both relative quantities and prices are in percent deviation (i.e., 0.2 means 20% higher than
the average year). The scatter plot reveals a negative relation that is consistent with a
downward-sloping demand curve. When the supply of Japanese long-term debt is relatively
high, its relative price is low. Our finding suggests a downward-sloping demand for long-term
debt, extending a similar finding for the US to an international context (Krishnamurthy and
Vissing-Jørgensen 2012; Greenwood and Vayanos 2014).
   Figure 2 repeats the same exercise for equity markets. The horizontal axis measures
each region's equity quantity relative to the US in logarithms (i.e., qt (n, 3) - qt (US, 3)). The
vertical axis measures each region's stock price in US dollars relative to the US stock price
in logarithms (i.e., pt (n, 3) + et (n) - pt (US, 3)). Again, the scatter plot reveals a negative
relation that is consistent with a downward-sloping demand curve. When the supply of
Japanese equity is relatively high, its relative price is low.
    Figures 1 and 2 are by no means formal estimates of demand curves, which we leave for
Section III. However, they foreshadow estimates of low demand elasticities for long-term

                                                  8
debt and equity. The slope of the demand curve reveals the degree to which investors view
the assets of different countries to be close substitutes. The slope would be virtually flat if
the assets of different countries were near-perfect substitutes. In contrast, the steepness of
the slopes in Figures 1 and 2 suggests that long-term debt and equity of different countries
are imperfect substitutes.


II.     Demand System Asset Pricing

We present an asset demand system that matches observed international holdings and implies
flexible substitution within and across asset classes. We also discuss how the asset demand
system and market clearing determine exchange rates and asset prices.

A.     Market Clearing

There are I investor countries that we index as i = 1, . . . , I . Each investor i allocates wealth
Ai,t in US dollars at time t across three asset classes in N issuer countries. The investor
could also allocate wealth to countries outside the N issuer countries, which we represent as
an outside asset (indexed as n = 0) within each asset class. Without loss of generality, we
write investor i's portfolio weight in country n and asset class l at time t as

                                      wi,t (n, l) = wi,t (n|l)wi,t (l).                                     (1)

The first term on the right side represents the portfolio weight in country n within asset
class l. The second term represents the aggregate portfolio weight in asset class l.
                                                                           N
   The portfolio weights must sum to one within each asset class:          n=0 wi,t (n|l ) = 1. The
                                                                                    3
aggregate portfolio weights must also sum to one across all asset classes:          l=1 wi,t (l ) = 1.
            3
Let Oi,t = l=1 Ai,t wi,t (0, l) be the total investment in outside assets across all asset classes.
We write the investor's wealth as

                                                             Oi,t
                                  Ai,t =              3        N
                                                                                   .                        (2)
                                           1-         l=1      n=1   wi,t (n, l)

      Market clearing for each country n and asset class l at time t is

                                                I
                  Pt (n, l)Et (n)Qt (n, l) =         Ai,t wi,t (n, l; Pt , Et )
                                               i=1
                                                I
                                                                Oi,t wi,t (n, l; Pt , Et )
                                           =                   3      N
                                                                                                        .   (3)
                                               i=1   1-        k =1   m=1    w i,t ( m, k ; P t , E t )


                                                         9
The left side is supply. The right side is demand, which is wealth times the portfolio weight
aggregated across all investors. The notation in equation (3) emphasizes that both wealth
and the portfolio weights depend on the entire vector of exchange rates and asset prices.
    Market clearing is a system of 3N equations in 3N asset prices and N - 1 exchange
rates. By defining all exchange rates to be US dollars per local currency unit, we normalize
the exchange rate for the US to be one. Conditional on realized short-term bond prices
(or equivalently, short-term rates), we have a system of 3N equations in N long-term bond
prices, N stock prices, and N - 1 exchange rates. We obtain an exactly determined system
by assuming that the Federal Reserve adjusts the supply so that the US short-term debt
market clears at a given short-term rate. Therefore, we could use the demand system (3) as
an international asset pricing model once we specify a model of portfolio weights.

B. Characteristics-Based Demand

Koijen and Yogo (2019) develop a characteristics-based model of asset demand, in which the
portfolio weights are a logit function of asset prices, asset characteristics, and latent demand.
The logit function implies portfolio weights that are strictly positive and sum to one. The
exponential-linear specification is ideal for fitting observed holdings that are log-normally
distributed. The presence of latent demand makes the model sufficiently flexible to match
actual holdings.
    Koijen and Yogo (2019) derive characteristics-based demand from the mean-variance
portfolio, which is the solution of a portfolio choice problem. The key assumptions are that
returns have a factor structure and that expected returns and factor loadings depend on the
assets' own characteristics. These assumptions make an asset's own characteristics sufficient
for its contribution to the expected return and risk of the overall portfolio. We refer to
Appendix B for further details about the relation between the mean-variance portfolio and
characteristics-based demand.
   We extend the demand specification of Koijen and Yogo (2019) in two ways to tailor to
the present context of international holdings across three asset classes. First, asset demand
depends on both exchange rates and asset prices. We model portfolio weights as a function
of expected returns through a predictive regression of returns onto the market-to-book ratio
and the real exchange rate. Second, we use a nested logit specification to allow for imperfect
substitution across asset classes. The inner nest wi,t (n|l) in equation (1) describes how an
investor substitutes across countries within an asset class. The outer nest wi,t (l) describes
how an investor substitutes across asset classes.




                                               10
Expected returns

We model how expected returns are related to exchange rates and asset prices through a
predictive regression. Let rt+1 (n, l) be the continuously compounded return in US dollars
for asset class l in country n from year t to t + 1. Let yt (n) be country n's continuously
compounded 1-year yield in year t, where yt (US) is the US yield. Let et+1 (n) be the change
in log exchange rate from year t to t + 1. The predictor variables are log market-to-book
pt (n, l) and log real exchange rate et (n) - zt (n). For debt, log market-to-book is minus
maturity times the continuously compounded yield. For equity, log market-to-book is a
valuation measure, for which high valuation predicts subsequently low returns.
   Separately for each asset class, we define a panel regression model for excess returns:

            rt+1 (n, l) - yt (US) = l pt (n, l) + l (et (n) - zt (n)) + n,l + t+1 (n, l),        (4)

where n,l are country by asset class fixed effects. The return in US dollars is the sum of the
return in local currency unit plus the change in log exchange rate. A high real exchange rate
predicts depreciation of the nominal exchange rate under purchasing power parity. Therefore,
the real exchange rate should predict foreign returns in US dollars.
    We assume that investors care about returns in their own currency unit for the purposes
of portfolio choice. The predicted values from panel regression (4) imply expected returns
in US dollars. We construct expected returns in investor i's currency unit based on

                   Et [rt+1 (n, l) - et+1 (i) - yt (i)] =Et [rt+1 (n, l) - rt+1 (i, 1)]
                                                        =i,t (n, l) + n,l - i,1 ,                (5)

where

           i,t (n, l) = l pt (n, l) + l (et (n) - zt (n)) - 1 pt (i, 1) - 1 (et (i) - zt (i)).   (6)

Consider an example of Japanese investors holding UK equity, who care about returns in yen.
The left side of equation (5) is the expected excess UK stock return in yen relative to the
Japanese short-term rate. The right side says that this expected excess return is equivalent
to the expected UK stock return in US dollars minus the expected Japanese short-term bond
return in US dollars.




                                                   11
Allocation within Asset Class

We model the portfolio weight in country n within asset class l at time t as

                                                            i,t (n, l)
                                     wi,t (n|l) =            N
                                                                               ,                             (7)
                                                    1+       m=0 i,t (m, l )


where

                           log(i,t (n, l)) = l i,t (n, l) + l xi,t (n) +           i,t (n, l ).              (8)

Demand depends on the expected return i,t (n, l), a vector of asset characteristics xi,t (n), and
latent demand i,t (n, l). We index the coefficients l and l by l to allow for heterogeneous
demand elasticities across asset classes.3 By the budget constraint, the portfolio weight in
the outside asset within asset class l at time t is

                                                                1
                                     wi,t (0|l) =           N
                                                                               .                             (9)
                                                    1+      m=0 i,t (m, l )


   In every portfolio choice model, asset allocation depends on differences in expected returns
across assets. The expected return i,t (n, l) is a combination of log market-to-book and log
real exchange rate that best predicts excess returns. That is, we impose a single index
restriction on log market-to-book and log real exchange rate to respect the economic reason
that these two variables enter demand. Each investor cares about returns in its own currency
unit, which explains the index i in i,t (n, l). The expected return for Japanese investors in
yen is different from the expected return for UK investors in pounds.
    We index the asset characteristics not only by issuer n but also by investor i to allow
for bilateral variables such as export shares, import shares, and distance. Thus, expected
returns and perceived risk for the same asset could vary across investors. For example,
investors could perceive farther countries as having lower expected returns or higher risk
because of informational frictions that increase with distance. Similarly, latent demand
represents characteristics unobserved by the econometrician, which capture differences in
expected returns and perceived risk across investors and assets.
   3
    In the logit case, the coefficient restriction l > max{1/l , 1/l } is sufficient for existence and uniqueness
of equilibrium (Koijen and Yogo 2019, Proposition 2).




                                                       12
Allocation across Asset Classes

We model the aggregate portfolio weight in asset class l at time t as
                                                                l
                                              N
                                   1+         m=0 i,t (m, l )       exp{l + i,t (l)}
                 wi,t (l) =                                         k
                                                                                            ,   (10)
                                3               N
                                k =1   1+       m=0 i,t (m, k )         exp{k + i,t (k )}

where l  [0, 1]. The first term inside the parentheses in the numerator, which is also the
denominator in the inner nest (7), is called the "inclusive value" in a nested logit model.
To understand the role of the inclusive value, suppose that the coefficient on the short-term
bond price is negative (i.e., 1 < 0). A decrease in short-term bond prices across several
countries makes short-term debt more attractive as an asset class, reflected by an increase
in the inclusive value of short-term debt. The outer nest (10) then implies an increase in the
aggregate portfolio weight in short-term debt. Thus, the inclusive value connects changing
asset prices and characteristics in the inner nest to respective changes in portfolio weights
in the outer nest.
    In addition to the inclusive value, equation (10) depends on asset-class fixed effects l
and asset-class latent demand i,t(l). Asset-class latent demand represents characteristics
unobserved by the econometrician, which capture differences in expected returns and per-
ceived risk across investors and asset classes. Because the budget constraint implies that
there are only two degrees of freedom, we normalize 3 + i,t (3) = 0 for equity.
   By market clearing (3), a demand shock in one asset class could affect prices in other
asset classes through two channels. The first channel is a substitution effect. A demand
shock could change the inclusive value of an asset class and thereby change the aggregate
portfolio weights (10) across asset classes. The second channel is a wealth effect. A demand
shock could change the investors' wealth (2), which affects the demand for other asset classes.
As we discussed above, market clearing across all asset classes determines exchange rates,
conditional on short-term rates. Thus, a demand shock in long-term debt or equity markets
could affect exchange rates through both substitution and wealth effects.

Special Cases

When l = 1 for all asset classes in equation (10), the portfolio weight simplifies to the logit
specification (Koijen and Yogo 2019):

                                                           i,t (n, l)
                              wi,t (n, l) =           3         N
                                                                                  .             (11)
                                              3+      k =1      m=0 i,t (m, k )




                                                      13
In this expression, we have normalized l + i,t (l) = 0 because asset-class latent demand is
not separately identified from latent demand within asset classes.
    When l = 0 for all asset classes in equation (10), the portfolio weight simplifies to

                                         i,t (n, l)          exp{l + i,t (l)}
                   wi,t (n, l) =          N                 3                    .          (12)
                                   1+     m=0 i,t (m, l )      exp{k + i,t (k )}
                                                            k =1


In this case, the allocation across asset classes does not depend on the inclusive value. As
we discussed above, this means that only wealth effects are present and not substitution
effects. Blanchard, Giavazzi, and Sa (2005) emphasize this special case. Although the
overall allocation to equity is constant, the allocation across countries within equity affects
exchange rates through the wealth effect.
   These two cases clarify that l is an important parameter that determines the strength
of substitution across asset classes. Higher values of l imply stronger substitution across
asset classes. That is, a demand shock has stronger effects on prices in other asset classes.


III.    Demand Estimation

We discuss the identifying assumption, describe the estimation procedure, and present the
estimated demand system.

A.     Estimating Equations

Demand within Asset Class

Dividing equation (7) by equation (9) and taking the logarithm, we have

                            wi,t (n|l)
                     log                  = l i,t (n, l) + l xi,t (n) +   i,t (n, l ).      (13)
                            wi,t (0|l)

This is a separate panel regression model for each asset class l, whose observations are investor
i's holding of country n in year t. Equation (13) says that the demand for Japanese long-term
debt relative to UK long-term debt depends on their relative characteristics. An investor
substitutes from Japanese to UK long-term debt if the characteristics of UK long-term debt
become relatively more attractive (e.g., higher rating).
   The coefficients l and l vary across asset classes. However, they do not vary across
investors because of the limited sample size in our data at the country level. Koijen et al.
(2018) allow the coefficients to vary across investor types using more disaggregate data at
the institution level for sovereign debt in the euro area.


                                                      14
Demand across Asset Classes

Dividing equation (10) for short- or long-term debt (i.e., l = 1, 2) by the same equation for
equity (i.e., l = 3) and taking the logarithm, we have

                                    N                                N
          wi,t (l)
    log              =l log 1 +          i,t (m, l)    - 3 log 1 +         i,t (m, 3)   + l + i,t (l)
          wi,t (3)                 m=0                               m=0

                     = - l log(wi,t (0|l)) + 3 log(wi,t (0|3)) + l + i,t (l).                       (14)

The second line follows from equation (9), which relates the inclusive value to the portfolio
weight in the outside asset. This is a panel regression model, whose observations are investor
i's aggregate holding of asset class l relative to equity in year t. Equation (14) says that the
demand for short-term debt relative to equity depends on their relative inclusive value. An
investor substitutes from short-term debt to equity if the characteristics of equity become
relatively more attractive (e.g., lower prices).

B. Asset Characteristics

To operationalize equation (13), we must specify asset characteristics that explain portfolio
choice across countries. The macro variables are log nominal GDP, log real GDP per capita,
and inflation. The risk measures are equity volatility and sovereign debt ratings. We convert
the rating to a continuous measure equal to minus one times the 5-year default probability,
so that a higher measure implies a higher rating. Bilateral variables are the export share,
the import share, and distance. We refer to Appendix A for further details about how we
construct these variables.
   We include investor fixed effects to allow for cross-sectional variation in the outside asset
weight. We include year fixed effects to allow for time-series variation in the outside asset
weight. The combination of investor and year fixed effects means that the variation across
issuer countries (rather than the variation between inside and outside assets) identifies the
demand elasticities. For all asset classes, we include fixed effects for US issuance interacted
with year. These fixed effects capture the special status of US assets that is time varying.
For the equity market, we capture home bias through a dummy for own country ownership.

C. Identifying Assumption

Demand estimation requires an identifying assumption because latent demand is jointly
endogenous with exchange rates and asset prices. Our starting point is the assumption
that asset characteristics and quantities are exogenous in the same spirit as asset pricing in


                                                      15
endowment economies (Lucas 1978) or term structure models with an exogenous short-term
rate (Cox, Ingersoll, and Ross 1985). The ultimate goal, beyond the scope of this paper,
is to endogenize the macro variables together with exchange rates and asset prices. Doing
so for all 36 countries is a formidable task that is beyond the scope of current international
macro models (Engel and Matsumoto 2009; Devereux and Sutherland 2011; Heathcote and
Perri 2013).
    We also assume that the total investment in outside assets is exogenous. That is, the ini-
tial distribution of wealth across investor countries prior to portfolio choice is predetermined
and exogenous to current latent demand. Let xt be a matrix of asset characteristics for all
investor countries, issuer countries, and asset classes. Let Qt be a matrix of asset quantities
for all issuer countries and asset classes. Let Ot be a vector of investment in outside assets
for all investor countries. Formally, the identifying assumption amounts to a conditional
moment restriction:

                                      i,t (n, l )
                                  E                 xt , Qt , Ot = 0.                      (15)
                                       i,t (l)

   In typical economic applications, equation (15) is not sufficient for identification because
we do not have an explicit instrument. In our case, we have an implicit instrument that de-
pends only on asset characteristics through market clearing. In equation (13), the demand
for Japanese long-term debt depends directly on its own characteristics and indirectly on the
characteristics of other countries' long-term debt through exchange rates and asset prices.
For example, when the characteristics of UK long-term debt become relatively more attrac-
tive, the relative demand for Japanese long-term debt falls through market clearing. Under
equation (15), market clearing defines a particular nonlinear function of all asset characteris-
tics as an instrument for exchange rates and asset prices. We now describe how to construct
the instrument in the context of a step-by-step description of the estimation procedure.

D. Estimation Procedure

The estimation proceeds in four steps. In the first step, we estimate the predictive regression
(4). We then construct expected returns (6), which we will use in the fourth step to estimate
demand within asset class through equation (13).
   In the second step, we estimate a reduced-form regression corresponding to equation (13):

                                  wi,t (n|l)
                            log                  = l xi,t (n) + i,t (n, l).                (16)
                                  wi,t (0|l)



                                                    16
Let i,t (n, l) be the predicted value of this regression, which is a function of only the as-
set characteristics. We will use this predicted demand to construct the instrument in the
following steps.

Demand across Asset Classes

In the third step, we estimate demand across asset classes through equation (14), in which
the two endogenous regressors are the logarithms of wi,t (0|l) and wi,t (0|3). We construct an
instrument for wi,t (0|l):

                                                                  1
                                    wi,t (0|l) =                N
                                                                                  .                             (17)
                                                     1+         m=0 i,t (m, l )


We estimate instrumental variables regression (14) with two instruments, which are log(wi,t (0|l))
and log(wi,t (0|3)). In the following step, we will denote the estimated coefficients for demand
across asset classes as l and l .

Demand within Asset Class

We construct a predicted weight in country n and asset class l at time t:

                                                                                          l
                                                                      N
                                 i,t (n, l)                 1+        m=0 i,t (m, l )         exp{l }
           wi,t (n, l) =          N
                                                                                                            .   (18)
                                                                                              k
                           1+     m=0 i,t (m, l )      3                 N
                                                       k =1      1+      m=0 i,t (m, k )          exp{k }

These predicted weights capture the exogenous part of portfolio weights that depend only
on asset characteristics. We then compute counterfactual exchange rates and asset prices
that clear markets at the predicted weights. The instrument for the exchange rate clears the
short-term debt market at the predicted weights:

                                                 I
                                        1                         Oi,twi,t (n, 1)
                           Et (n) =                              3      N
                                                                                         .                      (19)
                                    Qt (n, 1)   i=1   1-         k =1   m=1 wi,t (m, k )


The instruments for the long-term bond price (l = 2) and the stock price (l = 3) clear their
respective markets at the predicted weights:

                                                       I
                                          1                            Oi,t wi,t (n, l)
                    Pt (n, l) =                                       3      N
                                                                                                   .            (20)
                                  Et (n)Qt (n, l)     i=1   1-        k =1   m=1    w i,t ( m, k )




                                                           17
In constructing the instrument for equity, we exclude own country holdings from both sides
of market clearing to avoid the instrument being dominated by the strong home bias.
    In the fourth step, we estimate demand within asset class through equation (13), in
which the endogenous regressor is the expected return i,t (n, l). For short-term debt, we
estimate instrumental variables regression (13) with log(Et (n)) as the instrument for the
expected return. For long-term debt, we use log(Pt (n, 2)) and log(Et (n)) as instruments for
the expected return. For equity, we use log(Pt (n, 3)) and log(Et (n)) as instruments for the
expected return.
    Having described the estimation procedure mechanically, we now offer a simpler version
of the instrument and explain the intuition behind identification. For estimating equation
(13), we only need cross-sectional variation in asset prices and the instruments. Therefore, we
could construct a strong instrument based only on a small subset of asset characteristics that
are slow moving or time invariant: log GDP, distance, investor fixed effects, and a dummy for
own country ownership. In this simpler version, variation in the instrument arises only from
the size distribution of investor countries (captured by Oi,t ), the size distribution of issuer
countries (captured by log GDP and asset quantities), and the distance between and investor
and issuer countries. Relatively small issuer countries that are in close proximity to relatively
large investor countries have a high inelastic component of demand, and consequently, high
exchange rates and asset prices.
    The estimates are ultimately not sensitive to whether or not we use the simpler version
of the instrument. However, we prefer the simpler version because the source of variation
that the instrument is exploiting has a clear interpretation. Therefore, we present estimates
for the simpler version in the remainder of the paper.

E.   Estimated Demand System

Expected returns

Table 3 reports estimates of panel regression (4) for short-term debt, long-term debt, and
equity across 36 countries from 2002 to 2017. Log market-to-book and log real exchange
rate are reliable predictors of excess returns for all asset classes. For short-term debt, the
estimated coefficient is -7.78 on log market-to-book and -0.31 on log real exchange rate.
For long-term debt, the estimated coefficient is -0.45 on log market-to-book and -0.37 on
log real exchange rate. For equity, the estimated coefficient is -0.29 on log market-to-book
and -0.88 on log real exchange rate. These coefficients imply that expected stock returns
increase by 29 basis points per one percent decrease in market-to-book equity and 88 basis
points per one percent increase in the real exchange rate.


                                               18
Demand within Asset Class

Table 4 reports the estimated coefficients for demand within asset class. The coefficient
on the expected return is 31.53 for short-term debt. Although there is no simple analytic
expression for the demand elasticity, we numerically compute the partial derivative to be
42 in 2017. That is, short-term debt demand decreases by 42 percent per one percent price
increase. With a maturity of 0.25 years, the demand elasticity with respect to yield is 10.5.
That is, short-term debt demand decreases by 10.5 percent per one percentage point yield
decrease. The coefficient on the expected return is 9.31 for long-term debt, which implies a
demand elasticity of 4.2 in 2017. With a maturity of 10 years, the demand elasticity with
respect to yield is 42. The coefficient on the expected return is 4.29 for equity, which implies
a demand elasticity of 1.9 in 2017.
   The signs of the coefficients on the macro variables are similar across asset classes. The
coefficients on log GDP and log GDP per capita are positive, which means that demand
increases with the issuer country's size and wealth. Demand decreases in inflation, especially
for short- and long-term debt. Long-term debt demand decreases by 22 percent per one
percentage point increase in inflation.
   Demand decreases in the two risk measures across all asset classes. The coefficient on
equity volatility is -4.83 for equity, which means that demand decreases by 4.83 percent
per one percentage point increase in equity volatility. The coefficient on sovereign debt
rating is 0.23 for long-term debt, which means that demand decreases by 23 percent per one
percentage point increase in the 5-year default probability.
   The bilateral variables are highly significant determinants of demand across all asset
classes. The coefficients on export and import shares are positive and significant, except for
the import share being insignificant for short-term debt. That is, investors hold assets of
countries with which they trade more (Lane and Milesi-Ferretti 2008). The coefficient on the
export share is 0.32 for equity, which means that demand increases by 32 percent per one
percentage point increase in exports as a share of the geometric average of GDP. Even after
controlling for trade activity, distance is a highly significant determinant of demand. The
coefficient on distance is -0.11 for equity, which means that demand decreases by 11 percent
per 1,000 km increase in distance. Although there are several potential explanations, the
previous literature favors the hypothesis that informational frictions increase with distance
(Portes, Rey, and Oh 2001; Portes and Rey 2005).
   In addition to local bias, there is a strong home bias in the equity market. The coefficient
on the dummy for own country ownership is 7.21. That is, demand for own equity is seven
times higher than that for foreign equity, controlling for asset characteristics.



                                              19
Demand across Asset Classes

Table 5 reports estimated coefficients for demand across asset classes. The coefficient on log
outside asset weight is 1 = 0.23 for short-term debt, 2 = 0.24 for long-term debt, and
3 = 0.50 for equity. For all asset classes, we reject the hypothesis that the coefficient is
zero. This means that substitution across asset classes is important for exchange rates and
asset prices.


IV.    Decomposition of Exchange Rates and Asset Prices

Based on the estimated demand system and market clearing, we decompose exchange rates
and asset prices into five sources of variation. They are changes in macro variables, short-
term rates, long-term debt quantities, foreign exchange reserves, and latent demand. We
also present a case study of the European sovereign debt crisis.
    The variance decomposition in this section is an accounting exercise based on market
clearing and an econometric model of portfolio weights. It is in the same spirit as a variance
decomposition of the price-dividend ratio based on a present-value identity and an econo-
metric model of stock price and dividend dynamics (Campbell and Shiller 1988). Neither
our variance decomposition nor Campbell and Shiller (1988) can be interpreted as causal
effects that would arise from a fully specified macro model. Nevertheless, these variance
decompositions are useful for isolating important sources of variation to estimate and test
existing macro models and to help design future models.

A.    Market Clearing

In our empirical implementation, we have market clearing (3) for long-term debt and eq-
uity across 36 countries. For the short-term debt market, we only have 27 market clearing
equations because 10 of the 36 countries have a common short-term rate in the euro area.
Because all exchange rates are defined in US dollars per local currency unit, the exchange
rate for the US is always one. In the counterfactual experiments, we assume that the Federal
Reserve adjusts the supply so that the US short-term debt market clears at a given short-
term rate (and an exchange rate of one). Similarly, the Hong Kong dollar is pegged to the US
dollar, and the Danish krone is pegged to the euro. We assume that the respective central
banks maintain their currency pegs in counterfactual experiments. That is, the central bank
adjusts the supply so that its short-term debt market clears at a given short-term rate and
currency peg.
     Market clearing defines an implicit function for exchange rates and asset prices, which


                                             20
we express as
                                   
                              et
                                   
                            pt (2) = g(xt , zt , Ot , pt (1), Qt , t , t).                        (21)
                             pt (3)

The left side is a vector of exchange rates, long-term bond prices, and market-to-book equity.
The right side is a function of asset characteristics, relative CPI, outside assets, short-term
bond prices, asset quantities, latent demand, and asset-class latent demand.
   We order and group the variables on the right side of equation (21) as follows.
  1. Macro variables: xt , zt , Ot , and Qt (3).

  2. Short-term rates: pt (1) and Qt (1).

  3. Long-term debt quantities: Qt (2).

  4. Foreign exchange reserves: Submatrix of            t   and t for foreign exchange reserves only.

  5. Latent demand: Submatrix of         t    and t for investor countries.
Macro variables are a set of variables that government policy does not determine directly
and would evolve exogenously in an endowment economy. Central bank policy determines
short-term rates together with short-term debt quantities. Fiscal policy and unconventional
monetary policy determine long-term debt quantities. We separate latent demand into that
of foreign exchange reserves, determined by central bank policy, and investor countries.

B. Variance Decomposition of Exchange Rates and Asset Prices

We change the macro variables in equation (21) from their values in year t to t + 1 and
compute the counterfactual vector of exchange rates and asset prices that would clear all
markets. Using the subscript 1, we denote the counterfactual exchanges rates as e1,t+1 , long-
term bond prices as p1,t+1 (2), and market-to-book equity as p1,t+1 (3). We repeat the same
procedure for short-term rates and denote the counterfactual exchanges rates and asset prices
using the subscript 2: e2,t+1 , p2,t+1 (2), and p2,t+1 (3). We repeat the same procedure for long-
term debt quantities (using the subscript 3), foreign exchange reserves (using the subscript
4), and latent demand (using the subscript 5). The actual realized change in exchange rates
from year t to t + 1 is the sum of the changes across these counterfactual experiments:

           et+1 - et =e1,t+1 - et + e2,t+1 - e1,t+1 + e3,t+1 - e2,t+1 + e4,t+1 - e3,t+1
                        + e5,t+1 - e4,t+1 ,                                                       (22)

                                                   21
Thus, we have a variance decomposition of annual changes in exchange rates:

     Var(et+1 - et ) =Cov(e1,t+1 - et , et+1 - et ) + Cov(e2,t+1 - e1,t+1 , et+1 - et )
                       + Cov(e3,t+1 - e2,t+1 , et+1 - et ) + Cov(e4,t+1 - e3,t+1 , et+1 - et )
                       + Cov(e5,t+1 - e4,t+1 , et+1 - et ).                                      (23)

We define the variance decomposition of long-term bond prices and market-to-book equity
analogously.
   Table 6 reports the variance decomposition of exchange rates, weighted by size of the
short-term debt market. The weighting is equivalent to constructing a value-weighted port-
folio of exchange rates relative to the US dollar. Macro variables account for 26 percent,
short-term rates account for 8 percent, long-term debt quantities account for 2 percent, and
foreign exchange reserves account for 19 percent of the variation in exchange rates. These
fundamental sources jointly account for 55 percent of the variation in exchange rates. La-
tent demand, which is uncorrelated with asset characteristics in the demand specification,
accounts for the remaining 45 percent.
   In Table 7, we further decompose the contribution of latent demand to the variance of
exchange rates by geographic group and asset class. Recall from Table 2 that a significant
amount of short-term debt investment passes through offshore financial centers (i.e., Ireland,
Luxembourg, and the Cayman Islands). Consistent with this fact, latent demand of offshore
financial centers substituting across short-term debt markets accounts for 26 percent of the
variation in exchange rates. Developed countries in North America and Europe are large
investors across all asset classes. Consequently, asset-class latent demand of North American
and European investors, which captures substitution across asset classes, each accounts for 8
percent of the variation in exchange rates. Hau and Rey (2004) and Camanho, Hau, and Rey
(2018) also find that substitution across asset classes is important for exchange rates. A key
takeaway of Table 7 is that the importance of latent demand is geographically concentrated
in large investor countries.
    Table 6 reports the variance decomposition of long-term yields, weighted by size of the
long-term debt market. Although macro variables account for 16 percent of the variation in
long-term yields, policy variables play a more important role. Short-term rates account for
9 percent, and long-term debt quantities account for 20 percent of the variation in long-term
yields. Foreign exchange reserves account for 11 percent of the variation in long-term yields,
confirming the importance of central bank interventions in foreign debt markets. Latent
demand accounts for 43 percent of the variation in long-term yields, of which European
investors account for 28 percent.


                                                22
    Table 6 also reports the variance decomposition of market-to-book equity, weighted by
size of the equity market. Macro variables and short-term rates are the primary determinants
of market-to-book equity. Macro variables account for 57 percent, and short-term rates
account for 6 percent of the variation in market-to-book equity. Latent demand accounts for
31 percent of the variation in market-to-book equity. European and Pacific investors each
account for 13 and 11 percent of the variation in market-to-book equity, respectively.
   As a point of reference, Table C1 in Appendix C reports reduced-form regressions of
annual changes in exchange rates and asset prices onto contemporaneous changes in the
macro variables. We obtain an R2 of 44 percent for exchange rates, 46 percent for long-term
yields, and 55 percent for market-to-book equity. Other studies have also confirmed high
explanatory power in the post-crisis sample in contrast to no explanatory power in the pre-
crisis sample (Engel and Wu 2018; Lilley et al. 2019). Therefore, it should not be surprising
that fundamentals have high explanatory power in Table 6. The problem with the reduced-
form regressions in Table C1 is that the signs of the estimated coefficients are inconsistent
across asset classes and difficult to interpret. In contrast, the estimated coefficients for
demand in Table 4 have an intuitive economic interpretation, and their signs are consistent
across asset classes.

C. A Closer Examination of the Variance Decomposition

According to the second step of the variance decomposition in Table 6, short-term rates
account for 8 percent of the variation in exchange rates. This estimate represents the average
relation across countries and over time. To better understand the sources of variation that
lead to this estimate, Figure 3 reports the realized changes in exchange rates that relate
to contemporaneous changes in short-term rates for four regions: the euro area, Japan,
Switzerland, and the UK. That is, the vertical axis reports the subvector of e2,t+1 - e1,t+1
in equation (22) that corresponds to the four regions, and the horizontal axis reports the
corresponding change in the short-term rate. In all four regions, monetary easing is associated
with a depreciation of the exchange rate. Averaged across the four regions, the exchange
rate depreciates by 2.2 percent per one percentage point decrease in the short-term rate.
   According to the third step of the variance decomposition, long-term debt quantities
account for 2 percent of the variation in exchange rates and 20 percent of the variation
in long-term yields. Figure 4 takes a closer examination of the third step of the vari-
ance decomposition for the four regions. The horizontal axis reports annual changes in
long-term yields that relate to contemporaneous changes in long-term debt quantities (i.e.,
-10(p3,t+1 (2) - p2,t+1 (2)) assuming a 10-year maturity). The vertical axis reports annual
changes in exchange rates that relate to contemporaneous changes in long-term debt quan-

                                              23
tities (i.e., e3,t+1 - e2,t+1 ). In all four regions, a decrease in long-term debt quantity is
associated with a lower long-term yield and a depreciation of the exchange rate. Averaged
across the four regions, a change in long-term debt quantity that decreases the long-term
yield by one percentage point also depreciates the exchange rate by 1.5 percent.

D. A Case Study of the European Sovereign Debt Crisis

We demonstrate that the variance decomposition could be used to interpret major economic
events through a case study of the European sovereign debt crisis. Table 8 reports the
variance decomposition of the long-term yield spread between Germany and the US. Short-
term rates account for 53 percent, long-term debt quantities account for 15 percent, and
foreign exchange reserves account for 20 percent of the variation in the long-term yield
spread. Remarkably, these policy variables together account for 88 of the variation in the
long-term yield spread.
   Figure C1 in Appendix C is a simple scatter plot that explains this finding. The upper
panel shows that the long-term yield spread between Germany and the US is positively
related to the interest rate differential between the two countries. That is, the relative level
factor drives the long-term yield spread. The lower panel shows that the long-term yield
spread is positively related to the relative long-term debt quantity. In both scatter plots,
the data points in the upper right are 2002, 2003, and 2008 when the US had relatively
expansionary monetary policy and a lower long-term yield. The data points in the lower left
are 2016 and 2017 when Germany had relatively expansionary monetary policy and a lower
long-term yield.
    Table 8 also reports the variance decomposition of the long-term yield spreads between
southern euro countries (i.e., Greece, Italy, and Portugal) and Germany. Because countries
in the euro area share a common short-term rate, the variance decomposition gives a sensible
answer that short-term rates account for none of the variation in the long-term yield spreads.
Especially after 2008, southern euro countries had very different macro and fiscal experiences
relative to Germany. Consistent with this fact, macro variables account for 64 percent, and
long-term debt quantities account for 14 percent of the variation in the long-term yield
spreads. Latent demand of European investors accounts for 13 percent, and latent demand
of offshore financial centers accounts for 4 percent of the variation in the long-term yield
spreads. This finding that only the latent demand of euro area investors matters is consistent
with currency bias in sovereign debt portfolios (Maggiori, Neiman, and Schreger 2018).
   Figure 5 shows the time series of the annual change in the long-term yield spread between
southern euro countries and Germany and their decomposition into changes due to macro
variables, long-term debt quantities, and latent demand. The most influential observations

                                              24
are the sharp increase in the long-term yield spread at the onset of the European sovereign
debt crisis in 2011, followed by a sharp decrease when the European Central Bank intervened
in 2012. Consistent with the variance decomposition in Table 8, the figure shows high
correlation between the overall change in the long-term yield spread and the changes due
to macro variables, long-term debt quantities, and latent demand. A close examination
reveals an interesting difference between Greece versus Italy and Portugal. For Greece,
macro variables, which include equity volatility and sovereign debt ratings, account for the
sharp increase in the credit spread. For Italy and Portugal, latent demand, which captures
perceived rather than realized risk, account for the sharp increase in the credit spread. This
finding is consistent with the narrative that Greece had a realized solvency problem, while
investors perceived Italy and Portugal to be still solvent but vulnerable.


V.   Convenience Yield on US Assets

US assets enjoy a special status in global financial markets because the US dollar is the
most important reserve currency (Gourinchas and Rey 2007). The demand system that
we have estimated in Section III captures the special status of US assets through fixed
effects for US issuance interacted with year. Because these fixed effects are significantly
positive, the demand for US assets are much higher than other countries' assets, controlling
for observed characteristics. By setting the fixed effects to zero for all asset classes and
computing counterfactual prices through market clearing, we infer the convenience yield on
US assets. By how much would US asset prices decrease (and expected returns increase) if
they were not special?
    In the absence of special status, the US dollar would be weaker and expected to appreciate
at a higher rate. As reported in Table 9, the expected annual appreciation of the US dollar
relative to a value-weighted portfolio of foreign currencies would be 1.28 percentage points
higher. The demand system allows us to trace the investor origins of this convenience yield
into a sum of 0.06 percent for foreign exchange reserves, 0.04 percent for North American
investors, 0.35 percent for European investors, 0.41 percent for Pacific investors, 0.33 percent
for offshore financial centers, 0.07 percent for emerging market investors, and 0.03 percent
for other countries. For example, the convenience yield on the US dollar would be 0.35
percentage points lower at 0.93 percent instead of 1.28 percent in the absence of special-
status demand from European investors.
   In the absence of special status, the US long-term yield would be 2.15 percentage points
higher, confirming the special status of Treasury debt in global financial markets (Jiang,
Krishnamurthy, and Lustig 2018). We trace the investor origins of this convenience yield


                                              25
and find that the most important sources are 0.48 percent for foreign exchange reserves,
0.51 percent for European investors, 0.52 percent for Pacific investors, and 0.53 percent for
offshore financial centers. Figure 6 reports the time series of US long-term yield and its
convenience yield. The convenience yield tends to be countercylical and increased to 3.15
percent in 2011 during the European sovereign debt crisis.
   In the absence of special status, the US annual expected stock return would be 1.70
percentage points higher. We trace the investor origins of this convenience yield and find that
the most important sources are 0.21 percent for North American investors, 0.69 percent for
European investors, 0.37 percent for Pacific investors, and 0.38 percent for offshore financial
centers.


VI.   Conclusion

Based on a demand system approach, we have developed an international asset pricing model
to study sources of variation in exchange rates and asset prices. We conclude with three
broad lessons. First, the significance of substitution effects across asset classes highlights
the need to study exchange rates, long-term yields, and stock prices jointly. Second, central
banks play an important role in managing exchange rates and the term structure of interest
rates globally. Short-term rates account for 8 percent of the variation in exchange rates
and 9 percent of the variation in long-term yields. Long-term debt quantities account for 20
percent of the variation in long-term yields. Foreign exchange reserves account for 19 percent
of the variation in exchange rates and 11 percent of the variation in long-term yields. Third,
the convenience yield on US assets is large across all asset classes, and the importance of
special-status demand is geographically dispersed.
   Based on a vector autoregression, Clarida and Gali (1994), Eichenbaum and Evans (1995),
and Inoue and Rossi (2018) find that both conventional and unconventional monetary policy
affect exchange rates. Based on an event study, Gagnon et al. (2011) and Krishnamurthy
and Vissing-Jørgensen (2011) find that unconventional monetary policy affects long-term
yields. Fundamentally, unconventional monetary policy concerns changes in the supply of
long-term debt and their impact on exchange rates and asset prices through substitution
effects. The demand system approach models this mechanism directly, based on market
clearing of global financial markets. Therefore, it is suited for studying the simultaneous
and cumulative impact of conventional and unconventional monetary policy across many
countries. An important avenue of future work is to apply a demand system approach to
better understand event study estimates of the impact of monetary shocks on asset prices
(Koijen et al. 2018).


                                              26
    In the spirit of portfolio balance models in international finance, we have focused entirely
on financial markets in this paper. Future work could extend our framework to the real side
of the economy. Recent work on international macro models emphasizes the need for latent
demand (i.e., demand shocks unrelated to fundamentals) to resolve longstanding puzzles in
international finance (Blanchard, Giavazzi, and Sa 2005; Gabaix and Maggiori 2015; Itskhoki
and Mukhin 2017). A critique of this literature is that latent demand is an unmeasurable
"wedge" without a structural interpretation. The demand system approach shows otherwise,
that latent demand could be estimated from international holdings data. Therefore, the
variance decompositions in this paper are useful for isolating important sources of variation
to estimate and test existing international macro models and to help design future models.




                                              27
References

Adler, Michael and Bernard Dumas. 1983. "International Portfolio Choice and Corporation
 Finance: A Synthesis." Journal of Finance 38 (3):925­984.

Asness, Clifford S., Tobias J. Moskowitz, and Lasse Heje Pedersen. 2013. "Value and Mo-
  mentum Everywhere." Journal of Finance 68 (3):929­985.

Blanchard, Olivier, Francesco Giavazzi, and Filipa Sa. 2005. "International Investors, the
  U.S. Current Account, and the Dollar." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1:1­49.

Camanho, Nelson, Herald Hau, and H´
                                  el`
                                    ene Rey. 2018. "Global Portfolio Rebalancing and
  Exchange Rates." NBER Working Paper No. 24320.

Campbell, John Y. and Robert J. Shiller. 1988. "The Dividend-Price Ratio and Expectations
  of Future Dividends and Discount Factors." Review of Financial Studies 1 (3):195­228.

Clarida, Richard and Jordi Gali. 1994. "Sources of Real Exchange-rate Fluctuations: How
  Important Are Nominal Shocks?" Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy
  41:1­56.

Cox, John C., Jonathan E. Ingersoll, Jr., and Stephen A. Ross. 1985. "A Theory of the Term
  Structure of Interest Rates." Econometrica 53 (2):385­407.

Dahlquist, Magnus and Henrik Hasseltoft. 2013. "International Bond Risk Premia." Journal
 of International Economics 90 (1):17­32.

Devereux, Michael B. and Alan Sutherland. 2011. "Country Portfolios in Open Economy
  Macro-Models." Journal of the European Economic Association 9 (2):337­369.

Eichenbaum, Martin and Charles L. Evans. 1995. "Some Empirical Evidence on the Effects
  of Shocks to Monetary Policy on Exchange Rates." Quarterly Journal of Economics
  110 (4):975­1009.

Engel, Charles and Akito Matsumoto. 2009. "The International Diversification Puzzle When
  Goods Prices Are Sticky: It's Really about Exchange-Rate Hedging, Not Equity Portfo-
  lios." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 1 (2):155­188.

Engel, Charles and Steve Pak Yeung Wu. 2018. "Liquidity and Exchange Rates: An Empir-
  ical Investigation." NBER Working Paper No. 25397.




                                           28
Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French. 2012. "Size, Value, and Momentum in International
  Stock Returns." Journal of Financial Economics 105 (3):457­472.

Gabaix, Xavier and Matteo Maggiori. 2015. "International Liquidity and Exchange Rate
  Dynamics." Quarterly Journal of Economics 130 (3):1369­1420.

Gagnon, Joseph, Matthew Raskin, Julie Remache, and Brian Sack. 2011. "The Financial
  Market Effects of the Federal Reserve's Large-Scale Asset Purchases." International Jour-
  nal of Central Banking 7 (1):3­43.

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier. 2008. "Valuation Effects and External Adjustment: A Review."
  In Current Account and External Financing, Central Banking, Analysis, and Economic
  Policies Book Series, vol. 12, edited by Kevin Cowan, Sebasti´
                                                               an Edwards, and Rodrigo O.
  Vald´
      es. Santiago, Chile: Central Bank of Chile, 195­236.

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier and H´
                                el`
                                  ene Rey. 2007. "From World Banker to World Venture
 Capitalist: U.S. External Adjustment and the Exorbitant Privilege." In G7 Current
  Account Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment, edited by Richard H. Clarida, chap. 1.
  Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 11­66.

Greenwood, Robin and Dimitri Vayanos. 2014. "Bond Supply and Excess Bond Returns."
  Review of Financial Studies 27 (3):663­713.

Hau, Herald and H´
                 el`
                   ene Rey. 2004. "Can Portfolio Rebalancing Explain the Dynamics
  of Equity Returns, Equity Flows, and Exchange Rates?" American Economic Review:
  Papers and Proceedings 19 (1):273­317.

------. 2006. "Exchange Rates, Equity Prices, and Capital Flows." Review of Financial
  Studies 94 (2):126­133.

Heathcote, Jonathan and Fabrizio Perri. 2013. "The International Diversification Puzzle Is
  Not As Bad As You Think." Journal of Political Economy 121 (6):1108­1159.

Inoue, Atsushi and Barbara Rossi. 2018. "The Effects of Conventional and Unconventional
  Monetary Policy on Exchange Rates." NBER Working Paper No. 25021.

International Monetary Fund. 2002. Coordinated Portfolio Investment Survey Guide. Wash-
  ington, DC: International Monetary Fund, 2nd ed.

Itskhoki, Oleg and Dmitry Mukhin. 2017. "Exchange Rate Disconnect in General Equilib-
   rium." NBER Working Paper No. 23401.


                                            29
Jiang, Zhengyang, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Hanno Lustig. 2018. "Foreign Safe Asset
  Demand and the Dollar Exchange Rate." NBER Working Paper No. 24439.

Jotikasthira, Chotibhak, Anh Le, and Christian Lundblad. 2015. "Why Do Term Structures
  in Different Currencies Co-Move?" Journal of Financial Economics 115 (1):58­83.

Koijen, Ralph S. J., Fran¸
                         cois Koulischer, Beno^
                                              it Nguyen, and Motohiro Yogo. 2018. "In-
  specting the Mechanism of Quantitative Easing in the Euro Area." Banque de France
  Working Paper No. 601.

Koijen, Ralph S. J., Robert J. Richmond, and Motohiro Yogo. 2019. "Which Investors
  Matter for Global Equity Valuations and Expected Returns?" Working paper, University
  of Chicago.

Koijen, Ralph S. J. and Motohiro Yogo. 2019. "A Demand System Approach to Asset
 Pricing." Journal of Political Economy 127 (4):1475­1515.

Kouri, Pentti J. K. 1976. "The Exchange Rate and the Balance of Payments in the Short
  Run and in the Long Run: A Monetary Approach." Scandinavian Journal of Economics
  78 (2):280­304.

Kouri, Pentti J. K. and Jorge Braga De Macedo. 1978. "Exchange Rates and the International
 Adjustment Process." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1:111­150.

Krishnamurthy, Arvind and Annette Vissing-Jørgensen. 2007. "The Demand for Treasury
  Debt." NBER Working Paper No. 12881.

------. 2011. "The Effects of Quantitative Easing on Interest Rates: Channels and Impli-
  cations for Policy." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2:215­265.

------. 2012. "The Aggregate Demand for Treasury Debt." Journal of Political Economy
  120 (2):233­267.

Lane, Philip R. and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti. 2008. "International Investment Patterns."
  Review of Economics and Statistics 90 (3):538­549.

Lilley, Andrew, Matteo Maggiori, Brent Neiman, and Jesse Schreger. 2019. "Exchange Rate
  Reconnect." NBER Working Paper No. 26046.

Lucas, Robert E., Jr. 1978.    "Asset Prices in an Exchange Economy."       Econometrica
  46 (6):1429­1445.


                                           30
Lustig, Hanno, Nikolai Roussanov, and Adrien Verdelhan. 2011. "Common Risk Factors in
  Currency Markets." Review of Financial Studies 24 (11):3731­3777.

Maggiori, Matteo, Brent Neiman, and Jesse Schreger. 2018. "International Currencies and
  Capital Allocation." NBER Working Paper No. 24673.

Markowitz, Harry. 1952. "Portfolio Selection." Journal of Finance 7 (1):77­91.

Mayer, Thierry and Soledad Zignago. 2011. "Notes on CEPII's Distances Measures: The
 GeoDist Database." CEPII Working Paper No. 2011­25.

Nelson, Charles R. and Andrew F. Siegel. 1987. "Parsimonious Modeling of Yield Curves."
  Journal of Business 60 (4):473­489.

Portes, Richard and H´
                     el`
                       ene Rey. 2005. "The Determinants of Cross-Border Equity Flows."
  Journal of International Economics 65 (2):269­296.

Portes, Richard, H´
                  el`
                    ene Rey, and Yonghyup Oh. 2001. "Information and Capital Flows: The
  Determinants of Transactions in Financial Assets." European Economic Review 45 (4­
  6):783­796.

Standard & Poors. 2018. "Default, Transition, and Recovery: 2017 Annual Sovereign Default
  Study and Rating Transitions." S&P Global Ratings.

Zorom´e, Ahmed. 2007. "Concept of Offshore Financial Centers: In Search of an Operational
  Definition." IMF Working Paper No. 07­87.




                                           31
                                        Table 1
                            Market values of Financial Assets

                                 Short-term debt            Long-term debt           Equity
                                 Billion   Share in        Billion   Share in   Billion   Share in
          Country                  US$     reserves          US$     reserves     US$     reserves
           Developed markets: North America
              Canada               168.7       0.09         859        0.13       2,367       0.00
              United States        822.7       0.34       7,402        0.28      32,121       0.01
           Developed markets: Europe
              Austria                                       308        0.15         151       0.00
              Belgium                                       364        0.12         438       0.00
              Finland                                       183        0.13         204       0.01
              France                                      1,928        0.17       2,749       0.01
              Germany                                     1,740        0.31       2,262       0.01
              Italy                                       1,042        0.07         735       0.00
              Netherlands                                 1,398        0.08       1,100       0.01
              Portugal                                      106        0.05          76       0.00
              Spain                                         762        0.08         889       0.00
              Euro                 892.3       0.26
              Denmark               19.0       0.35         214        0.07         592       0.00
              Israel                 0.6       0.00          29        0.01         231       0.00
              Norway                18.5       0.11         222        0.07         287       0.00
              Sweden                99.3       0.12         386        0.07         699       0.00
              Switzerland           33.6       0.19         112        0.03       1,686       0.00
              United Kingdom       352.9       0.06       1,948        0.08       3,246       0.01
           Developed markets: Pacific
              Australia             95.9       0.09         637        0.14       1,508       0.00
              Hong Kong             34.6       0.15         100        0.01       4,351       0.00
              Japan                441.4       0.36         474        0.22       6,223       0.00
              New Zealand            2.4       0.07          51        0.08          95       0.00
              Singapore             63.7       0.24          88        0.06         787       0.00
           Emerging markets
              China                101.1       0.17         237        0.25       8,711       0.00
              Colombia               0.2       0.00          60        0.01         121       0.00
              Czech Republic        15.5       0.00          34        0.02          25       0.00
              Greece                                         26        0.05           51      0.00
              Hungary                0.3       0.00          35        0.02          32       0.00
              India                 10.6       0.00          78        0.01       2,332       0.00
              Malaysia               6.8       0.25          63        0.03         456       0.00
              Mexico                10.7       0.08         259        0.02         417       0.00
              Philippines            1.4       0.00          28        0.10         290       0.00
              Poland                 0.1       0.00         111        0.07         201       0.00
              Russia                 0.4       0.00          61        0.00         623       0.00
              South Africa           0.2       0.00          63        0.01       1,231       0.00
              South Korea           20.1       0.38         137        0.18       1,772       0.00
              Thailand               3.4       0.00          28        0.00         549       0.00
    The market value of short- or long-term debt is the total amount held by foreign investors. The market
value of equity is total stock market capitalization. Short-term debt is aggregated for the ten countries in
the table that are in the euro area. All market values are in billion US dollars at year-end 2017.




                                                      32
                                        Table 2
                            Top Ten Investors by Asset Class

        Short-term debt                    Long-term debt                          Equity
                        Billion                            Billion                            Billion
   Investor               US$        Investor                US$        Investor                US$
   Reserves                 912      Reserves                4,381      United States         32,799
   Ireland                  527      Japan                   2,176      China                  8,194
   United States            488      United States           2,165      Japan                  5,343
   Luxembourg               361      Germany                 2,002      Hong Kong              4,198
   France                   215      Luxembourg              1,995      United Kingdom         2,867
   Cayman Islands           188      France                  1,489      Canada                 2,846
   United Kingdom           126      Ireland                 1,317      France                 1,971
   Hong Kong                111      United Kingdom          1,038      Luxembourg             1,952
   Singapore                 84      Netherlands               909      India                  1,828
   Switzerland               55      Cayman Islands            834      Australia              1,629
    The IMF aggregates foreign exchange reserves across all central banks for confidentiality. All market
values are in billion US dollars at year-end 2017.




                                                   33
                                             Table 3
                                      Predictive Regression

                                                 Short-term       Long-term
                   Variable                            debt            debt Equity
                   Log market-to-book                     -7.78        -0.45      -0.29
                                                         (3.49)       (0.13)     (0.22)
                   Log real exchange rate                 -0.31        -0.37      -0.88
                                                         (0.08)       (0.11)     (0.30)
                   Observations                             375          540        540
    The estimation is equation (4). For debt, log market-to-book is minus maturity times the continuously
compounded yield. All specifications include country fixed effects. Robust standard errors clustered by year
are reported in parentheses. The annual sample period is 2002 to 2017.




                                                    34
                                         Table 4
                            Estimated Demand within Asset Class

                                                    Short-term Long-term
                    Variable                              debt      debt Equity
                    Expected return                          31.53          9.31       4.29
                                                            (5.55)        (0.61)     (0.46)
                    Log GDP                                   0.96          0.87       0.80
                                                            (0.04)        (0.01)     (0.01)
                    Log GDP per capita                        1.79          1.42       0.44
                                                            (0.15)        (0.04)     (0.03)
                    Inflation                                -0.51         -0.22      -0.02
                                                            (0.09)        (0.02)     (0.01)
                    Volatility                               -3.78         -1.83      -4.83
                                                            (0.47)        (0.23)     (0.27)
                    Rating                                    0.11          0.23       0.08
                                                            (0.02)        (0.02)     (0.01)
                    Export share                              0.35          0.29       0.32
                                                            (0.04)        (0.02)     (0.02)
                    Import share                             -0.03          0.09       0.09
                                                            (0.04)        (0.02)     (0.02)
                    Distance                                 -0.20         -0.17      -0.11
                                                            (0.02)        (0.00)     (0.00)
                    Dummy: Own country                                                 7.21
                                                                                     (0.13)
                    Observations                         17,293          31,252      30,202
                    R2                                     0.25            0.44        0.66
    The estimation equation is equation (13). Sovereign debt rating is a continuous measure equal to minus
one times the 5-year default probability. All specifications include fixed effects for the investor country, year,
and US issuance interacted with year. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.
The annual sample period is 2002 to 2017.




                                                       35
                                      Table 5
                        Estimated Demand across Asset Classes

                         Variable                       Symbol     Estimate
                         Log outside asset weight:
                           Short-term debt              1               0.23
                                                                      (0.06)
                            Long-term debt              2               0.24
                                                                      (0.08)
                            Equity                      3               0.50
                                                                      (0.03)
                         Dummy:
                          Short-term debt               1              -2.21
                                                                      (0.25)
                            Long-term debt              2               0.52
                                                                      (0.27)
                         Observations                                  2,339
    Equation (14) is the estimation equation. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in
parentheses. The annual sample period is 2002 to 2017.




                                                  36
                                   Table 6
          Variance Decomposition of Exchange Rates and Asset Prices

                                                     Exchange      Long-term
                 Variable                                 rate          debt Equity
                 Macro variables                           0.26           0.16       0.57
                                                         (0.07)         (0.09)     (0.08)
                 Short-term rates                          0.08           0.09       0.06
                                                         (0.05)         (0.03)     (0.07)
                 Debt quantities                           0.02           0.20       0.03
                                                         (0.01)         (0.02)     (0.00)
                 Reserves                                  0.19           0.11       0.03
                                                         (0.04)         (0.03)     (0.01)
                 Latent demand                             0.45           0.43       0.31
                                                         (0.04)         (0.06)     (0.06)
                    North America                          0.08           0.05       0.06
                                                         (0.02)         (0.01)     (0.04)
                    Europe                                 0.08           0.28       0.13
                                                         (0.02)         (0.03)     (0.03)
                    Pacific                                0.03           0.04       0.11
                                                         (0.01)         (0.01)     (0.04)
                    Offshore financial centers             0.25           0.05      -0.01
                                                         (0.02)         (0.02)     (0.01)
                    Emerging markets                       0.01           0.01       0.03
                                                         (0.00)         (0.00)     (0.03)
                    Other countries                        0.01           0.00       0.00
                                                         (0.00)         (0.00)     (0.01)
                 Observations                               375            540        540
    Variance is value-weighted by size of the corresponding asset market. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard
errors are reported in parentheses. The annual sample period is 2002 to 2017.




                                                    37
                                  Table 7
        Variance Decomposition of Exchange Rates by Latent Demand

                                                    Within asset class             Across
                                           Short-term Long-term                      asset
            Investor                             debt      debt Equity             classes
            Total                                  0.28           0.03     -0.03      0.17
                                                 (0.03)         (0.02)    (0.01)    (0.03)
            North America                          0.01           0.00     -0.01      0.08
                                                 (0.02)         (0.00)    (0.00)    (0.02)
            Europe                                -0.02           0.03     -0.01      0.08
                                                 (0.03)         (0.01)    (0.00)    (0.02)
            Pacific                                0.01           0.01      0.00      0.01
                                                 (0.02)         (0.01)    (0.00)    (0.01)
            Offshore financial centers             0.26          -0.02      0.00      0.00
                                                 (0.03)         (0.01)    (0.00)    (0.02)
            Emerging markets                       0.01           0.01     -0.01      0.00
                                                 (0.00)         (0.01)    (0.01)    (0.00)
            Other countries                        0.01           0.00      0.00      0.00
                                                 (0.00)         (0.00)    (0.00)    (0.00)
    Variance is value-weighted by size of the short-term debt market. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard
errors are reported in parentheses. The annual sample period is 2002 to 2017.




                                                  38
                                    Table 8
               Variance Decomposition of Long-Term Yield Spreads

                                                        Germany Southern euro
                    Variable                               -US    - Germany
                    Macro variables                         -0.02               0.64
                                                           (0.24)             (0.13)
                    Short-term rates                         0.53               0.00
                                                           (0.16)             (0.00)
                    Debt quantities                          0.15               0.14
                                                           (0.06)             (0.04)
                    Reserves                                 0.20               0.04
                                                           (0.20)             (0.03)
                    Latent demand                            0.14               0.19
                                                           (0.12)             (0.12)
                       North America                        -0.02               0.01
                                                           (0.03)             (0.01)
                       Europe                                0.04               0.13
                                                           (0.07)             (0.08)
                       Pacific                               0.02               0.01
                                                           (0.05)             (0.00)
                       Offshore financial centers            0.07               0.04
                                                           (0.10)             (0.02)
                       Emerging markets                      0.00               0.00
                                                           (0.01)             (0.00)
                       Other countries                       0.01              -0.01
                                                           (0.01)             (0.01)
                    Observations                               15                 45
    The southern euro countries are Greece, Italy, and Portugal. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors
are reported in parentheses. The annual sample period is 2002 to 2017.




                                                   39
                                      Table 9
                       Average Convenience Yield on US Assets

                                                  Exchange       Long-term
                  Investor                             rate           debt Equity
                  Total                                   1.28         2.15      1.70
                                                        (0.40)       (0.14)    (0.15)
                  Reserves                                0.06         0.48     -0.07
                                                        (0.14)       (0.02)    (0.01)
                  North America                           0.04         0.02      0.21
                                                        (0.00)       (0.00)    (0.02)
                  Europe                                  0.35         0.51      0.69
                                                        (0.06)       (0.03)    (0.04)
                  Pacific                                 0.41         0.52      0.37
                                                        (0.06)       (0.05)    (0.03)
                  Offshore financial centers              0.33         0.53      0.38
                                                        (0.15)       (0.05)    (0.05)
                  Emerging markets                        0.07         0.05      0.09
                                                        (0.01)       (0.01)    (0.02)
                  Other countries                         0.03         0.04      0.03
                                                        (0.01)       (0.00)    (0.00)
    Convenience yield is reported as an annual percentage. The three columns report expected appreciation
of the US dollar relative to a value-weighted portfolio of foreign currencies, US long-term yield, and US
expected stock return. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. The annual
sample period is 2002 to 2017.




                                                   40
                                                            Euro                                                  Japan
                                                                                                      10
                                     .2
                                                                                                 09          11
                                                                   09
                                                                  07 04
                                          17                13     06
                                                             14                                                    12
                                                                                                                   04
                                                                       05                                          08           03
                                     0                            10              03                                  13
                                               16    15          12          08                                       06
                                                                                                                  07 17     05
                                                                                                                            16        02
       Log price (relative to US)




                                                                        11                                                 15
                                                                                                                           14
                                    -.2
                                                                                        02


                                    -.4
                                                      Switzerland                                          United Kingdom
                                     .2                     13                                                 06
                                                            15
                                                          16 12
                                                                   17                                         04 07
                                                                10                                             05
                                                              11 14
                                                             09                                               03
                                     0                                                                            13
                                                                                                                   14
                                                                                                                     1210        09
                                                             04 07                                             15
                                                                                                                17
                                                                                                                02    11
                                                       06
                                                            05                                                    16
                                                                      03 08                                                           08
                                    -.2
                                                                        02

                                    -.4
                                           -.4       -.2          0           .2            .4   -.4        -.2        0        .2         .4
                                                            Log quantity (relative to US)

                                               Figure 1. Relative Long-Term Debt Quantity and Price
    The horizontal axis is each region's log face amount of long-term debt in local currency unit minus log
face amount of US long-term debt (in US dollars). The vertical axis is each region's log long-term bond price
plus log exchange rate (in US dollars per local currency unit) minus US log long-term bond price. For the
euro area, log price is a weighted average across countries, based on size of the long-term debt market. The
two digit number represents year (e.g., 02 is 2002). Each panel reports the linear regression line.




                                                                                       41
                                                            Euro                                  Japan
                                     .5
                                                         07
                                                  06
                                                            09                           10       08
                                            04               08                                      05
                                                 05                                12       09 06
                                                                                           11
                                                                                               04
                                                   03                                             07
                                     0             13 12 10                                   13 03
       Log price (relative to US)




                                                                  11
                                                      14                                             02 15
                                                         17
                                                          15
                                                                  02                             14 16
                                                       16                                                 17


                                    -.5
                                                      Switzerland                          United Kingdom
                                     .5
                                                                                    06
                                                                                          07
                                                  10                                          05
                                                12
                                                13 09                                       0409
                                                     11
                                                                  08                           10
                                     0           14 0615                                       13
                                                                                                 12
                                                                                                           11
                                                               07                                           03
                                                   17
                                                  04
                                                   16                                                       08 02
                                                               05                              14
                                                               03                                15

                                                                            02                        17
                                                                                                      16
                                    -.5
                                          -.2           0              .2        .4 -.2          0             .2   .4
                                                          Log quantity (relative to US)

                                                 Figure 2. Relative Equity Quantity and Price
     The horizontal axis is each region's log book equity in local currency unit minus US log book equity
(in US dollars). The vertical axis is each region's log market-to-book equity plus log exchange rate (in
US dollars per local currency unit) minus US log market-to-book equity. For the euro area, log price is a
weighted average across countries, based on size of the equity market. The two digit number represents year
(e.g., 02 is 2002). Each panel reports the linear regression line.




                                                                            42
                                                         Euro                          Japan
                                      10



                                       0
       Change in exchange rate (%)




                                     -10

                                                    Switzerland                  United Kingdom
                                      10



                                       0



                                     -10


                                           -3     -2     -1     0      1   -3     -2     -1     0    1
                                                       Change in short-term rate (%)

                                           Figure 3. How Exchange Rates Relate to Short-Term Rates
    The annual change in the exchange rate is decomposed into macro variables, short-term rates, long-
term debt quantities, foreign exchange reserves, and latent demand. This figure reports the changes due to
short-term rates only. Each panel reports the linear regression line. The annual sample period is 2002 to
2017.




                                                                     43
                                                     Euro                           Japan
                                     1.5

                                      1

                                      .5
       Change in exchange rate (%)




                                      0

                                     -.5

                                                 Switzerland                  United Kingdom
                                     1.5

                                      1

                                      .5

                                      0

                                     -.5

                                           -.5   0          .5        1 -.5     0           .5   1
                                                  Change in long-term yield (%)

      Figure 4. How Long-Term Yields and Exchange Rates Relate to Debt Quantities
    The annual changes in the exchange rate and the long-term yield are decomposed into macro variables,
short-term rates, long-term debt quantities, foreign exchange reserves, and latent demand. This figure
reports the changes due to long-term debt quantities only. For the euro area, the long-term yield is a
weighted average across countries, based on size of the long-term debt market. Each panel reports the linear
regression line. The annual sample period is 2002 to 2017.




                                                                 44
                                                   Greece
                                                                                  Yield spread
                                     20
                                                                                  Due to:
                                                                                  Macro variables
                                     10
                                                                                  Debt quantities
                                                                                  Latent demand
                                      0
       Change in yield spread (%)




                                    -10

                                    -20
                                                    Italy                         Portugal
                                      4                             10


                                      2                               5


                                      0                               0


                                    -2                              -5
                                          2002   2007   2012   2017       2002   2007   2012        2017
                                                               Year

Figure 5. Change in the Long-Term Yield Spread between Southern Euro Countries and
Germany
    The annual change in the long-term yield spread is decomposed into macro variables, short-term rates,
long-term debt quantities, foreign exchange reserves, and latent demand. This figure reports the changes
due to macro variables, long-term debt quantities, and latent demand only.




                                                               45
                      7                                                 Convenience yield
                                                                        Long-term yield
                      6


                      5
          Yield (%)




                      4


                      3


                      2


                      1


                      0
                          2002              2007                2012                 2017
                                                      Year


                           Figure 6. US Long-Term Yield and Its Convenience Yield
    The convenience yield is the additional yield on US long-term debt implied by the demand system in
the absence of fixed effects for US issuance interacted with year.




                                                    46
Appendix A.      Data Construction

A.   International Holdings

Table A1 contains the complete list of 88 investor countries. The 36 countries in bold are
also issuer countries, for which we have complete data on asset prices and characteristics.
Based on their MSCI classification, we group the countries into developed markets in three
regions (North America, Europe, and Pacific) and emerging markets. We define offshore
financial centers as countries whose ratio of portfolio assets to GDP is above five (Zorom´
                                                                                          e
2007, Table 8). They are Bermuda, the Cayman Islands, Guernsey, Ireland, the Isle of Man,
Jersey, Luxembourg, and the Netherlands Antilles. The "other countries" in Table A1 are
neither part of the MSCI ACWI Index nor an offshore financial center.
    Mutual funds and investment companies domicile in offshore financial centers because of
favorable regulation and taxes. Consequently, offshore financial centers have large amounts
of investment from investor countries that pass through to issuer countries. The IMF's Co-
ordinated Portfolio Investment Survey counts these investments twice, once as investment
from an investor country and again as investment to an issuer country (International Mone-
tary Fund 2002, p. 72). To eliminate double counting, we do not count investment from an
investor country to an offshore financial center. This is equivalent to treating the aggregate
holdings of an offshore financial center as an investor unit without breaking them apart by
the ultimate investor, which would require some assumptions and imputations.
   The IMF does not report confidential holdings. For each investor-issuer pair, we impute
the missing observation based on the last (if available) or next observed holding. We assume
that the investment amount does not change from one year to the next. If the data are
always confidential for an investor-issuer pair, we assume that the investment amount is
zero.
    The IMF reports small holdings less than $0.5 million as zero. For these cases, we first
distinguish an actual zero from a censored zero based on the panel dimension. If the reported
amount has always been zero for an investor-issuer pair, we assume that the investment
amount is an actual zero. If the reported amount has been positive in the past, we assume
that the investment amount is a censored zero. We estimate a censored regression model
of log investment amount onto investor and issuer fixed effects by year and asset class. We
impute the censored observation as the predicted value from the regression, conditional on
censoring at $0.5 million.
   Long-term debt includes both government and corporate debt. Unfortunately, there is
no tractable way to separate the two for all countries. Moreover, corporate bond yields are
unavailable for many of the 36 countries in the sample. Therefore, we simply assume that


                                             47
                                    Table A1
                      List of Investor and Issuer Countries

                Country                                  Country
                Developed markets: North America         Offshore financial centers
                   Canada                                   Bermuda
                   United States                            Cayman Islands
                Developed markets: Europe                   Guernsey
                   Austria                                  Ireland
                   Belgium                                  Isle of Man
                   Denmark                                  Jersey
                   Finland                                  Luxembourg
                   France                                   Netherlands Antilles
                   Germany                               Other countries
                   Israel                                   Albania
                   Italy                                    Argentina
                   Netherlands                              Aruba
                   Norway                                   Bahamas
                   Portugal                                 Bahrain
                   Spain                                    Barbados
                   Sweden                                   Belarus
                   Switzerland                              Bolivia
                   United Kingdom                           Bulgaria
                Developed markets: Pacific                  Costa Rica
                   Australia                                Curacao
                   Hong Kong                                Cyprus
                   Japan                                    Estonia
                   New Zealand                              Gibraltar
                   Singapore                                Honduras
                Emerging markets                            Iceland
                   Brazil                                   Kazakhstan
                   Chile                                    Kosovo
                   China                                    Kuwait
                   Colombia                                 Latvia
                   Czech Republic                           Lebanon
                   Egypt                                    Lithuania
                   Greece                                   Macao
                   Hungary                                  Macedonia
                   India                                    Malta
                   Indonesia                                Mauritius
                   Malaysia                                 Mongolia
                   Mexico                                   Panama
                   Pakistan                                 Romania
                   Peru                                     Saudi Arabia
                   Philippines                              Slovakia
                   Poland                                   Slovenia
                   Russia                                   Ukraine
                   South Africa                             Uruguay
                   South Korea                              Vanuatu
                   Thailand                                 Venezuela
                   Turkey                                   West Bank and Gaza
The countries in bold are issuer countries with complete data on asset prices and characteristics.



                                                48
the benchmark government bond yield is the representative yield of long-term debt in the
international holdings data. Another measurement issue is that a small share of debt may
be denominated in a foreign currency. Because there is no tractable way to separate the
foreign-currency debt, we simply assume that all debt is denominated in local currency.

B. Asset Characteristics

Nominal GDP in US dollars and real GDP per capita, based on purchasing power parity in
constant international dollars, are from the World Bank. CPI inflation rates are from the
IMF's International Financial Statistics. Exports and imports are from the UN Comtrade
Database. We compute the export share for each pair of countries as exports divided by
the geometric average of their nominal GDP. We compute the import share for each pair
of countries analogously. The physical distance between each pair of countries is from the
GeoDist Database (Mayer and Zignago 2011).
   For each country and at each year-end, we estimate the standard deviation of monthly
stock returns in US dollars over the past 12 months. We annualize equity volatility by
                                               
multiplying the monthly standard deviation by 12. Sovereign debt ratings are from S&P
Capital IQ Entity Ratings. We use the long-term debt rating in local currency (if available)
or foreign currency. We convert the rating to a continuous measure based on the 5-year
default probability (Standard & Poors 2018, Table 16): 0 percent for AAA to AA-, 1.48
percent for A(+/-), 2.02 percent for BBB(+/-), 2.55 percent for BB(+/-), 5.32 percent
for B(+/-), and 33.53 percent for CCC+ and below. Our measure is minus one times the
5-year default probability, so that a higher value implies a higher rating.


Appendix B.       Relation between the Mean-Variance Portfolio and Characteristics-
                  Based Demand

We relate the mean-variance portfolio to characteristics-based demand. We ignore time
t subscripts to simply notation. Investors have heterogeneous beliefs and disagree about
expected returns and risk. Let i be the vector of investor i's expected excess returns on all
countries and asset classes. Let

                                     i = i i + diag( )                                      (B1)

be investor i's perceived covariance matrix of excess returns on all countries and asset classes.
Excess returns have a one-factor structure, where i is the vector of factor loadings and
diag( ) is the diagonal matrix of idiosyncratic variances. We denote the elements of i as


                                               49
i (n, l) for the expected excess return on asset class l in country n. Similarly, we denote
the elements of i as i (n, l). For simplicity, we assume that the idiosyncratic variance is
constant across investors and within asset class. We denote the idiosyncratic variance of
asset class l as  (l).
   Investors have a mean-variance objective function, so their optimal portfolio is the mean-
variance portfolio (Markowitz 1952):

                                         wi = - 1
                                              i i .                                       (B2)

Investors have different portfolios because they have heterogeneous beliefs about expected
returns and risk. The Woodbury matrix identity implies that the inverse of the covariance
matrix (B1) is

                                                     i i diag( )-1
                        - 1
                        i = diag( )
                                    -1
                                       I-                               .                 (B3)
                                                   1 + i diag( )-1i

Therefore, the optimal portfolio weight in country n and asset class l is

                                             i (n, l) - i i (n, l)
                               wi (n, l) =                         ,                      (B4)
                                                       (l )

where

                                          i diag( )-1i
                                  i =                    .                                (B5)
                                        1 + i diag( )-1i

Equation (B4) implies higher portfolio weights on assets with higher expected returns and
smaller factor loadings (i.e., lower risk).
    To relate the optimal portfolio (B4) to characteristics-based demand, we project expected
returns and factor loadings onto asset characteristics in the spirit of cross-sectional asset
pricing in international finance (Fama and French 2012; Dahlquist and Hasseltoft 2013;
Jotikasthira, Le, and Lundblad 2015). Investor i's expected excess return on asset class l in
country n is

                           i (n, l) = i (n, l) + l xi (n) + i (n, l).                     (B6)

The first term is a common forecast of excess returns, defined by equation (6). The remaining
two terms represent an investor-specific deviation from the common forecast that depends
on a vector xi (n) of the asset's own characteristics and unobserved (to the econometrician)
characteristics i (n, l). Similarly, investor i's perceived factor loading for asset class l in


                                                 50
country n is

                                    i (n, l) = l xi (n) + i (n, l).                         (B7)

The factor loading depends on the asset's own characteristics and unobserved characteristics
i (n, l).
   Under these two assumptions, the optimal portfolio (B4) is

                             i (n, l)     l - i l                 i (n, l) - i i (n, l)
               wi (n, l) =            +                xi (n) +                         .   (B8)
                              (l )           (l )                           (l )
                                                                          i (n,l)



Demand system asset pricing amounts to estimating equation (B8) on portfolio holdings
data. The actual specification that we estimate in equation (13) is log-linear in expected
returns and asset characteristics while equation (B8) is linear. We refer to Koijen and Yogo
(2019) for technical details about how more general assumptions imply the logit functional
form.




                                                  51
Appendix C.         Supplemental Tables and Figures


                                   Table C1
          Regressions of Changes in Exchange Rates and Asset Prices

                                                 Exchange      Long-term
                      Variable                        rate          debt Equity
                      Log GDP                          0.73           -0.01     -0.11
                                                     (0.05)          (0.03)    (0.04)
                      Log GDP per capita              -0.21           -0.08      0.02
                                                     (0.07)          (0.06)    (0.06)
                      Inflation                        0.02            0.17      0.14
                                                     (0.05)          (0.06)    (0.07)
                      Volatility                      -0.16           -0.05     -0.65
                                                     (0.05)          (0.05)    (0.05)
                      Rating                           0.03           -0.22      0.02
                                                     (0.05)          (0.08)    (0.03)
                      Export share                     0.28            0.15      0.03
                                                     (0.13)          (0.11)    (0.12)
                      Import share                    -0.38           -0.18     -0.23
                                                     (0.14)          (0.12)    (0.12)
                      Relative CPI                     0.07            0.05      0.13
                                                     (0.06)          (0.05)    (0.05)
                      Asset quantity                  -0.21            0.53      0.03
                                                     (0.05)          (0.06)    (0.05)
                      Observations                      509             539       539
                      R2                               0.44            0.46      0.55
     Observations are value-weighted by size of the corresponding asset market. All regressors are in first
differences. Sovereign debt rating is a continuous measure equal to minus one times the 5-year default
probability. Asset quantity is the face value of debt or the book value of equity in local currency unit. All
coefficients are standardized. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. The
annual sample period is 2002 to 2017.




                                                     52
                                                                        1

                                                                                                                                                08




                               Long-term yield (%, Germany minus US)
                                                                                                                                                02
                                                                                                                     07
                                                                                                                                          03
                                                                        0                                                            11

                                                                                                                                    10
                                                                                                                12             09
                                                                                                           04

                                                                                     06

                                                                       -1                                            13
                                                                            05



                                                                                                     15         14



                                                                       -2 17
                                                                                          16

                                                                            -2             -1            0          1                                2
                                                                                     Short-term rate (%, Germany minus US)

                                                                        1

                                                                                                                     08
                               Long-term yield (%, Germany minus US)




                                                                                                                                           02
                                                                                                             07
                                                                                                                                    03
                                                                        0                             11

                                                                                                     10
                                                                                                     12 09
                                                                                                                          04

                                                                                                                06

                                                                       -1                      13
                                                                                                                     05



                                                                                          15    14



                                                                       -2 17
                                                                               16

                                                                               -.5                 0               .5                                1
                                                                                           Log quantity (Germany minus US)



              Figure C1. Long-Term Yield Spread between Germany and the US
    In the lower panel, the horizontal axis is the German log long-term debt quantity in euros minus US log
long-term debt quantity (in US dollars). The two digit number represents year (e.g., 02 is 2002). Each panel
reports the linear regression line.




                                                                                                           53
