                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          COPING WITH DISASTERS:
              TWO CENTURIES OF INTERNATIONAL OFFICIAL LENDING

                                       Sebastian Horn
                                     Carmen M. Reinhart
                                     Christoph Trebesch

                                     Working Paper 27343
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27343


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2020




We thank Erik Eichler, Leonard Rosen and Robert Yee for excellent research assistance as well
as the German Research Foundation (DFG) for financial support (SPP 1859). Sebastian Horn
gratefully acknowledges financial support from the Egon Sohmen Graduate Center at LMU
Munich. We thank Harold James, Matteo Maggiori, Josefin Meyer, Vincent Reinhart, Lucie
Stoppok, Jean Tirole and Jeromin Zettelmeyer for helpful comments. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Sebastian Horn, Carmen M. Reinhart, and Christoph Trebesch. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Coping with Disasters: Two Centuries of International Official Lending
Sebastian Horn, Carmen M. Reinhart, and Christoph Trebesch
NBER Working Paper No. 27343
June 2020
JEL No. E42,E5,F02,F3,F35,G01,G15,N1,N20

                                           ABSTRACT

Official (government-to-government) lending is much larger than commonly known, often
surpassing total private cross-border capital flows, especially during disasters such as wars,
financial crises and natural catastrophes. We assemble the first comprehensive long-run dataset of
official international lending, covering 230,000 loans, grants and guarantees extended by
governments, central banks, and multilateral institutions in the period 1790-2015. Historically,
wars have been the main catalyst of government-to-government transfers. The scale of official
credits granted in and around WW1 and WW2 was particularly large, easily surpassing the scale
of total international bailout lending after the 2008 crash. During peacetime, development finance
and financial crises are the main drivers of official cross-border finance, with official flows often
stepping in when private flows retrench. In line with the predictions of recent theoretical
contributions, we find that official lending increases with the degree of economic integration. In
crises and disasters, governments help those countries to which they have greater trade and
banking exposure, hoping to reduce the collateral damage to their own economies. Since the
2000s, official finance has made a sharp comeback, largely due to the rise of China as an
international creditor and the return of central bank cross-border lending in times of stress, this
time in the form of swap lines.

Sebastian Horn                                    Christoph Trebesch
University of Munich                              Kiel Institute for the World Economy
and Kiel Institute                                Research Area on International Finance
sebastian.horn@econ.lmu.de                        Kiellinie 66,
                                                  24105 Kiel,
Carmen M. Reinhart                                Germany
Kennedy School of Government                      and CEPR and CESifo
Harvard University                                christoph.trebesch@ifw-kiel.de
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and CEPR
and also NBER
carmen_reinhart@harvard.edu
1. Introduction

          The world of official (bilateral and multilateral) lending remains largely unexplored in the
academic literature, despite the scale and relevance of this type of cross-border flows. Most studies
focus on a single government or institution, such as US lending as part of the Marshall Plan or IMF
bailouts during the Asian Crisis. Compared to the vast literature on private cross-border capital flows,
research on official international financial flows has been limited by a lack of systematic data. Existing
datasets on official debt and inter-governmental lending typically have a narrow focus (e.g. on
development aid, concessionary lending) or they start only in the 1970s.

          We collect lending data by 134 creditor countries and 50 international and regional financial
organizations across 200 years, building on hundreds of sources, including international treaties,
budget accounts, proprietary lending data by the World Bank, and archival material. In total, we
identify more than 230,000 official loans, grants and guarantees from 1790 to 2015, with total
commitments amounting to more than 15 trillion US Dollars (in constant 2015 terms). Using this data,
we document the characteristics of official capital flows, link them to the occurrence of disasters
(wars, financial crises and natural disasters), and study their determinants with a gravity model of
bilateral lending since the 18th century. Our main findings can be summarized as follows.

          Official lending by governments, central banks, and multilateral institutions is larger than
commonly known. Indeed, over the past two centuries, official creditors have played a major role in
international finance. Since 1800, official capital flows have repeatedly exceeded private cross-border
flows. This is especially true during times of war, financial crises, or other disasters, when private
flows decline and official actors become the chief international lenders.

           The biggest surges in official lending occurred during major wars, in particular in WW1,
WW2 and the Napoleonic wars. The amounts lent during these global conflicts were much larger than
the loans made during global financial crises or major natural disasters. This adds perspective to
modern debates on the international financial system, as there is a tendency to think of official finance
as a complementary type of capital flows in the context of development aid and crisis bailouts. But this
view reflects the fact that much of the world has enjoyed 70 years of peace. Global wars have been the
most disruptive force in international finance.

          In peacetime, the main driver of official international lending was and continues to be
financial crises. We show that cross-border rescue lending during banking panics and currency crises
has a long history, occurring repeatedly during the 19th and early 20th century, well before the creation
of the IMF. The rescue loans extended in historical crises were substantial, e.g. in the crises of 1861 or
1890, but they were granted ad hoc and to bridge short-term liquidity problems. In contrast, since
                                                                                                 1
WW2, financial crisis lending has become much more institutionalized and "serial" bailouts to highly
indebted countries have become more common. This is partly the result of the rise of international and
regional financial institutions, in particular the IMF and the World Bank. Lending by these multilateral
creditors overtook total bilateral lending for the first time in the 1970s.

           By comparing our novel data on official flows with previously assembled long-run data on
private international capital flows by Reinhart, Reinhart and Trebesch (2019) we show that both series
are negatively correlated. Official capital flows are highest when private capital flows dry out. During
wartime, private investors usually face widespread capital controls, while governments lend at record
pace internationally. Furthermore, the data show that official creditors were the "only game in town"
during the Bretton Woods era in the 1950s and 1960s, while private cross-border capital flows were
scarce and heavily curtailed. An expanded official role is also evident during the height of the Great
Depression in the 1930s and during the 2008 global financial crisis and its aftermath on periphery
Europe, when central bank and sovereign lending spiked, while private capital outflows reversed.

           It is not widely appreciated that we witnessed a comeback of official lending in the past two
decades. China's rise as an international creditor has been underestimated due to a lack of data and
transparency. We document how China has become one of the most important official creditors
worldwide, as almost all of its foreign lending is extended by the government and its state-owned
banks (see also Horn, Reinhart and Trebesch 2019). China's official lending boom is part of a more
general rise of new creditor powers, especially emerging markets such as Russia, India, Brazil or the
Arab oil states, who have all become active official lenders in varying degrees. In addition, dozens of
new official lending institutions were founded since WW2, including a range of regional development
banks and regional financial arrangements in Asia, Africa and South America. The result has been a
notable increase in "South-South" official sovereign lending. More generally, we find a much higher
incidence of official loans in the current era. Today, most financial crises, natural catastrophes and
wars are accompanied by official lending of some form. This was not the case historically.

           Similarly, we are seeing a resurgence of official financing via central banks. During the
financial crisis of 2008 the Federal Reserve Bank, the ECB and the Bank of Japan granted record
amounts of "swap lines" via a network of standing credit lines that allow drawing overnight foreign
currency loans (Bahaj and Reis 2019). These developments are reminiscent of the flourishing cross-
border central bank lending during the gold standard era pre-WW1 and in the interwar years. The
newly resurrected and intensely used Federal Reserve swap lines during the COVID-19 pandemic is
yet another example.



                                                                                                      2
          On the determinants of official flows, our results are consistent with the predictions of
recent theoretical contributions. Tirole (2015), Farhi and Tirole (2018) and Gourinchas, Martin and
Messer (2019) all predict the scope of bilateral official lending and bailouts to increase with economic
and financial integration. When the negative spillovers from a crisis country are potentially high, e.g.,
due to close bank and trade linkages, countries have an incentive to grant rescue loans to the
government facing the crisis. In so doing, creditor governments aim to reduce the collateral damage to
their own economy.

          Until now, it was difficult to test these priors systematically, due to data limitations. We
connect the models and narratives in this literature to our new database. We estimate an augmented
gravity model of bilateral official loans worldwide and across crises and disasters of the past two
centuries (including more than 1700 dyads). We find that bilateral trade and bilateral bank exposure
are indeed a key predictor of official lending flows in crisis times. Across all eras, countries were most
willing to help others when private agents had significant economic or financial exposure in the
recipient countries. The prevailing interpretation is that foreign official lending is a function of
economic and political self-interest, rather than of altruism or more general "country solidarity". At
the same time, official flows seem to be impeded by informational asymmetries, as the likelihood of
rescue lending decreases significantly with higher geographic and cultural distance.

          Our paper adds a significant missing piece to the literature on capital flows and the
international monetary system. Research in this broad topic has almost exclusively focused on private
capital flows (see, for example, Calvo, Leiderman and Reinhart 1993, Stone 1999, Obstfeld and
Rogoff 2000, Obstfeld and Taylor 2004, Lane and Milesi-Ferretti 2007, Bruno and Shin 2013,
Gourinchas and Jeanne 2013, Rey 2015, and Reinhart, Reinhart and Trebesch 2017). In contrast, there
is only very little research on official capital flows (among the few exceptions is the pioneering work
on official finance by Alfaro, Kalemli-Ozcan and Volosovych 2014, as well as some of our own work
in Reinhart and Trebesch 2016 and Schlegl, Trebesch and Wright 2019). Given the size of official
capital flows, both in the past and most recently, omitting official lending distorts the picture on the
size and dynamics of international capital flows. The omission is most problematic during natural
disasters, economic crises and war.

          Our analysis also contributes to the literature on macroeconomic disasters (e.g. Barro 2006,
Barro and Ursúa 2008, Gabaix 2012) and on the economics of international wars (e.g. Martin, Mayer
and Thoenig 2005, Glick and Taylor 2010), by combining our dataset on official flows with data on
inter-state conflicts, natural disasters and financial crises. Not unlike the literature on capital flows,
economic research on disasters and wars has focused primarily on the implications for private capital
markets and trade. We show that over the past 200 years, official lending repeatedly reached record
                                                                                                  3
heights during some macroeconomic disasters and all global wars, with large potential consequences
for output, trade and asset markets alike (these effects remain largely unexplored).

             More generally, our dataset allows us to address fundamental questions of international
cooperation in a new way. Why do countries cooperate financially and what are the outcomes?
Existing work on economic cooperation between sovereign states mainly focuses on cooperation in the
realms of fiscal policy, exchange rate policy, or banking regulation (e.g. the seminal work of
Kindleberger 1986, Eichengreen 1992, or James 1996). But, until now, there have been almost no
systematic empirical analyses on the determinants of financial cooperation via sovereign-to-sovereign
and central-bank-to-central-bank lending in the past and present, which is the focus here.

             Another strand of related literature focuses on financial crises and sovereign debt problems.
Countless papers have explored the pricing of privately held sovereign bonds and the determinants and
effects of default by sovereign borrowers (see Reinhart and Rogoff 2009, Panizza et al. 2009, Aguiar
and Amador 2014 or Meyer, Reinhart and Trebesch 2019 for overviews). In contrast, there has been
very little work on lending by sovereigns. The history of official debt has long been overlooked in this
research area, except for a body of work on IMF and World Bank lending, which, as we document,
only became large in the 1970s and today accounts for a third of total official lending. We contribute
to the literature on financial crises by conducting the first systematic long-run study on international
official rescue lending during debt, currency and banking crises in both advanced and developing
countries.

             We thereby considerably expand the existing narratives and data collections on country
bailouts, e.g. by Kindleberger (2006), Bordo and Schwartz (1998), Roubini and Setser (2004), Barkbu,
Eichengreen and Mody (2012) or Corsetti, Erce and Uy (2017, 2018). Our data show that crisis
lending has evolved from occasional, ad-hoc rescue loans by allied states to a global financial safety
net with dozens of institutions. Besides covering the incidence, origin, and amounts of official lending,
we also gathered information on the interest rates and repayment terms, as well as on the political
conditions of official support. This data resource will allow further analyses on the determinants,
design, and consequences of cross-border bailouts and will help to inform the theoretical literature on
international crises (see above, as well as Summers 2000, Bordo et al. 2001 and Lorenzoni 2014, for
overviews). 2 By exploring political drivers of bilateral rescue lending we also add to existing work on
the political economy of bailouts (Brown and Dinc 2005, Schneider and Tobin 2020).


2
  A small theoretical literature specifically studies sovereign bailouts across borders, e.g. Corsetti, Guimaraes
and Roubini 2006, Morris and Shin 2006, Dellas and Niepelt 2016, Fink and Scholl 2016, Corsetti, Erce and Uy
2018, Roch and Uhlig 2018, as well as the references cited above Tirole (2015), Farhi and Tirole (2018)
Gourinchas, Martin and Messer (2019).
                                                                                                               4
          The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 provides information on who
lends, tracking official creditors and institutions since 1790. This section also describes our coding and
data sources. Section 3 presents our new database and provides a panoramic view on salient features of
official sovereign lending across two centuries: We identify the main creditors and the (de jure)
purposes of official lending over time and document the time profile of official transfers. We also
examine the correlation of official flows with private international capital flows. In Section 5, we turn
to official lending in times of crises and disasters. To do so we compile a new database on the
occurrence of different disasters that tracks financial crises, military conflict and severe natural
disasters. In Section 5 we explore the determinants of official lending by estimating an augmented
gravity model of bilateral rescue loans. Section 6 concludes.



2. Measuring official sovereign lending: methodology and sources

          The main challenge to the study of official international lending is the lack of systematic
and encompassing data, with most available data not going back any further than the mid-1970s. We
therefore embark on a large-scale data collection effort with the objective of constructing the first
long-run database on official flows over two centuries. This section offers a sketch of the main
elements of our database, while Appendix III provides a much more detailed overview on our sources
and coding approach.

          We define official international lending (conventional definition) as all loans, grants and
guarantees extended by a sovereign, supra-sovereign or sub-sovereign creditor entity to a foreign
sovereign or non-sovereign debtor. By this definition, official creditors include both bilateral and
multilateral institutions, as well as sub-sovereign creditors such as a state-owned export and
development banks. Given the relative scarcity of discussion on official lending in history, the next
subsection provides a brief background on the universe of official creditor institutions over the past
200 years. This sets the stage for the subsequent description of our data sources.

2.1 Official creditors and institutions since 1790

          Figure 1 provides a stylized representation of the evolution of the official creditor universe,
distinguishing between bilateral and multilateral institutions. Throughout the 19th century and up until
the 1920s, official international loans were exclusively extended by bilateral creditors, namely by the
treasuries, foreign and colonial offices and war ministries of nations, as well as by national central
banks. These institutions were not specialized on providing foreign loans, but took up the task when
special circumstances required them to do so, very often under considerable political controversy.

                                                                                                        5
              Figure 1. The universe of official sovereign creditor institutions 1790 ­ 2015

                          Foreign and Colonial Offices                         Ministries of Development


            Bilateral                                                        Export Credit Banks
            creditors
                                              Central Banks & Treasuries


    1800                                                   1918       1945              1973             2015


                                                         League of Nations    United Nations System

                                                                    Bank for International Settlements
           Multilateral
            creditors                                                         International Monetary Fund
                                                                                       World Bank

                                                                                Regional Development Banks
                                                                                    Regional Safety Nets

                    Sources: Official international lending database and Cogan et al. (2016).



            The practice of official sovereign lending across borders changed profoundly with the onset
of World War I. European sovereigns established a new type of official creditor institution: state-
owned export banks that guaranteed private trade credits and directly extended buyer credits to foreign
sovereigns, in particular to the Soviet Union that had lost access to private capital markets (Margold,
1934). In addition, the League of Nations, founded in 1920, started to cooperate with national
treasuries to mobilize rescue loans for crisis countries in need, especially in Central and Eastern
Europe where governments tried to stabilize their currencies after the war (Flores Zendejas and
Decorzant, 2016). In doing so, they were supported by increasingly active central banks, which
extended record amounts of rescue loans to other central banks facing capital and gold outflows in an
effort to support the interwar gold standard. This era of central bank cooperation peaked during the
crisis of 1931 and quickly receded afterwards. Guided by the newly founded Bank of International
Settlements (BIS), central banks mobilized significant emergency credits to Central Europe and
Britain to stem the turmoil caused by the retrenchment of private flows, with limited success
(Accominotti and Eichengreen, 2015).

            The crisis of 1931 and its aftermath mark a turning point in the development of official
international lending. The crisis highlighted the volatile nature of private capital flows and led leading
policy-makers and academics to acknowledge the importance of counter-cyclical official lending
                                                                                             6
(Nurkse, 1944). During the course of the 1930s, the United States joined European states in extending
official loans to states with balance-of-payments problems, in particular through the US Export-Import
Bank and the US Treasury's Exchange Stabilization Fund, which was established in 1934.

          The lessons learned during these operations turned out to have great effect on the design of
the post-World War II Bretton Woods System (Bordo and Schwartz, 2001). In 1944, the IMF was
founded with the aim of providing short-term official funds to countries with temporary balance-of-
payments problems, alongside with the World Bank that was intended to provide long-term
development and reconstruction funds. However, official lending during the post-war decades
continued to be dominated by bilateral creditors. The US, in particular, engaged in large scale lending,
e.g. via the Marshall Plan and EXIM Bank funds. Also the Soviet Union became an active official
lender. Furthermore, outside the convertible dollar and sterling areas, sovereigns financed their current
account deficits with the reciprocal extension of clearing credits.

          Starting from the late 1950s, the practice of official lending began to gradually shift from
bilateral to multilateral creditor institutions, driven by a remarkable increase in the number and variety
of multilateral lending institutions. Regional development banks first emerged in the late 1950s with
the establishment of the European Development Fund and the Inter-American Development Bank and
have spread to all regions of the globe since. In parallel, new Regional Financial Arrangements
(RFAs) were set up, typically focused on providing emergency funds during balance-of-payments
crises of member states. Early examples include the European Monetary Agreement founded in 1958
and the Central American Monetary Stabilization Fund of 1970. More recently, the European Stability
Mechanism (ESM) founded in 2012, is just one manifestations of this long-run trend towards regional
rescue facilities (Scheubel and Stracca 2016). Beyond regional and multilateral arrangements, central
bank swap lines have become an additional main source of official emergency finance. Starting with
the defense of the Bretton Woods system in the 1960s, a network of bilateral swap lines has been in
place that connects the major central banks of the world. More recently, these networks have been
expanded in size and scope. They now include the central banks of main emerging markets and, driven
by China's central bank, also a growing number of developing countries.

          Taken together, these institutional developments have transformed the practice of official
sovereign lending from occasional instances of ad hoc cooperation between two states into a multi-
layered, global financial safety net composed of a broad range of specialized institutions.




                                                                                                        7
2.2 Main sources and scope of the database

          Our new database compiles loans, grants and guarantees from the majority of these official
creditors and several hundred primary and secondary sources that are described in detail in Appendix
III. The resulting database spans official lending from 1790 to 2015 and covers more than 230,000
loans, grants and guarantees extended by national agencies of up to 134 bilateral creditor countries and
by 50 different international organizations (see Appendix III for a full list). Whenever available we
collected data on the creditor and the borrower, both commitment and disbursement amounts, the
purpose of the loan as well as the interest rates and repayment terms. In other cases, our data is more
aggregate. At the minimum, however, our database contains creditor and borrower country as well as
commitment amounts at the annual level allowing us to identify source and direction of official
lending and thus the bilateral patterns of international official flows. We now sketch the main sources
used in constructing the database.

          International treaty series: Our main source for official lending during the 19th century and
leading up to World War II are international treaty collections. In doing so, we make use of the fact
that the conduct of foreign policy became increasingly formalized in the late 18th century, so that
international loans between two states were now codified in inter-governmental treaties (Keene 2012).
Our sources show that, over the course of the 150 years from 1790 to World War II, sovereigns
negotiated thousands of bilateral treaties, in which they regulated their political and commercial
interactions. To identify bilateral lending, we systematically search the available treaty collections and
related databases for bilateral financial agreements that arrange the extension of loans and grants or
that extend guarantees on privately issued international loans or bonds.

          National budget accounts and parliamentary records: For the main bilateral creditor
countries prior to World War II, we supplement the information obtained from international treaties
with national budget accounts and parliamentary records. In the absence of specialized creditor
entities, international official loans often required parliamentary approval and we can use these
sources as important consistency check. Furthermore, they allow us to capture within-empire (country)
transactions, e.g. lending to colonies, for which no inter-governmental treaties exist. More specifically,
we comb through the national budgets and parliamentary records of the UK, France, Germany and the
US starting in the early 19th century.

          Reports and datasets from international organizations: Starting from the inter-war period,
publications and data by international organizations become an additional, highly valuable source. We
make extensive use of regular research reports on international capital flows by the League of Nations,
the BIS, the IBRD, the UN, the OECD and the IADB. We also use a wide range of creditor specific

                                                                                                        8
sources, such as recently declassified CIA reports on foreign lending by Sino-Soviet Bloc countries
and the annual reports of a large number of bilateral and multilateral creditor institutions. Moreover,
and most importantly, we supplement this hand-coded data with a comprehensive data-extract on
bilateral lending from the World Bank's Debtor Reporting System (DRS), which was shared with us
on a confidential basis. Specifically, the DRS records all bilateral lending transactions of all member
states reporting to the World Bank, starting in the 1960s. For aid flows and grants, our main sources
are the OECD's Creditor Reporting System and the database provided by AidData at William & Mary
(Tierney et al., 2011).

           Archival research (especially central bank archives): For a subgroup of official creditors no
published reports of sufficient detail are available. This is particularly the case for central banks and
the BIS. In these cases, we go through the archives of these institutions and collect data from original
reports and documents. Appendix III provides details on this (ongoing) data collection process.

           Secondary sources: Finally, we draw on the existing literature on international capital flows
and international political relations. These sources, again listed in Appendix III, allow us to
complement and cross-check our own data.

   Figure 2. Illustration of historical sources ­ international financial agreements and budget reports




Note: This figure shows examples for the most common historical sources used to construct our database in the
19th century. We show an extract from an international financial treaty (left panel) as well as from a national
budget report (right panel). For a detailed description of the data and the sources see Appendix III.


                                                                                                             9
3. Official sovereign lending 1790 ­ 2015: A panoramic view

              This section introduces our new database and gives a descriptive overview on the
occurrence and magnitude of official sovereign lending from 1790 to 2015. We discuss the main
creditors, recipients and purposes of official lending over time.

                        Figure 3. Bilateral and multilateral official lending 1790 ­ 2015




Note: The data includes commitments through grants, loans and guarantees, but excludes official portfolio
investments and central bank lending (see below. The data is from the international official lending database that
we construct (see Appendix III for details).



              Figure 3 summarizes the ebbs and flows of inter-governmental lending, by showing annual
gross commitments by bilateral and multilateral creditors since the French Revolution. All amounts
are scaled by the GDP of the most important official creditor country. Specifically, we use UK GDP
until the onset of the First World War (1914) and US GDP thereafter. While there are various
alternative scaling options, the use of US and UK GDP offers comprehensive coverage. 3 Official
lending was dominated by bilateral creditors until the Second World War. With the foundation of the
IMF and the World Bank Group, lending gradually shifted from bilateral to multilateral sources.



3
    The main conclusions of this section are not altered when using alternative series for scaling, e.g. world GDP.
                                                                                                                  10
During the 1970s, multilateral lending first overtook bilateral lending and has remained dominant
since then.

           To further distinguish by type of creditor, Figure 4 shows the share of total official lending
since 1900 for (i) bilateral creditors, (ii) the IMF and the World Bank, and (iii) other multilateral
creditors, in particular regional development banks and regional financial arrangements. It can be seen
that the third category of "other" multilateral creditors is now more important than ever.


              Figure 4. Relative importance of multilateral and bilateral creditors over time




Note: Other multilateral creditors (yellow area) include different regional development banks and regional
financial arrangements as well as loans issued under the auspices of the League of Nations (see appendix III.6
for a full list). Bilateral creditors are represented by the blue area. All three series are smoothed by applying a
five-year moving average. Source: international official lending database (see Appendix III).


           Within the group of bilateral creditors, the relative importance of individual countries varies
markedly over time, reflecting long-run shifts in economic and political power. Up until the First
World War, bilateral lending was dominated by the Great European Powers, in particular Great Britain
and France. Over the course of the two World Wars and throughout the Cold War, the United States
emerged as the world's primary official creditor. In comparison, official lending by the Soviet-Sino
bloc was small, although it increased until the 1980s. During the oil crises of the 1970s, oil exporting
nations suddenly became a major source of official international lending. Since then, in particular after
the end of the Cold War, the international landscape of bilateral lending has become more
heterogeneous. In line with their growing share of world output and trade, emerging market countries
                                                                                                                11
have established themselves as leading bilateral creditors. This development is driven by China, which
has recently surpassed the US, the World Bank and the IMF as the world's most important official
creditor (see Horn, Reinhart and Trebesch 2019).


                      Figure 5. Recipients of official sovereign lending 1790 - 2015




Note: The data includes commitments through grants, loans and guarantees, but excludes official portfolio
investments and central bank swap credit. Data is from the international official lending database (Appendix III).


           Not just the creditors, but also the recipients of official flows have changed markedly over
the course of the past 200 years. Today, official sovereign lending is often associated with rescue
lending and aid to developing countries. Indeed, Figure 5 shows that the bulk of official lending
between 1960 and the 2000s went to developing countries. Before that, however, over a span of more
than 150 years, advanced countries have been the main recipients of official loans, especially during
times of global war. Also more recently, after the 2008 financial crisis and the 2010-12 Eurozone
crisis, advanced countries received large-scale official lending, via regional and multilateral financial
arrangements, as well as via central bank swap lines (see below).

           To provide a first overview on the motives of government-to-government and multilateral
official lending over the past 200 years we distinguish between four categories of lending purposes ­
military assistance, economic development, humanitarian relief, and financial crisis rescues. The
category of military assistance covers loans and grants extended for the pursuit of war, defense or
procurement of military equipment. The category of economic development includes loans and grants

                                                                                                               12
extended for the financing of projects in developing countries ranging from infrastructure investments
to state-building activities. The category of humanitarian relief relates to financial assistance in
response to natural disasters, e.g. grants to purchase basic necessities such as food. The fourth
category, financial rescue loans, covers loans, grants and guarantees during currency, debt and banking
crises, including balance-of-payment crises, as well as general budget support.



                     Figure 6. The purpose of official sovereign lending 1790 - 2015




Note: The data includes commitments through grants, loans and guarantees, but excludes official portfolio
investments and central bank swap credit. Data is from the international official lending database (Appendix III).




           Whenever possible, we rely on the original sources to distinguish between these purposes,
although we are aware that the distinction is not always clear-cut and involves a number of judgement
calls. One problem is that the officially declared purpose of a loan does not necessarily need to align
with its de facto purpose. As an example, foreign currency loans for development projects are often
provided during a financial crisis, in order to address a severe balance-of-payment problem. Moreover,
we sometimes lack official information on the lending purpose so that we need to infer the purpose
from events at the time. Despite these caveats and challenges, Figure 6 is helpful as a first descriptive


                                                                                                               13
overview and to motivate our more systematic analysis of official lending during disasters in sections
4 and 5.

             Figures 3 and 6 illustrate that, during the 19th century and up to World War I official
sovereign lending was heavily concentrated in times of major wars. Notable lending surges occurred
during the French Revolutionary Wars, the Napoleonic Wars and the First Crimean War. In each case
the Great European Powers provided substantial financial support to their allies by means of loans,
guarantees and grants. Similarly, during the Latin American Wars of Independence the newly founded
republics cooperated financially through the extension of loans and grants in an effort to win against
Spain. With respect to financial crises, there were repeated instances of official rescue lending during
banking panics, through reciprocal credits between central banks (see below and Eichengreen 1992,
Bordo and Schwartz 1998). In contrast, there are only few cases of official lending during sovereign
debt crises, e.g. the official guarantees on private bonds issued by Greece in 1832 and 1898. Sovereign
defaults were more commonly left to market forces or solved through enforced adjustments in the
form of super-sanctions (Mitchener and Weidenmier 2010, Tuncer 2015). Moreover, prior to World
War I, we found few instances of official lending in response to natural disasters or famines and also
official lending for development purposes was very limited throughout the 19th century, with the
exception of transactions within empires, where grants and loans were occasionally used to build
infrastructure and to contain the negative effects of military conflict, e.g. in Transvaal after the Second
Boer War.

             During the first half of the 20th century, the two World Wars stand out, leading to
historically unprecedented levels of international assistance. Interestingly, however, the aftermaths of
the two wars look very different. After World War I, official flows quickly dried up, with only modest
lending for relief and reconstruction. In contrast, after 1945, official lending remained strong over the
course of the entire Bretton Woods era. US bilateral loans, in particular, played a crucial role in the
closing of the Dollar Gap and the reconstruction of Europe (mostly connected with the Marshall Plan).
This period - from the break-down of the inter-war gold exchange standard in 1931 to the late 1960s -
can be considered the heyday of official finance. With wide-spread capital controls on private flows
and financial repression, official loans constituted the only feasible means of international capital
transfers.

             With the collapse of the Bretton Woods System and the steady rise in private capital
mobility, the purpose of official lending changed again. There are increasing financial flows to finance
domestic development and infrastructure projects in developing countries. These countries often lack
access to international private capital markets, so that official lending in the form of aid is often the
only source of foreign savings. Figure 6 shows that the scale of official flows for development finance
                                                                                                     14
has remained remarkably stable over the past decades. In contrast, official flows to advanced and
emerging economies are more volatile, driven mainly by economic and political crises. Indeed, it is the
incidence of major financial crises that explain most of the recent spikes in bilateral and multilateral
commitments, including the official rescue packages extended during the Oil Crises, the emerging
markets crises of the 1980s and 1990s and most recently during the Great Financial and the subsequent
Euro Debt Crisis.

          Over the past two decades, and especially after 2008 we are witnessing a comeback of
official finance, thus reversing a decade-long trend of gradual decline. Besides the large-scale
international bailouts during the financial crisis, it is the rise of China and of other emerging donor
countries such as India or resource-rich Arab countries that has contributed to a resurgence of bilateral
lending. Today, bilateral lending, in particular from China, constitutes a prime source of external
financing for dozens of low-income and emerging countries (Horn, Reinhart and Trebesch 2019).

          Another important reason for the comeback in official finance is the re-emergence of cross-
border central bank lending. Figure 7 adds credits and swap lines extended between central banks to
the total volume of official loan commitments (thus combining Figure 3 and Figure 8 below). The
graph reveals that international central bank credits have been quantitatively important both today and
in history, with credits exceeding 2% of UK or US GDP in different spells of the past 200 years.

          During the 19th century, there were repeated episodes with sizeable central bank lending,
including the Panic of 1861, the Baring Crisis in 1890 and the Panic of 1907. In the 20th century,
international central bank lending intensified during the interwar years. In the 1920s, for example,
consortia of central banks agreed to extend reciprocal credits so as to help each other return to gold
(Meyer 1970). In 1931, central bank lending reached a historic peak, with total credits exceeding 3%
of US GDP. Yet, these rescue credits, mainly extended to Austria, Hungary, Germany and Britain, did
not suffice to prevent the inter-war gold standard from collapsing (Accominotti and Eichengreen,
2015). Beyond these rescue operations, the US Federal Reserve granted a series of short-term credits
to Latin American countries facing balance-of-payments difficulties during the 1930s.

          In the decades following World War II, central bank lending across borders played a crucial
role in the defense of the Bretton Woods System of fixed exchange rates during the 1960s and
involved sizeable drawings on the Federal Reserve's swap line network, with support flowing to the
US, the UK and France (see also Bordo, Humpage and Schwartz, 2015).




                                                                                                      15
           Figure 7. Adding central bank lending: short-term credits and swaps across borders




Note: This graph adds data on central bank lending (see Figure 8) to the data on bilateral and multilateral official
loans (from Figure 3). The central bank lending data includes short-term credits to foreign central banks, as well
as bilateral swap line drawings (after WW2). See Figure 8 for details.


                         Figure 8. Central bank lending across borders, 1815-2015




Note: The graph shows a time series on our ongoing data collection on cross-border central bank lending since
1815. The data includes central bank short-term credits to foreign central banks as well as bilateral swap line
drawings (after WW2), shown in percent of UK GDP until 1914 and in percent of US GDP thereafter.
                                                                                                                 16
          Figure 8 above illustrates the re-emergence of large-scale international central bank lending
during the 2008 crash, at a scale not seen since the interwar years. This time lending took the form of
large-scale liquidity swap line drawings, rather than short-term credits like in the 1920s and 30s (Bahaj
and Reis 2019). Figure 9 adds to this by focusing on the US Federal Reserve swap line network, with
total drawings shown in USD since 2007. At the peak of the financial crisis in end-2008, total cross-
border swap line drawings by foreign central banks exceeded 500 billion USD, a whopping amount
that corresponds to more than 3% of USD GDP of 2008. This is not far from the latest spike in US
swap line drawings since the start of the COVID-19 crisis. As of May 2020, 400 billion USD have
been drawn, corresponding to more than 2% of US GDP of 2019.

   Figure 9. US Federal Reserve liquidity swaps extended to foreign central banks (in billion USD)




    Note: The data includes total drawings on the US liquidity swap network by foreign central banks on a
    weekly basis. Source: Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis (FRED).


          To conclude our panoramic overview, we now compare the ebbs and flows of official
international lending with those of private capital flows. Figure 10 combines our series of official
lending commitments since 1790 with the long-run series of private cross-border capital flows from
Reinhart, Reinhart and Trebesch (2016, 2019), which starts in 1815 and builds on their newly
constructed "Global Capital Flow Database". More specifically, the series on private capital flows
splices newly collected data on primary bond issuances in international markets (gross flows, until
WW1) with data on net capital flows to 63 capital importing countries, building on newly collected
country data on current accounts and gold and foreign exchange reserves since the interwar years
(global net capital flows, after WW1).

                                                                                                            17
           Figure 10 sheds new light on the history of the International Monetary System. A first take
away is that the magnitudes of official and private cross-border capital flows are comparable in size,
with international flows exceeding private flows in several historical spells. This finding is confirmed
when comparing gross private and official flows, i.e. by merging our newly assembled official lending
data with data on total sovereign bond issuance in international markets from Meyer, Reinhart and
Trebesch (2019) or End, Mariko and Miryugin (2019). In particular during periods of stress, official
international lending to sovereigns tends to be higher than total private sovereign lending by
international banks and bondholders.


                Figure 10. Official sovereign lending and private capital flows 1790 - 2015




      Note: The grey shaded era shows official international lending, including bilateral and multilateral
      commitments through grants, loans and guarantees, as well as central bank lending and swap line
      drawings. The red bold line shows the spliced series on private, cross-border capital flows from Reinhart,
      Reinhart and Trebesch (2016, 2019). Both series are scaled by main creditor GDP.

         The second main take away from Figure 10 is that official and private flows are negatively
correlated. When private capital flows retrench, official international flows often step in, with major
multilateral and bilateral lending surges during WW1 and WW2 as well as in major financial crises,
most visibly during the Great Depression (after 1930) and after the 2008 crash, but also in more
idiosyncratic, regional crises such as during the 1960s or the European exchange rate crisis of the early
1990s.
                                                                                                             18
4. Official lending in wars, financial crises and natural disasters

        In this section, we match our data on official sovereign lending with data on the occurrence of
disasters, more specifically of wars, financial crises and severe natural catastrophes such as
earthquakes. This allows us to study the international response to crises across different eras of the
international financial system. We begin by compiling a comprehensive database on disaster and crisis
events in the past 200 years and then match this with our novel dataset on official lending.

4.1 Identifying disasters and defining crisis events

          To identify financial crises, military conflicts and severe natural disasters, we make use of a
variety of sources. This section provides an overview, while details are described in Appendix I. Our
approach focuses on actual disaster dates and events, in contrast to a related macroeconomic literature
that defines "macroeconomic disasters" as drops in consumption or GDP beyond a specific threshold
(see Barro and Ursúa 2010). The advantage of using event data is that it allows for much broader
geographic and time coverage, given that long-run consumption and GDP data is only available for
advanced countries and a few select emerging market countries. Furthermore, event-based data allows
for a more granular analysis, e.g. by differentiating between different types of shocks and disasters.

          To identify financial crises, we rely on the data of Reinhart and Rogoff (2009), and the data
update by Meyer et al. (2019). We consider banking, currency and external sovereign debt crises and
follow the crisis definitions brought forward by Reinhart and Rogoff (see Appendix I).

        Our definition of wars follows the Correlates of War (CoW) project, namely a sustained
combat, involving organized armed forces and resulting in a minimum of 1000 battle-related fatalities
over the course of a 12 months period (Sarkees and Wayman 2010). The CoW data collection
distinguishes inter-state and intra-state conflict, both of which are included as disaster events here.
International or inter-state conflicts are defined as wars between two or more territorial states that are
members of the international state system. Intra-state (or civil) wars are defined by sustained military
combat within a state and with active participation of the national government. In the CoW database,
war begins with the onset of sustained military combat, irrespective of a formal declaration of war.

        Measuring natural disasters and the resulting damages and casualties over 200 years is
challenging. To build a long-run dataset we draw on a large number of sources. First and most
importantly, we draw on the EM-DAT International Disaster Database, which contains information on
several thousand natural disasters around the globe since 1900, including geophysical (earthquakes
and volcano eruptions), meteorological (extreme temperatures and storms), hydrological (floods and
landslides), climatological (droughts, famines and wildfires) and biological disasters such as
                                                                                                         19
epidemics. To expand the data coverage to the 19th century, we supplement this source with
information from the National Center for Environmental Information, which lists events of
earthquakes, volcano eruptions, floods, tsunamis, and storms going back until 1800. In addition, we
make use of multiple historical and country studies on famines and epidemics during the 19th century,
as listed in Appendix I.

                            Table 1. Number of disaster events in different eras: 1800-2015


                            Long 19th Century   Inter-War Period   Bretton Woods      Modern Era
                               1800 - 1913         1914 - 1945      1946 - 1973       1973 - 2015


        Financial crises           254                 235              164                   416

        Severe natural
                                    44                 28                20                   16
        disasters

        Military conflict          157                 70               104                   154


        Total number of
                                   455                 333              288                   586
        disaster events

      Sources: See text and Appendix I for details.


The resulting dataset identifies several thousand natural disasters since 1800. Given our focus on
disasters that warrant the provision of international financial assistance, we focus only on the most
severe events. To do so, we match our list of natural disasters with population data from Mitchell
(2013) and include only those natural disasters that result in casualties of at least 0.1 percent of the
population. This yields 108 severe natural disaster events over the course of the past 200 years. While
the timing of the disaster event is straight-forward with respect to earthquakes, floods or hurricanes, it
can be difficult to accurately measure the duration of famines and epidemics. For these episodes, we
consider the initial two years of the outbreak.

        Table 1 summarizes the number of disasters and their frequency across different eras. Figure
11 also plots the incidence of disasters but takes a different perspective. It shows the share of
independent countries that experience war, enter financial crises or suffer from severe natural disasters
in any given year since 1800 based on our sample. Figure 11 reveals that the time-variation in the
number of disasters is primarily driven by the waves of financial crises and military conflict that are
spatially correlated. In contrast, the occurrence of severe natural disaster events is less cyclical and
fairly constant over time.


                                                                                                       20
                 Figure 11. Incidence of wars, crises and natural disasters 1800 ­ 2010




             Note: Share of countries experiencing disasters. See text and Appendix I for details.

4.2 The international response to disasters ­ descriptives and case narratives

        In this section we merge our new data on official lending with the above described data on
disaster events in order to analyze the international response to disasters over the past 200 years. We
begin by presenting case narratives for each type of disaster and then turn to a more systematic
assessment of the incidence of rescue lending across time.

        The following tables show selected cases of international financial rescues in severe natural
disasters (Table 2), during military conflicts (Table 3) and during financial crises (Table 4). For each
of the listed episodes, the tables show the most important recipients, the main official creditors and the
magnitude of assistance provided. The cases illustrate that international official lending played an
important role in a wide variety of disaster events and across all eras.




                                                                                                       21
       Table 2. Natural disasters and their official international response: selected cases, 1800-2015


                                                                                                    Official assistance
                                                         Main                      Main                (in real 2015 USD
 Natural disaster              Year
                                                      recipient(s)                donor(s)            and as % of recipient
                                                                                                        GDP or imports)



     Famine                1811 ­ 1813             Portugal, Russia          United Kingdom                $ 27 mn

Caracas Earthquake             1812                    Venezuela                    USA                    $ 1 mn

    Hurricane                  1836                    Dominica              United Kingdom               $ 1.2 mn

Volcano eruption,
                               1843              Antigua, Montserrat         United Kingdom                $ 21 mn
  earthquakes

Eruption of Mount                                                            United Kingdom,
                               1902                   Martinique                                           $ 14 mn
      Pelée                                                                       France

     Famine                    1913                     Albania              United Kingdom               $ 0.2 mn

      Famines                                                                    USA, UK,
                           1919 ­ 1923                   Europe                                            $ 12 bn
 (following WWI)                                                              France, Norway
Jericho Earthquake             1927                   Transjordan            United Kingdom               $ 1.4 mn
                                                                                                          $ 46 mn
      Flood                    1949                    Guatemala                 US, Cuba
                                                                                                       7 % of imports
    Valdivia                                                                                              $ 6 bn
                               1960                       Chile               IMF, IBRD, US            12 % of GDP
   Earthquake
                                                                                                     230 % of imports
                                                                             UN, IDA, Soviet              $ 4 bn
     Famine                1983 ­ 1985                  Ethiopia                                       27 % of GDP
                                                                                  Union
                                                                                                     260 % of imports
                                                                               UN, IDA, G-7               $ 4.3 bn
     Cyclone                   1991                   Bangladesh                                        8 % of GDP
                                                                                countries
                                                                                                      68 % of imports
                                                                             UN, IDA, Japan,              $ 3 bn
     Tsunami                   2004                    Sri Lanka                                       14 % of GDP
                                                                                  China
                                                                                                      45 % of imports
                                                                              UN, IADB, US,               $ 6 bn
   Earthquake                  2010                       Haiti                                        90 % of GDP
                                                                                  France
                                                                                                     200 % of imports

  Note: This table shows the scale of official rescue lending in selected severe natural disasters of the past 200
  years. The size of official assistance is given in real 2015 US Dollars. Whenever data availability permits, we
  show the magnitude of assistance in percent of recipient GDP and imports (using pre-disaster values).



                                                                                                               22
            Table 3. Military conflicts and their international response: selected cases, 1800 - 2015


                                                                                                Official assistance
     Military                                          Main                   Main                (in real 2015 USD
                              Year
     conflict                                       recipient(s)             donor(s)            and as % of recipient
                                                                                                   GDP or imports)

     French
  Revolutionary           1792 - 1802             Austria, Prussia       United Kingdom                $ 2 bn
      Wars

                                                 Austria, Prussia,
Napoleonic Wars           1803 ­ 1815            Russia, Portugal,        United Kingdom               $ 5 bn
                                                     Sweden

                                                     Sardinia,           United Kingdom,
  Crimean War             1853 ­ 1856                                                                $ 950 mn
                                                 Ottoman Empire               France
                                                                                                     $ 2.1 bn
1st Sino-Japanese
                              1895                     China              France, Russia          0.5 % of GDP
       War
                                                                                                 66 % of imports
  World War I             1914 - 1918          UK, France, Russia         US, UK, France              $ 475 bn


2nd Sino-Japanese                                                          USA, Soviet               $ 2.7 bn
                          1935 - 1938                  China                                       22 % of GDP
       War                                                                   Union
                                                                                                 135 % of imports

                                                                          Germany, Italy,            $ 12.5 bn
  Spanish Civil               1936                     Spain               Soviet Union            11 % of GDP
      War                                                                                        256 % of imports

                                                  UK, Germany,
  World War II            1939 ­ 1945                                           USA                   $ 800 bn
                                                  Soviet Union

  Vietnam War             1956 ­ 1975             South Vietnam                 USA                   $ 150 bn

                                                                                                     $ 2.6 bn
Yom-Kippur War                1973                     Israel                   USA                4 % of GDP
                                                                                                 20 % of imports

Note: This table shows the scale of official rescue lending in selected severe wars and military conflicts of the
past 200 years. The size of official assistance is given in real 2015 US Dollars. Whenever data availability
permits, we further show the magnitude of assistance in percent of pre-disaster recipient country GDP and
imports.




                                                                                                               23
           Table 4. Financial crises and their international response: selected cases, 1800 - 2015


                                                                                       Official assistance
   Financial                                 Main                  Main
                         Year                                                       (in real 2015 USD and as % of
     crisis                               recipient(s)            donor(s)
                                                                                       recipient GDP or imports)

                                                                                            $ 45 mn
 Panic of 1925           1825           United Kingdom             France                0.7 % of GDP
                                                                                         1% of imports
                                                                                           $ 290 mn
 Banking Crisis          1846                France           United Kingdom             0.6 % of GDP
                                                                                         6 % of imports
World Economic                                                                             $ 150 mn
                         1857              Hamburg                 Austria
    Crisis                                                                               2 % of imports
                                                                                           $ 575 mn
  Baring Crisis          1890           United Kingdom         France, Russia            0.2 % of GDP
                                                                                         1 % of imports
                                                                                            $ 390 mn
 Panic of 1907           1907           United Kingdom             France                0.1 % of GDP
                                                                                        0.5 % of imports
   Post WWI                                                     UK, France,                 $ 5.7 bn
                     1919 ­ 1923             Austria                                      22 % of GDP
  Stabilization                                               League of Nations
                                                                                        135 % of imports
    Currency                                                  Consortium of 16               $ 1 bn
                         1927                 Italy                                      0.5 % of GDP
  stabilization                                                Central Banks
                                                                                        7.2 % of imports
                                                              France, UK, USA,                $ 8 bn
 Crisis of 1931          1931               Germany                                        2 % of GDP
                                                                     BIS
                                                                                         20 % of imports
                                                                                             $ 19 bn
 Crisis of 1931          1931           United Kingdom          France, USA                4 % of GDP
                                                                                         24 % of imports
Currency & debt                                                                              $ 1.5 bn
                     1934 ­ 1937             Brazil                 USA                    2 % of GDP
     crisis
                                                                                         50 % of imports
 Dollar Gap &
                                                                                             $ 280 bn
Reconstruction of    1946 ­ 1952        Western Europe              USA
                                                                                                 -
    Europe
                                                                                             $ 2.7 bn
Currency & debt                                                 Soviet Union,
                         1956               Hungary                                        4 % of GDP
     crisis                                                        China
                                                                                         94 % of imports
   Defense of                                                                                $ 30 bn
                         1964           United Kingdom         IMF, BIS, G-10              5 % of GDP
    Sterling
                                                                                         30 % of imports


                                                                                                     24
 First Oil Crisis       1974 ­ 1976                 Italy                IMF, EEC,                    $ 23 bn
                                                                          Germany                   3 % of GDP
                                                                                                  25 % of imports
   Developing                                                                                         $ 33 bn
                                                                    IMF, IBRD, IADB,
  Country Debt          1982 ­ 1983                Brazil                                           5 % of GDP
                                                                      Germany, USA
     Crisis                                                                                       50 % of imports

                                                                                                      $ 76 bn
  Tequila Crisis        1994 ­ 1995               Mexico                 IMF, USA                  10 % of GDP
                                                                                                  68 % of imports
                                                                                                      $ 18 bn
   Asian Crisis              1997                Thailand            IMF, Korea, Japan              7 % of GDP
                                                                                                  16 % of imports
 Great Financial                                                                                      $ 50 bn
                        2008 ­ 2010               Ukraine              IMF, EU, USA                31 % of GDP
     Crisis
                                                                                                  65 % of imports
 Eurozone Debt                                                                                        $ 475 bn
                         2010 - 2015              Greece               Eurozone, IMF               144 % of GDP
     Crisis
                                                                                                  550 % of imports

   Note: This table shows selected official rescue packages during financial crises of the past 200 years. The
   size of official assistance is given in real 2015 US Dollars. Whenever data availability permits, we further
   show the magnitude of assistance in percent of pre-disaster recipient country GDP and imports.



        One insight from the case narratives is that international official assistance following disasters
was rare historically, in fact, so rare that we lowered the bar and also show some cases in which total
population losses were lower than 0.1% of the population (these cases are not included in the
regression analysis below). Among the few notable historical cases are US aid flows after the Caracas
earthquake of 1812 and international aid to the Caribbean in response to the 1843 volcano eruption on
Guadeloupe. Moreover, the committed amounts in the context of natural disasters were typically low,
not just by modern standards but also in comparison to the sizeable official lending during wars of the
same era. Over time, the amounts grow and in the recent decades there are a few cases in which
natural disasters triggered large-scale official aid flows, e.g. Ethiopia's famines in the mid-1980s, the
tsunami in the Indian Ocean in 2004 or the earthquake in Haiti of 2010.

        Generally, the cases illustrate that the amounts of official lending have increased over time,
both in absolute terms and as percent of recipient GDP or imports. This is particularly true for
international bailouts in financial crises. Notable examples include the Sterling Crisis of 1964 in which
the UK received USD 30 billion (5% of GDP), the Tequila Crisis of 1994/95 in which Mexico
received USD 76 billion (10% of GDP), as well as the recent bailouts of Ukraine after 2008 (50 billion


                                                                                                              25
USD, or 31% of GDP) and Greece after 2010 (Greece received a whopping 475 billion USD or 375
billion Euro in bailouts, corresponding to 144 % of Greek GDP, see Reinhart and Trebesch 2015b).

        We continue our analysis with a more systematic analysis on the incidence of international
rescue lending during disasters, focusing on the overlap between the two. Figure 12 shows the share of
independent countries that experienced disasters (black line) as well as the subset of these countries
that received international official assistance at the same time (grey shaded areas). The figure
considers financial crisis, natural catastrophes and military conflict as defined above.

            Figure 12. Incidence of official rescue lending in disasters (all types, 1800-2015)




        Note: This figure shows the share of independent countries that experience a disaster (black solid line),
        as well as the subset of these countries that also receive international official assistance (grey shaded
        area).


        The main take away from Figure 12 is that official international lending in disasters has
become much more prevalent and systematic over the course of the past 200 years. Since the interwar
period, an ever-larger share of crisis countries received foreign financial support. Since World War II
the share of recipients has almost reached a hundred percent, with only very few countries entering
crises without receiving any foreign financial help. Institutionally, this trend reflects the emergence of
a multi-layered financial safety net for sovereigns that provides ready-to-use access to a large array of
standing financing and risk-sharing options. Figure 13 goes a step further and explores the incidence
of rescue lending by type of disaster. It shows that the trend towards more systematic international
rescues is visible for all disaster types.


                                                                                                               26
                 Figure 13. Incidence of rescue lending by type of disaster (1800-2015)




 Note: This figure shows the share of independent countries that experience a disaster (black solid line), as well
 as the subset of these countries that also receive international official assistance (grey shaded area). The panels
 differentiate between disaster events: all financial crises (A), debt crises (B), natural disasters (C) and wars (D).




5. Determinants of rescue lending: Why do governments extend cross-border official
    loans?

            Why do governments extend cross-border official loans? According to recent theoretical
contributions by Tirole (2015), Farhi and Tirole (2018) and Gourinchas, Martin and Messer (2019), a
main driver of official rescue lending is the concern about cross-border spillovers. In case of two
closely integrated countries, a creditor government has an incentive to assist the country in crisis so as
to limit the collateral damage to their own economy. In this view, the rescuer country's solidarity is
largely a function of economic self-interest, aimed at reducing the negative externalities stemming
from the crisis country. The larger this externality is expected to be, the higher the likelihood and
volumes of rescue lending. The intensity of trade and banking linkages should thus help to predict why
some governments are willing to assist a crisis country on a large scale, while others choose to abstain.

           Here, we bring this theoretical prior to the data. The main hypothesis is that the size of
bilateral lending during financial crises increases in the scale of economic and/or financial integration
                                                                                                                   27
between creditor and crisis country. To test this hypothesis, we use our newly assembled bilateral
sovereign lending database, which allows us to estimate the determinants of official lending between
countries across 200 years. Specifically, we combine our dataset on official bilateral loans with the
above described disaster events, focusing on loans extended during the first two years of a war, a
major natural disaster, or of banking, sovereign debt and currency crises.4

           Figure 14 illustrates the dyadic structure of the bilateral lending data. The width of the red
connecting lines represents the number of bilateral rescue loans during financial crisis events, wars and
natural disasters since 1800. The graph shows a wide-spanning global network of bilateral financial
assistance with the United States and Western Europe being the main creditors.

      Figure 14. Bilateral rescue loans in financial crises, wars and natural disasters 1800 to 2015




Note: The width of the red lines increases with the number of bilateral rescue loans. Data on bilateral official
lending is from our international official lending database (see Section 2 and Appendix III). Data on the
incidence of financial crises, wars, and disasters is compiled from various sources (see Section 4.1).



5.1 Drivers of bilateral rescue lending - descriptives

        In this section we take a preliminary look at the data. We first introduce the key explanatory
variables of interest and then examine their correlation with official rescue lending during crises.

        To capture the degree of economic and financial interdependence between two countries, we
consider two measures. First, bilateral trade exposure, defined as bilateral trade (exports plus imports)


4
 This two-year focus is in line with the crisis literature (Kaminsky and Reinhart 1998). The results are similar
when considering only loans in the first crisis year or if we use the first three years.
                                                                                                             28
between a creditor and a crisis country, computed as a share of total trade of the creditor economy with
the rest of the world. This measure captures the weight of the crisis economy in total external trade of
the potential creditor economy. Long-run bilateral trade data comes from the comprehensive
TRADHIST project, with bilateral import and export data going back to the early 19th century
(Fouquin and Hugot 2016). Second, to capture bilateral financial linkages, we use the BIS
International Banking Statistics, which is available from 1984. We calculate bilateral financial
exposure analogously to bilateral trade exposure, meaning that we use the bank loan exposure of a
potential creditor country towards the crisis country divided by the total bank exposure of the creditor
country to the rest of the world. This variable captures the relative importance of the crisis country for
the banking and financial sector of the potential creditor country.

           Figure 15. Correlates of bilateral lending during disasters­ trade and bank linkages




Note: The lines show the fitted values from a regression of log bilateral commitments on the relevant
explanatory variable (the corresponding beta coefficient is shown separately). Data on bilateral rescue lending is
from the international official lending database (see Section 2 and Appendix III), data on trade and banking
exposure is from TRADEHIST (back to 1830) and BIS (back to 1984), respectively.



         Figure 15 shows scatter plots of banking and trade exposure between creditor and crisis
country with the bilateral loan commitment amount granted by creditor countries in disasters (in
constant 2015 US dollars). Each scatter point represents a bilateral loan commitment during disasters
since 1830. For illustration, we use natural logarithms. Furthermore, to reduce reverse causality
problems, we use pre-crisis trade and banking exposure. Figure 15 also shows fitted values and beta
coefficients from a univariate regression of bilateral rescue lending amounts on trade and banking
                                                                                                               29
exposure, respectively. The figure clearly shows that higher creditor country trade or private financial
exposure is associated with higher bilateral commitments in a disaster event.

          In addition to financial and economic exposure, we also consider the political allegiance
between country pairs. Governments may be more inclined to rescue lending, if the crisis country is
politically aligned. We measure this political alignment by the overlap in UN voting behavior between
pairs of states, a widely used measure that is available post-WW2 (Bailey, Strezhnev and Voeten,
2017).

          Following the literature on international trade, we also consider measures of geographic and
cultural proximity. We expect the likelihood of cross-border financial assistance to be higher among
countries of the same region and those that share cultural and political origins. This builds on the idea
that enforcement is easier and information asymmetries are lower between cultural and geographic
neighbors (see e.g. Tirole 2015 or Abraham, Caceles-Poveda, Liu and Marimon 2019). Specifically,
we use a measure of geographic distance as well as dummy variables of a shared religion, a shared
language and a shared colonial history (from Fouquin and Hugot, 2016).

         Figure 16. Correlates of bilateral lending in disasters ­ geographic and political proximity




Note: The lines show the fitted values from a regression of log bilateral commitments on the relevant
explanatory variable (the corresponding beta coefficient is shown separately). Data on bilateral rescue lending is
from the international official lending database (see Section 2 and Appendix II), data on UN voting and distance
is from the UN and Fouquin and Hugot (2016), respectively.

          Figure 16 plots the measures of joint UN voting and geographic distance against bilateral
lending commitments during wars, crises and disasters, again using logs and the pre-disaster values for
the explanatory variables. As expected, larger geographic distance between a creditor and a crisis
                                                                                               30
country is associated with lower financial commitments in crises (left panel). Moreover, we find a
(weak) negative correlation between UN voting similarity and bilateral rescue lending (right panel).

6.2. A gravity model of bilateral rescue lending

        In this section, we move beyond correlations and estimate an augmented gravity model of
bilateral rescue lending. Gravity models posit that bilateral trade between two countries is proportional
to their economic size and inversely related to their geographic distance (Head and Mayer 2014). They
are a workhorse models of international trade, but have also been found to have high explanatory
power for the geography of private international capital flows (e.g. Portes and Rey 2005 and
Niepmann 2015). Building on this literature, we apply a gravity model for the context of bilateral
official flows. The model takes the following form:

ln,, 
                  =  ln (. ,, ) +  ln(, ) +  ln ,, 
                  +   ,, +  +  +  + ,, ,

where subscript i refers to the crisis (debtor) country, j denotes a potential creditor country and t is the
disaster episode. The dependent variable, ,, , captures the size of official bilateral
commitments in real US$ received by debtor country i from creditor country j in crisis episode t. More
specifically, we include all bilateral official loan commitments extended in the first two years of major
wars, natural disasters and financial crises since 1830, as discussed in Section 4.1 and Appendix I.

        As explanatory variables, we build on the above cited theory work and include measures of
the creditor country's economic and financial exposure to the crisis country. Since bank and trade
exposure are very highly correlated we include these variable separately to avoid issues of
multicollinearity. In the baseline regressions we use bilateral trade exposure, because the data goes
back to the early 19th century, while bilateral bank linkages from the BIS are available only since the
1980s. As discussed above, we also include geographic distance to the crisis country, similarity in UN
voting as well as variables for cultural proximity through joint language, joint religion and a shared
colonial history. Since these measures of cultural proximity are highly correlated, we only include a
dummy for a shared colonial history in our benchmark regressions, but the results do not significantly
change, if other measures are used. We also include debtor and creditor fixed effects to account for
time-invariant creditor or debtor characteristics and episode fixed effects. These episode fixed effects
are disaster-specific, so as to control for time-specific disaster characteristics such as crisis severity.



                                                                                                              31
        For the estimation, we closely follow the established literature and examine both the extensive
and intensive margin, which in our case is the occurrence and size of bilateral official rescue lending,
respectively. Under heteroscedasticity, OLS estimates of log-linearized models are known to be
biased. Furthermore, the large number of zeros in the dependent variable leads to a truncated sample
under log-transformation (Head and Mayer 2014). A common solution is to employ a Poisson Pseudo
Maximum Likelihood (PPML) estimator that has the desirable properties of being consistent under
heteroskedastic error terms and that naturally incorporates zero observations (Head and Meyer 2014).
PPML can be used to estimate the parameters of a constant elasticity model in its multiplicative form
and thus avoids the dropping of zeros. Santos Silva and Tenreyro (2006) further show that the PPML
estimator leads to the same set of first-order conditions as an efficient and consistent non-linear least
square estimator. For the PPML estimator to be consistent and efficient, it is therefore not necessary
for the data generating process to follow a Poisson likelihood function.

        Against this backdrop, our main approach is to estimate Poisson Pseudo Maximum Likelihood
models, in order to account for heteroscedasticity and to avoid truncation of the sample. For
completeness, we also show results using a simple binary model, in which the dependent variable is a
dummy that takes the value of one, if a creditor country extends a rescue loan to the crisis country and
that is zero otherwise. Moreover, we run OLS to estimate the log-linearized model with log bilateral
commitments as the dependent variable, even though we are aware that this will result in a truncated
sample with the above-mentioned bias due to heteroscedasticity. In all three models, robust standard
errors are used, clustered at the creditor-debtor dyad level.

        Table 5 shows the results of the PPML regressions for the full sample as well as for sub-
samples in different eras of the international financial system. In line with our main hypothesis,
bilateral economic and financial exposure is significantly correlated with bilateral rescue lending
across all subsamples, both when using measures of trade and banking linkages. The same is true for
political allegiances (UN voting similarity, post-WW2) and for the importance of a shared colonial
history. We also find that geographic distance is a statistically significant predictor of bilateral rescue
lending. It enters all regressions models with a negative coefficient and thus suggests that
informational asymmetries and enforcement issues play an important role in impeding official
financial lending in crisis times.




                                                                                                        32
         Table 5: Gravity models of bilateral rescue lending: Full sample (1830-2015) and by era


                                                   Dep. variable: Bilateral rescue lending
                           Full Sample       Pre-WWII         Bretton Woods        Modern Era       Modern Era
                           1830 - 2015       1830 - 1945       1946 - 1973         1973 - 2015       1984 - 2015
                                                                                 (trade linkages) (banking linkages)
                               (1)               (2)                (3)                 (4)              (5)

  Trade exposure             0.34***            0.99*              0.32**            0.50***
                              (0.10)            (0.54)             (0.15)             (0.12)
  Financial exposure                                                                                   0.26***
                                                                                                        (0.06)
  Distance                   -0.35**           -0.95**            -0.63**             -0.30*          -0.55***
                              (0.15)            (0.48)             (0.28)             (0.18)            (0.17)
  UN voting                                                       6.60***             2.54**           5.44**
                                                                   (1.45)             (1.25)           (2.41)
  (Former) colony            1.12***           1.37***            1.53***            0.69***           1.18***
                              (0.29)            (0.46)             (0.34)             (0.26)            (0.22)
  Constant                   9.67***             7.10             8.25***              0.67             -0.43
                              (1.26)            (4.63)             (2.65)             (1.53)            (1.92)

  Observations                15429              449               1736               12042             1283
  R-squared                   0.825             0.997              0.921              0.730             0.961
  Creditor FE                                                                                             
  Debtor FE                                                                                               
  Episode FE                                                                                              
  Controls                                                                                                



Note: Poisson Pseudo Maximum Likelihood regressions using gross bilateral commitments during crises, wars
and disasters as dependent variable (in real USD.) All explanatory variables enter as pre-crisis values. The
models include creditor, debtor and disaster fixed effects. Robust standard errors are clustered at the creditor-
debtor dyad. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level. See Table A2 in the
Appendix for a list of included countries.

         Table 6 confirms the main results by focusing on the post-WW2 sample and comparing the
PPML estimation results with those of OLS and Probit models. In all three columns, bilateral trade
exposure emerges as a key predictor of official rescue lending during crisis and disasters, both in terms
of statistical significance and in terms of coefficient size. At the extensive margin (probit model), an
increase in bilateral trade exposure is associated with a statistically significant increase in the
likelihood of a rescue loan. In the OLS model, an increase in trade exposure by one percent is reflected
in a 0.40 percent increase in real commitment amounts. And finally, in the PPML model that captures
both the intensive as well as the extensive margin, the estimated elasticity of rescue lending to bilateral
trade exposure is 0.43 and statistically significant. The different models also show similar results with
respect to distance, shared culture, and political allegiance (UN general assembly voting).
                                                                                                                   33
        Table 6. Gravity models of bilateral rescue lending: Different econometric models

                                                  Dep. variable: Bilateral rescue lending

                                         Probit                    OLS                      PPML
                                          (1)                      (2)                       (3)

      Trade exposure                    0.24***                  0.40***                    0.43***
                                         (0.03)                   (0.06)                     (0.10)
      Distance                           -0.13*                 -0.46***                    -0.29*
                                         (0.07)                   (0.13)                    (0.15)
      UN voting                          -0.34                   1.59***                    3.77***
                                         (0.41)                   (0.57)                     (0.71)
      Former colony                     0.35***                  1.67***                    0.92***
                                         (0.13)                   (0.21)                     (0.20)
      Constant                          3.08**                     -0.99                    6.64***
                                        (1.30)                    (1.23)                     (1.17)

      Observations                       13778                    3639                      13778
      R-squared                                                   0.600                     0.742
      Creditor FE                                                                             
      Debtor FE                                                                               
      Episode FE                                                                              
      Controls                                                                                



Note: The dependent variable in the probit model is a dummy variable indicating the provision of a bilateral
rescue loan, the dependent variables in the OLS and PPML model are log real bilateral commitments. All
explanatory variables enter as pre-crisis values. All three models include creditor, debtor and episode fixed
effects. Robust standard errors are clustered at the creditor-debtor dyad. ***, **, and * indicate statistical
significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level. See appendix table A2 for a list of included countries.



        Taken together, our results reveal persistent patterns of financial rescue lending during
disasters. The statistical significance and quantitative importance of bilateral trade and financial
exposure suggests that official flows follow private flows. Countries seem to be most willing to
cooperate financially, when private agents have significant "skin in the game" in the form of real
economic or financial exposure to the crisis country. This finding points towards a substantial element
of economic self-interest in financial cooperation across all eras of the international financial system.
Cooperation is most likely to emerge during contagious crises and between closely integrated
economies. A less charitable restatement is that smaller and poorer countries with more limited
spillover potential across borders are likely to receive less official finance even if their disasters are
just as severe.

                                                                                                           34
        At the same time, cooperation seems to be impeded by informational asymmetries, as the
likelihood of rescue lending decreases significantly with higher geographic and cultural distance.
Besides economic exposure, political allegiance can help in overcoming these frictions.



6. Conclusion

        This paper quantifies and studies the scope and determinants of official, sovereign-to-
sovereign lending over the past two centuries, based on an encompassing new database. We show that
cross-border official lending has been an important force in international finance both in the previous
two centuries and today. Official lending tends to spike during wars and severe financial crises with
the most notable episodes in World Wars 1 and 2, under Bretton Woods and in the 1930s Depression.

        Official cross-border loans and bailouts have also become much more institutionalized.
Dozens of new official creditor institutions have been created since the 1970s, including, regional
development banks. At the same time, bilateral and multilateral institutions lending continue to play an
important role while central banks have become much more active again in lending to their
counterparts across borders. Few, if any, major military conflicts, systemic financial crises, or natural
disasters pass without some form of international official rescue lending.

        In the past two decades, official overseas lending has returned with force, with China joining
advanced country governments as an active official lender. The size of the post-2008 crisis
international bailout packages of Greece, Iceland, Ireland, and Portugal set records (relative to the
recipient's GDP or IMF quotas). In its early stages still, official lending during the Covid-19 crisis has
already skyrocketed both in the form of various emergency facilities at the IMF and World Bank and
swap lines from the Federal Reserve, a replay of the global financial crisis of 2008.

        A further key insight from our analysis is that official lending increases with the degree of
economic integration. Standard gravity models suggest that economies that are closely interlinked are
also more likely to cooperate financially when adversity strikes. At a more general level, the rise in
globalization of recent decades occurs alongside a rise in official cross-border finance.

        While their character may morph over time, we conclude that official capital flows will remain
a central element of the international financial system for decades to come. Against this background,
more work is needed to analyze the features of official lending around the world, as well as its
determinants and consequences. On determinants, our analysis represents a first step to understand
why sovereign nations lend to each other. There are many questions more for future research. What
are geopolitical drivers of official lending? What is the role of central bank cross-border lending in
                                                                                                   35
crisis management and resolution? Should official loans and bailout packages be extended via
bilateral, regional or rather multilateral institutions? Also some of the questions addressed in an older
literature may warrant revisiting: What are the spillovers between official and private capital flows?
What are the effects of policy conditionality that is so often attached to official loans? No doubt the
unfolding Covid-19 pandemic will raise a whole new set of questions on the design and efficacy of
new crisis lending facilities and official debt relief efforts.




                                                                                                      36
References

Accominotti, Olivier, and Barry Eichengreen. 2015. The mother of all sudden stops: capital flows and
      reversals in Europe, 1919­32. The Economic History Review, 69(2), 469-492.

Aguiar, Mark, and Manuel Amador. 2013. Sovereign Debt: A Review. NBER Working Paper No.
        19388.

Alfaro, Laura, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, and Vadym Volosovych. 2014. Sovereigns, Upstream Capital
        Flows, and Global Imbalances. Journal of the European Economic Association, 12(5), 1240-
        1284.

Árpád, Ábrahám, Eva Carceles-Poveda, Yan Liu, and Ramon Marimon. 2019. On the optimal design
       of a Financial Stability Fund. Mimeo.

Bahaj, Saleem, and Ricardo Reis. 2019. Central Bank Swap Lines: Evidence on the Effects of the
        Lender of Last Resort. IMES Discussion Paper Series 19-E-09.

Bailey, Michael A., Anton Strezhnev, and Erik Voeten. 2017. Estimating Dynamic State Preferences
        from United Nations Voting Data. Journal of Conflict Resolution, 61(2), 430-456.

Barkbu, Bergljot, Barry Eichengreen, and Ashoka Mody. 2011. International Financial Crises and the
       Multilateral Response: What the Historical Record Shows. NBER Working Paper No. 17361.

Barro, Robert J. 2006. Rare Disasters and Asset Markets in the Twentieth Century. The Quarterly
       Journal of Economics, 121(3), 823-866.

Barro, Robert J., and José F. Ursúa. 2008. Macroeconomic Crises since 1870. Brookings Papers on
        Economic Activity, 39(1), 255-350.

Bordo, Michael D., and Anna J. Schwartz. 1998. Under What Circumstances, Past and Present, Have
       Country Rescues Been Successful? Journal of International Money and Finance, 18(4), 683-
       708.

Bordo, Michael D., and Anna J. Schwartz. 2001. From the Exchange Stabilization Fund to the
       International Monetary Fund. NBER Working Paper No. 8100.

Bordo, Michael D., Owen F. Humpage, and Anna J. Schwartz. 2015. The Evolution of the Federal
       Reserve Swap Lines since 1962. IMF Economic Review, 63(2), 353-372.

Brown, Craig O., and I. Serdar Dinç. 2005. The Politics of Bank Failures: Evidence from Emerging
       Markets. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(4), 1413-1444.

Bruno, Valentina, and Hyun Song Shin. 2015. Capital flows and the risk-taking channel of monetary
       policy. Journal of Monetary Economics, 71(C), 119-132.

Calvo, Guillermo, Leonardo Leiderman, and Carmen M. Reinhart. 1993. Capital Inflows and Real
       Exchange Rate Appreciation in Latin America: The Role of External Factors. IMF Staff
       Papers, 40(1), 108-151.

Cogan, Jakob K., Ian Hurd, and Ian Johnstone. 2016. The Oxford Handbook of International
       Organizations. London: Oxford University Press.



                                                                                                 37
Cooper, Richard, Barry Eichengreen, Gerald Holtham, Robert Putnam, and C. Randall Henning, eds.
       1989. Can Nations Agree? Washington D.C.: Brookings Institution Press.

Corsetti, Giancarlo, Aitor Erce, and Timothy Uy. 2017. Official Sector Lending Strategies During the
        Euro Area Crisis. Cambridge Working Papers in Economics 1730.

Corsetti, Giancarlo, Bernardo Guimaraes, and Nouriel Roubini. 2003. A Model of the IMF's Catalytic
        Lending. Journal of Monetary Economics, 53(3), 441-471.

Dellas, Harris, and Dirk Niepelt. 2016. Sovereign Debt with Heterogeneous Creditors. Journal of
        International Economics, 99, 16-26.

Eichengreen, Barry. 1992. Golden Fetters: The Gold Standard and the Great Depression 1919-1939.
       New York: Oxford University Press.

End, Nicolas, Marina Marinkov, and Fedor Miryugin. 2019. Instruments of Debtstruction: A New
       Database of Interwar Debt. IMF Working Paper No. 19/226.

Farhi, Emmanuel, and Jean Tirole. 2018. Deadly Embrace: Sovereign and Financial Balance Sheets
        Doom Loops. Review of Economic Studies, 85(3), 1781-1823.

Feldstein, Martin, ed. 2007. International Economic Cooperation. Chicago: University of Chicago
        Press.

Fink, Fabian, and Almuth Scholl. 2016. A Quantitative Model of Sovereign Debt, Bailouts and
       Conditionality. Journal of International Economics, 98, 176-190.

Flores Zendejas, Juan H., and Yann Decorzant. 2015. Going multilateral? Financial markets' access
        and the League of Nations loans, 1923­8. The Economic History Review, 69(2), 653-678.

Fouquin, Michel, and Jules Hugot. 2016. Two Centuries of Bilateral Trade and Gravity Data: 1827-
       2014. CEPII Working Paper No. 14.

Gabaix, Xavier. 2012. Variable Rare Disasters: An Exactly Solved Framework for Ten Puzzles in
       Macro-Finance. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(2), 645-700.

Glick, Reuven, and Alan M. Taylor. 2010. Collateral Damage: Trade Disruption and the Economic
        Impact of War. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 92(1), 102-127.

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Olivier Jeanne. 2013. Capital Flows to Developing Countries: The
       Allocation Puzzle. The Review of Economic Studies, 80(4), 1484-1515.

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, Philippe Martin and Todd Messer. 2019. The Economics of Sovereign
       Debt, Bailouts and the Eurozone Crisis. Mimeo.

Head, Keith, and Thierry Mayer. 2014. Gravity Equations: Workhorse, Toolkit, and Codebook. In G.
       Gopinath, E. Helpman, and K. Rogoff, eds. Handbook of International Economics, 4, 131-
       195.

Horn, Sebastian, Carmen M. Reinhart, and Christoph Trebesch. 2019. China's Overseas Lending.
       NBER Working Paper No. 26050.

James, Harold. 1996. International Monetary Cooperation since Bretton Woods. New York: Oxford
       University Press.


                                                                                                 38
Kaminsky, Graciela L., and Carmen M. Reinhart. 1999. The Twin Crises: The Causes of Banking and
      Balance-of-Payments Problems. American Economic Review, 89(3), 473-500.

Keene, Edward. 2012. The Treaty-Making Revolution of the Nineteenth Century. The International
       History Review, 34(3), 475-500.

Kindleberger, Charles P. 1986. International Public Goods without International Government.
       American Economic Review, 76(1), 1-13.

Kindleberger, Charles P. 2006. A Financial History of Western Europe. London: Routledge.

Lane, Phillip, and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti. 2007. The external wealth of nations mark II: Revised
       and extended estimates of foreign assets and liabilities, 1970 ­ 2014. Journal of International
       Economics, 73(2), 223 ­ 250.

Lorenzoni, Guido. 2014. International Financial Crises. In G. Gopinath, E. Helpman, and K. Rogoff,
       eds. Handbook of International Economics, 4, 689-740.

Margold, Stella. 1934. Export Credit Insurance in Europe Today. Washington D.C.: U.S. Government
       Printing Office.

Marichal, Carlos. 1989. A Century of Debt Crises in Latin America: From Independence to the Great
       Depression, 1820-1930. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Martin, Philippe, Thierry Mayer, and Mathias Thoenig. 2005. Make trade not war? The Review of
        Economic Studies, 75, 865-900.

Meyer, Josefin, Carmen M. Reinhart, and Christoph Trebesch. 2019. Sovereign Bonds since Waterloo.
       NBER Working Paper No. 25543.

Meyer, Richard H. 1970. Bankers' Diplomacy - Monetary Stabilization in the Twenties. New York:
         Columbia University Press.

Mitchell, Brian. 2013. International Historical Statistics 1750 ­ 2010. Basingstoke: Palgrave
        Macmillan.

Mitchener, Kris J., and Marc D. Weidenmier. 2010. Supersanctions and sovereign debt repayment.
       Journal of International Money and Finance, 29(1), 19-36.

Morris, Stephen, and Hyun Song Shin. 2006. Catalytic Finance: When Does It Work? Journal of
        International Economics, 70(1), 161-177.

Niepmann, Friederike. 2015. Banking Across Borders. Journal of International Economics, 96(2),
      244-265.

Nurkse, Ragnar. 1944. International Currency Experience. Geneva: League of Nations.

Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff. 2000. The Six Major Puzzles in International
        Macroeconomics: Is There a Common Cause? NBER/Macroeconomics Annual, 15(1), 339-
        390.

Obstfeld, Maurice, Jay C. Shambaugh, and Alan M. Taylor. 2009. Financial Instability, Reserves, and
        Central bank Swap Lines in the Panic of 2008. American Economic Review, 99, 480-486.



                                                                                                   39
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Alan M. Taylor. 2004. Global Capital Markets: Integration, Crisis, and
        Growth. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Portes, Richard, and Hélène Rey. 2005. The Determinants of Cross-Border Equity Flows. Journal of
        International Economics, 65(2), 269-296.

Reinhart, Carmen M., and Christoph Trebesch. 2015a. The IMF: 70 Years of Reinvention. Journal of
       Economic Perspectives, 30(1), 3-28.

Reinhart, Carmen M., and Christoph Trebesch. 2015b. The pitfalls of external dependence: Greece,
       1829 ­ 2015. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, 307-328.

Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff. 2009. This Time Is Different: Eight Centuries of
       Financial Folly. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Reinhart, Carmen M., Vincent Reinhart, and Christoph Trebesch. 2016. Global Cycles: Capital Flows,
       Commodities, and Sovereign Defaults, 1815-2015. American Economic Review, 106(5), 574-
       580.

Rey, Hélène. 2015. Dilemma not Trilemma: The Global Financial Cycle and Monetary Policy
      Independence. NBER Working Paper No. 21162.

Roubini, Nouriel, and Brad Setser. 2004. Bailouts or Bail-Ins? Responding to Financial Crises in
       Emerging Economies. New York: Peterson Institute for International Economics.

Silva, João M.C. Santos, and Silvana Tenreyro. 2006. The Log of Gravity. The Review of Economics
         and Statistics, 88(4), 641-658.

Sarkees, Meredith, and Frank Wayman. 2010. Resort to War: 1816 ­ 2007. Washington D.C.: CQ
        Press.

Scheubel, Beatrice, and Livio Stracca. 2016. What Do We Know about the Global Financial Safety
       Net? Rationale, Data and Possible Evolution. ECB Occasional Paper Series No. 177

Schlegl, Matthias, Christoph Trebesch, and Mark L.J. Wright. 2019. The Seniority Structure of
        Sovereign Debt. NBER Working Paper No. 25793.

Schneider, Christina J., and Jennifer L. Tobin. 2020. The Political Economy of Bilateral
       Bailouts. International Organization, 74, 1-29.

Silva, João M.C. Santos, and Silvana Tenreyro. 2006. The Log of Gravity. The Review of Economics
         and Statistics, 88(4), 641-658.

Stallings, Barbara. 1987. Banker to the Third World: US Portfolio Investment in Latin America 1900-
        1986. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Stone, Irving. 1999. The Global Export of Capital from Great Britain, 1865-1914: A Statistical
        Survey. London: Palgrave Macmillan.

Summers, Lawrence. 2000. International Financial Crises: Causes, Prevention, and Cures. American
      Economic Review, 90(2), 1-16.

Suter, Christian. 1992. Debt cycles in the world economy: foreign loans, financial crises, and debt
        settlements, 1820-1990. Boulder: Westview.


                                                                                                40
Tierney, Michael J., Daniel L. Nielson, Darren G. Hawkins, J. Timmons Roberts, Michael G. Findley,
        Ryan M. Powers, Bradley Parks, Sven E. Wilson, and Robert L. Hicks. 2011. More Dollars
        than Sense: Refining Our Knowledge of Development Finance Using AidData. World
        Development, 39(11), 1891-1906.

Tirole, Jean. 2015. Country Solidarity in Sovereign Crises. American Economic Review, 105(8), 2333-
         2363.

Tunçer, Ali Cokun. 2015. Sovereign Debt and International Financial Control. The Middle East and
        the Balkans, 1870­1914. London: Palgrave Macmillan.




                                                                                                41
Appendix I. Dating disasters since 1800

Our dataset covers financial crises, military conflicts, and severe natural disasters since 1800. This
appendix describes the relevant definitions and data sources.

1. Banking, currency and external sovereign debt crises

Our definition of external financial crisis events follows Reinhart and Rogoff (2009). A currency crisis
is defined as an annual depreciation against the relevant anchor currency by 15 percent or more. A
banking crisis is defined by events: the occurrence of bank runs that lead to the closure, merging, or
take-over of one or more financial institutions, or, in the absence of runs, the closure, merging, take-
over, or large-scale government assistance of an important financial institution that marks the start of
similar outcomes for other financial institutions. Only systemic (severe) banking crises are included.
Finally, an external sovereign debt crisis is defined as the failure of a government to meet a principal
or interest payment towards a foreign creditor on the due date.

Determining the duration of a banking crisis is particularly challenging. While dating the start of a
banking crisis tends to be easier to discern due to the occurrence of a specific crisis event such as a
bank run or intervention, as described. External sovereign debt crises are generally considered to end
once final resolution is reached with external creditors (Reinhart and Rogoff, 2009). Figure A1 builds
on these definitions and presents the incidence of banking, currency and sovereign debt crises since
1800 by showing the number of countries that experience a currency or banking crisis or are in default
(restructuring) on external creditors.

Since that many years and even decades can pass before a country in default reaches a final agreement
with external creditors, sovereign defaults can give rise to very long debt crises spells. Similarly,
currency crashes can accompany chronically high inflation spells for years. Hence, we limit our focus
to new default episodes, i.e. the year, in which a country enters a crisis by defaulting on external debt.
Similarly, we date the first year of a currency crash or systemic banking crisis. Figure A2 provides the
corresponding incidence graph.




                                                                                                       42
                                    Figure A1. Varieties of financial crises
              Incidence of banking, currency and external sovereign debt crises 1800 - 2015




    Figure A2. Incidence of new banking, currency and external sovereign debt crises 1800 - 2015




Note: It is common for countries to experience different "varieties" of financial crises in the same year. Data is
from Reinhart and Rogoff (2009) and from Meyer, Reinhart and Trebesch (2019).

                                                                                                                 43
2. Military conflict

Our dating of wars relies on the Correlates of War project, which defines a war as sustained combat,
involving organized armed forces, resulting in a minimum of 1000 battle-related fatalities over the
course of a 12 months period (Sarkees and Wayman 2010). The Correlates of War data collection
further distinguishes inter-state and intra-state conflict: International or inter-state conflicts are defined
as wars between two or more territorial states that are members of the international state system. To
the contrary, intra-state (or civil) wars are defined by sustained military combat within a state and with
active participation of the national government. In the CoW database, war begins with the onset of
sustained military combat and ends with the cessation of sustained military combat. Formal
declarations of war and armistice agreements are only used as the beginning and end dates of war if
they coincide with the beginning and end of military combat.

Data on inter and intra-state military conflicts is available from the Correlates of War Project since
1816 and until 2010. As the coding of inter- and intra-state military conflicts does not cover the early
19th century and in particular the Napoleonic Wars, we extend coverage back to 1800. Since data on
combat and battle-related fatalities is not readily available, we create a simple dummy variable that
indicates formal declarations of war during the Napoleonic and French Revolutionary Wars. To do so,
we use the following sources:

Esdaile, Charles. 2007. Napoleon's Wars: An international history, 1803 ­ 1815. Penguin: London.

Fermont-Barnes, Gregory. 2006. The Encyclopedia of the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic
Wars: A Political, Social and Military History. ABC Clio: Santa Barbara.

Gibler, Douglas. 2008. International Military Alliances 1648 ­ 2008. CQ Press: Washington DC.



Figure A3 shows the number of countries involved in inter- and intra-state military conflicts in each
year since 1800.




                                                                                                           44
                         Figure A3. Incidence of military conflicts 1800 - 2010




         Note: See text for definition and sources.



3. Natural disasters

The key building block of this data is the EM-DAT International Disaster Database that provides
information on the occurrence, material damage and fatalities of several thousand disasters since 1900.
The EM-DAT database includes data on a variety of disastrous events: geophysical (earthquakes and
volcano eruptions), meteorological (extreme temperatures and storms), hydrological (floods and
landslides), climatological (droughts, famines and wildfires) and biological such as epidemics.

Extending the coverage to the 19th century poses a variety of challenges given that coverage falls far
short of modern standards. Our primary source for the years from 1800 to 1900 is the US National
Center for Environmental Information that offers data on the occurrence of earthquakes, volcano
eruptions, floods, tsunamis and storms. In ongoing data collection, we supplement this data with
sources that document the incidence of famines and epidemics in the 19th century. These include:

Alfani, Guido, and Cormac Ó Gráda. 2018. The timing and causes of famines in Europe. Nature
Sustainability 1: 283-288.


                                                                                                    45
Alfani, Guido, and Cormac Ó Gráda, eds. 2017. Famine in European History. Cambridge University
Press: Cambridge.

De Waal, Alex. 2018. Mass Starvation: The History and Future of Famines. Polity Press: Cambridge
MA.

Hays, J. 2005. Epidemics and Pandemics: Their Impact on Human History. ABC Clio: Santa Barbara.

Hays, J. 2009. The Burdens of Disease: Epidemics and Human Responses in Western History. Rutgers
University Press: New Brunswick NJ.

O'Grada, Garcia. 2009. Famine: A Short History. Princeton University Press: Princeton.

Figure A4 presents the incidence of natural disasters and the associated fatalities since 1800.
Casualties from natural disasters are dominated by major famines such as Europe's year without a
summer in 1816, the Great Irish Potato Famine in the late 1840s or the famines associated with
China's Great Leap Forward in the late 1950s. The number of identified disaster events shows a
pronounced increase particularly after World War II. Rather than reflecting structural trends in the
frequency of disasters, this shift is driven by the improvement in coverage and reporting; the time
series underscore that our log of disaster events in the 19th and early 20th century is far from complete.

However, as we are primarily interested in severe natural disasters that may warrant international
assistance, incomplete coverage during the 19th century is not a major concern. In effect, it raises the
issue that for the post-WW2 era we need to restrict the log the more severe disasters. To winnow the
event log, we match our list of natural disasters with population data from Mitchell (2007) and restrict
our coverage to those natural disasters where the loss of life is at least 0.1 percent of the population of
the affected country. This filter yields 108 severe natural disasters over the course of the past 200+
years.

While the timing of a natural disaster is straight-forward in the cases of earthquakes, floods or
hurricanes, it is more challenging to accurately date the duration of famines and epidemics. For these
cases, we follow the same approach as we do for financial crises and focus on the initial epidemic or
famine year.




                                                                                                        46
                Figure A4. Incidence of natural disasters 1800 - 2015




Sources: Multiple sources (see text).




                                                                        47
Appendix II. Country sample for regression analysis




                        Table A1. Country sample for regression analysis


    Algeria                       Ghana                          Peru
    Angola                        Greece                         Philippines
    Argentina                     Guatemala                      Poland
    Australia                     Honduras                       Portugal
    Belgium                       Hungary                        Romania
    Bolivia                       Iceland                        Russia
    Brazil                        India                          Singapore
    Canada                        Indonesia                      South Africa
    Central African Republic      Italy                          South Korea
    Chile                         Japan                          Spain
    China                         Kenya                          Sri Lanka
    Colombia                      Malaysia                       Thailand
    Costa Rica                    Mauritius                      Tunisia
    Cote d'Ivoire                 Mexico                         Turkey
    Dominican Republic            Morocco                        United Kingdom
    Ecuador                       Myanmar                        United States of America
    Egypt                         Netherlands                    Uruguay
    El Salvador                   Nicaragua                      Venezuela
    Finland                       Nigeria                        Zambia
    France                        Panama                         Zimbabwe
    Germany                       Paraguay




                                                                                            48
Appendix III. Construction of the International Official Lending database



Definition of official sovereign lending: Our database provides data on official loans, grants and
guarantees by bilateral and multilateral official creditors since 1790. Note that we do not attempt to
cover official transfers resulting from indemnity and reparation payments. While reparation payments
have been sizable at different points of history, we do not include them in our dataset, as they are not
based on the same consensual legal basis as credits, grants and guarantees.


Our database is spliced together from hundreds of different sources that fall into four main categories:
(i) International Treaties and Financial Agreements; (ii) Reports and budget plans of creditor and
debtor institutions, both published and from archives; (iii) Information on official lending collected by
international organizations, most importantly the Debtor Reporting System (DRS) of the World Bank
and the Creditor Reporting System (CRS) of the OECD's Development Assistance Committee (DAC);
(iv) Information on official lending collected by modern and historic academic research.


In the following, we list the sources used to construct the database and structure them by the four main
eras covered: (i) The long 19th century (1790 to WW2), (ii) the Inter-War Period, (iii) the post-World
War II and Bretton Woods era and (iv) the modern era (1970 - 2015), for which data is more readily
available from international organizations. Additional creditor-specific sources that have been used for
more than one historic era are listed separately by creditor country and organization (v).

1. The Long 19th Century: 1790 - 1914

Our dataset for the 19th century is mainly based on international treaty series. We search all available
treaty collections for bilateral credit and subsidy agreements and code all available information on
these financial transactions. The resulting dataset therefore consists of loan-level information on loans,
grants and guarantees extended by the United Kingdom, France, Germany, Italy, Russia, Austria-
Hungary as well as various smaller states. We supplement this series with information from investor
manuals and statistical year books as well as dozens of country specific resources, in particular budget
plans and national accounts. For lending by central banks, we have made use of existing research on
central bank cooperation during the 19th century and on archival research at the Bank of England and
the Banque de France.




                                                                                                       49
General Treaty Series

Bevans, Charles. Various Years. Treaties and Other International Agreements of the United States of
         America. Washington D.C.: Department of State.
De Martens, Georg Frederic. Various Years. Recueil Des Principaux Traites d'Alliance, de Paix, de
         Treve, de Neutralite, de Commerce, de Limites, d'Echange et des plusieurs autres actes
         servant a la connaissance des relations etranges des puissances et etats de l'Europe.
         Gottingue: Libraire de Dieterich.
De Martens, Georg Frederic, and de Martens, Charles. Various Years. Recueil Des Principaux Traites
         d'Alliance, de Paix, de Treve, de Neutralite, de Commerce, de Limites, d'Echange et des
         plusieurs autres actes servant a la connaissance des relations etranges des puissances et
         etats de l'Europe. Gottingue: Libraire de Dieterich.
De Martens, Georg Frederic, and Saalfeld, Frederic. Various Years. Recueil Des Principaux Traites
         d'Alliance, de Paix, de Treve, de Neutralite, de Commerce, de Limites, d'Echange et des
         plusieurs autres actes servant a la connaissance des relations etranges des puissances et
         etats de l'Europe. Gottingue: Libraire de Dieterich.
De Martens, Georg Frederic, and Murhard, Frederic. Various Years. Recueil Des Principaux Traites
         d'Alliance, de Paix, de Treve, de Neutralite, de Commerce, de Limites, d'Echange et des
         plusieurs autres actes servant a la connaissance des relations etranges des puissances et
         etats de l'Europe. Gottingue: Libraire de Dieterich.
Hopf, Jules. Various Years. Noveau Recueil Generals Des Traites et Autres Actes Relatifs aux Rapport
          de Droit International. Gottingue: Libraire de Dieterich.
Murhard, Frederic. Various Years. Noveau Recueil Generals Des Principaux Traites, Conventions et
         Autres Transactions Remarquables. Gottingue: Libraire de Dieterich.
Samwer, Charles, and Hopf, Jules. Various Years. Noveau Recueil Generals Des Traites et Autres
        Actes Relatifs aux Rapport de Droit International. Gottingue: Libraire de Dieterich.
Samwer, Charles. Various Years. Noveau Recueil Generals Des Principaux Traites, Conventions et
        Autres Transactions Remarquable. Gottingue: Libraire de Dieterich.
Stoerk, Felix. Various Years. Noveau Recueil Generals Des Traites et Autres Actes Relatifs aux
          Rapport de Droit International. Leipzig: Libraire Dieterich.
Triepel, Heinrich. Various Years. Noveau Recueil Generals Des Traites et Autres Actes Relatifs aux
          Rapport de Droit International. Leipzig: Libraire Dieterich.
De Martens, Georg Frederic. Various Years. Recueil des Traites et Conventions conclus par la Russie
         avec les Puissances Etrangeres. St. Petersburg: Imprimerie du Ministere des vois de
         communication.
De Clercq, M. Jules. Various Years. Recueil des Traites de la France. Paris: Archives Diplomatiques.
United Kingdom Foreign Office. Various Years. British and Foreign State Papers. London: Her
         Majesty's Stationary Office.


Annual Reports and Statistical Compendia

Clarke, Hyde. 1878. Sovereign and Quasi Sovereign States: Their Debts to Foreign Countries. Journal
          of the Statistical Society 51 (2): 299 - 347.
Fenn, Charles. Various years. Fenn's compendium of the English and foreign funds, debts and
         revenues of all nation. London: E. Wilson.
                                                                                         50
Fortune, Thomas. Various years. Fortune's Epitome of the Stock and Public Funds. London: Boosey &
          Sons.
Kimber, Albert. 1922. Kimber's Records of Government Debts and other Foreign Securities. New
         York: A. W. Kimber & Company.
Secondary sources

Ahrens, Gerhard. 1986. Krisenmanagement 1857 - Staat Und Kaufmannschaft in Hamburg Während
         Der Ersten Weltwirtschaftskrise. Hamburg: Verein für Hamburgische Geschichte.
Bordo, Michael D, and Anna J Schwartz. 1999. Under What Circumstances, Past and Present, Have
         International Rescues of Countries in Financial Distress Been Successful? Journal of
         International Money and Finance 18 (4): 683 - 708.
Esteves, Rui, and Ali Tuncer. 2014. Feeling the Blues. Moral Hazard and Debt Dilution in Eurobonds
          Before 1914. CEPR Discussion Paper 9860.
Flandreau, Marc. 1997. Central bank Cooperation in Historical Perspective: A Sceptical View. The
          Economic History Review 50 (4): 735-63.
Kindleberger, Charles. 1984. A Financial History of Western Europe. London: Routledge.
Mitchener, Kris J. and Marc Weidenmier. 2010. Supersanctions and Sovereign Debt Repayment.
         Journal of International Money and Finance 29 (1): 19 - 36.



2. World Wars I and II and the Interwar Period: 1914 - 1945


Official lending surged with the onset of World War I and its immediate aftermath. Debts owed to
official creditors remained high throughout the 1920s and 1930s. This phenomenon was documented
in policy reports by official institutions, in investor manuals and in the writings of contemporaneous
observers. Our time-series splices together all these sources and supplements them with credit
agreements from international treaty series and creditor country budget plans. For central banks we
again make use of annual reports, existing academic work and archival research.

Treaty Series, Annual Reports and Statistical Compendia

Bank for International Settlements. Various Years. Annual Report. Basel: Bank for International
         Settlements.
League of Nations. 1936. Enquiry into Clearing Agreements. Geneva: League of Nations.
League of Nations. 1943. Relief Deliveries and Relief Loans 1919-1923. Geneva: League of Nations.
League of Nations. Various Years. League of Nations Treaty Series. Geneva: League of Nations.
League of Nations. 1943. Europe's Capital Movements 1919-1932: A Statistical Note. Geneva: League
          of Nations.
Moody's. Various Years. Moody's Manual of Investments - American and Foreign. New York:
         Moody's Investor Service.


                                                                                                   51
United Nations. 1946. International Capital Movement during the Inter-War Period. United Nations
         Publication No. 1949.II.D.2.




Secondary sources

Andersen, Poul N. 1946. Bilateral Exchange Clearing Policy. London: Oxford University Press.
Clarke, Stephen. 1967. Central bank Cooperation 1924-1931. New York: Federal Reserve Bank of
          New York.
Eichengreen, Barry. 1992. Golden Fetters: The Gold Standard and the Great Depression 1919 - 1939.
         New York: Oxford University Press.
Fisk, Harvey. 1924. The Inter-Ally Debts 1914 - 1923. New York: Bankers Trust Company.
Flores Zendejas, Juan, and Yann Decorzant. 2016. Going Multilateral? Financial Markets' Access and
          the League of Nations Loans, 1923 ­ 1928. Economic History Review 2: 653­78.
Gordon, Margaret. 1941. Barriers to World Trade. New York: MacMillan.
Margold, Stella. 1934. Export Credit Insurance in Europe today. Washington D.C.: Government
         Printing Office.
Meyer, Richard Hemming. 1970. Bankers' Diplomacy - Monetary Stabilization in the Twenties. New
         York: Columbia University Press.
Moulton, Harold G., and Leo Pasvolsky. 1932. War Debts and World Prosperity. Washington D.C.:
         Brookings Institution.
Myers, Margaret. 1945. The League Loans. Political Science Quarterly 60 (4): 492­526.
Neal, Larry. 1979. The Economics and Finance of Bilateral Clearing Agreements: Germany, 1934-8.
          The Economic History Review 32 (3): 391-404.
Reinhart, Carmen, and Christoph Trebesch. 2016. Sovereign Debt Relief and Its Aftermath. Journal of
          the European Economic Association 14 (1): 215-51.
Ritschl, A O. 2001. Nazi Economic Imperialism and the Exploitation of the Small: Evidence from
          Germany's Secret Foreign Exchange Balances, 1938-1940. Economic History Review 54
          (2): 324­45.
Strachan, Hew. 2004. Financing the First World War. New York: Oxford University Press.
Thomas, Hugh. 1961. The Spanish Civil War. New York: Modern Library.



3. Post World War II and Bretton Woods: 1945 - 1973

Our collection of post-WW2 loans and grants builds on a large number of published and unpublished
reports by the BIS, the IBRD, Moody's, the OEEC (renamed to OECD in 1961) and the UN. All of the
reports listed in the following are available in the on-site or digital archives of these institutions. For
ongoing data collection on cross-border central bank lending, we make use of the secondary literature
and archival research at the Federal Reserve and the BIS.

                                                                                                        52
Main Sources

Andersen, Svend, and James Lynch. 1949. Summary Review of the External Debt of the United
         Kingdom. Report No. E 67A. Washington D.C.: International Bank for Reconstruction and
         Development.
Andersen, Svend, James Lynch, and William Pollock. 1949. The External Debt of Ecuador. Report
         No. E 66. Washington D.C.: International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Andersen, Svend, Martin Rosen, and Alexander Stevenson. 1947. Possibility of Foreign Lending by
         Countries other than the U.S. in the immediate Future. Report No. ERM 82. Washington
         D.C.: International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Bank for International Settlements. 1945 - 1973. Annual Report. Basel: Bank for International
         Settlements.
Beaufort, Carel de. 1953. Summary of the External Debt of Japan. Report No. EC 14. Washington
          D.C.: International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Beaufort, Carel de. 1953. Summary of the External Debt of West Germany. Report No. EC 18.
          Washington D.C.: International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Fraser, William. 1951. The History and Present Position of the External Debt of the Dominican
         Republic. Report No. E 137. Washington D.C.: International Bank for Reconstruction and
         Development.
Fraser, William. 1951. The External Debt of the Kingdom of Denmark. Report No. E 147e.
         Washington D.C.: International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Gaiola, Nicola. 1955. Summary of the External Public Debt of Peru. Report No. EC 46. Washington
          D.C.: International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Huang, Andrew. 1950. Public External Debt of the Belgium and Luxembourg. Report No. E 105.
        Washington D.C.: International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Huang, Andrew. 1950. Preliminary Survey of the External Debt of France. Report No. E 90.
        Washington D.C.: International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Huang, Andrew. 1950. Public External Debt of Ethiopia. Report No. E 107. Washington D.C.:
        International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Huang, Andrew. 1950. Public External Debt of Indonesia. Report No. E 119. Washington D.C.:
        International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Huang, Andrew. 1950. Preliminary Review of The External Debt of Iceland. Report No. E 126.
        Washington D.C.: International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Huang, Andrew. 1950. Public External Debt of Ceylon. Report No. E 129.       Washington D.C.:
        International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Huang, Andrew. 1950. The External Debt of Costa Rica. Report No. E 130. Washington D.C.:
        International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Huang, Andrew. 1951. Public External Debt of the Belgian Congo. Report No. E 154. Washington
        D.C.: International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Huang, Andrew. 1951. Review of the External Debt of Iceland. Report No. E 170. Washington D.C.:
         International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.


                                                                                            53
Huang, Andrew. 1952. The External Debt of Nicaragua. Report No. E 224. Washington D.C.:
        International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Huang, Andrew. 1952. Summary of the External Debt of Thailand. Report No. EC 1. Washington
        D.C.: International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Huang, Andrew. 1952. Public External Debt of Luxembourg. Report No. EC 4. Washington D.C.:
        International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Huang, Andrew. 1954. The Public External Debt of Austria. Report No. EC 26. Washington D.C.:
        International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Huang, Andrew. 1954. The External Debt of Ethiopia. Report No. EC 27. Washington D.C.:
        International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Huang, Andrew. 1954. External Public Debt of Greece. Report No. EC 28. Washington D.C.:
        International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Huang, Andrew. 1954. The Long-Term Public External Debt of Belgium and the Belgian Congo.
        Report No. EC 34. Washington D.C.: International Bank for Reconstruction and
        Development.
Huang, Andrew. 1954. The External Public Debt of Luxembourg. Report No. EC 38a. Washington
        D.C.: International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Huang, Andrew. 1955. The Long-Term Public External Debt of Belgium and the Belgian Congo.
        Report No. EC 39. Washington D.C.: International Bank for Reconstruction and
        Development.
Huang, Andrew. 1956. A Preliminary Review of the External Public Debt of India. Report No. EC 51.
         Washington D.C.: International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Huang, Andrew. 1956. Public External Debt of Indonesia. Report No. EC 54. Washington D.C.:
        International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
IBRD. 1955. Summary of the External Public Debt of Norway. Report No. EC 42. Washington D.C.:
         International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
IBRD. 1955. The External Debt of Italy. Report No. EC 44. Washington D.C.: International Bank for
         Reconstruction and Development.
IBRD. 1958. The External Public Debt of Yugoslavia. Report No. EA 84a. Washington D.C.:
        International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Larsen, Harold. 1949. External Credit of Brazil. Report No. E 38/49. Washington D.C.: International
         Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Lynch, James. 1950. The History and Present Position of the External Debt of Bolivia. Report No. E
         95. Washington D.C.: International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Lynch, James and W.M. Gilmartin. 1948. Honduras' External Debt History. Report No. ERM 63.
         Washington D.C.: International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Lynch, James. 1948. Columbia's External Debt History. Report No. ERM 122. Washington D.C.:
         International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Lynch, James. 1948. Finland's External Public Debt History. Report No. ERM 128. Washington D.C.:
         International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Lynch, James. 1949. Peru's External Public Debt History. Report No. E 6. Washington D.C.:
         International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.

                                                                                                54
Lynch, James. 1949. Mexico's External Public Debt, Economic and Financial Causes of Debt and Debt
         Adjustment Plans. Report No. E 11. Washington D.C.: International Bank for
         Reconstruction and Development.
Lynch, James. 1949. External Debt of Chile. Report No. E 32. Washington D.C.: International Bank
         for Reconstruction and Development.
Lynch, James. 1949. Turkey's External Public Debt History. Report No. E 36/49. Washington D.C.:
         International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Lynch, James. 1950. The History and Present Position of the External Debt of Bolivia. Report No. E
         95. Washington D.C.: International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Lynch, James. 1950. The History and Present Position of the External Debt of Colombia. Report No. E
         96. Washington D.C.: International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Lynch, James. 1950. The External Debt of Italy. Report No. E 100. Washington D.C.: International
         Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Lynch, James. 1949. The External Debt of Uruguay. Report No. E 62. Washington D.C.: International
         Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Lynch, James. 1950. External Debt of the Union of South Africa. Report No. E 108a. Washington
         D.C.: International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Lynch, James. 1950. The External Debt of the Netherlands. Report No. E 110. Washington D.C.:
         International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Lynch, James. 1950. The External Debt of Brazil. Report No. E 120. Washington D.C.: International
         Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Lynch, James. 1951. Summary of the External Debt of Colombia. Report No. E 150. Washington
         D.C.: International Bank for Reconstruction and Development..
Lynch, James. 1951. Summary of the External Debt of Panama. Report No. E 160. Washington D.C.:
         International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Lynch, James. 1951. The External Debt of Cuba. Report No. E 164. Washington D.C.: International
         Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Lynch, James. 1951. The External Debt of Paraguay. Report No. E 166. Washington D.C.:
         International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Lynch, James. 1951. The External Debt of Egypt. Report No. E 168. Washington D.C.: International
         Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Lynch, James. 1951. Summary of the External Debt of Paraguay. Report No. E 198. Washington D.C.:
         International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Lynch, James. 1952. The External Public Debt of Peru. Report No. E 216. Washington D.C.:
         International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Lynch, James. 1952. Summary of the External Debt of Chile. Report No. E 225. Washington D.C.:
         International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Lynch, James. 1952. The External Public Debt of Mexico. Report No. E 236. Washington D.C.:
         International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Lynch, James. 1952. Summary of the External Debt of the Netherlands. Report No. EC 2. Washington
         D.C.: International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.


                                                                                                55
Lynch, James. 1953. Summary of the External Public Debt of Turkey. Report No. EC 20a.
         Washington D.C.: International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Lynch, James. 1953. The External Public Debt of Uruguay. Report No. EC 24. Washington D.C.:
         International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Lynch, James. 1954. Summary of the Public External Debt of Norway. Report No. EC 29. Washington
         D.C.: International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Lynch, James. 1954. The External Public Debt of El Salvador. Report No. EC 30. Washington D.C.:
         International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Lynch, James. 1954. The External Public Debt of Peru. Report No. EC 32. Washington D.C.:
         International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Lynch, James. 1954. Summary of the External Public Debt of the Netherlands. Report No. EC 36.
         Washington D.C.: International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Lynch, James. 1954. The External Public Debt of El Salvador. Report No. EC 37. Washington D.C.:
         International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Lynch, James. 1953. The External Debt of Italy. Report No. EC 15. Washington D.C.: International
         Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Moody's. Various Years. Moody's Manual of Investments - American and Foreign. New York:
         Moody's Investor Service.
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. 1961. The Flow of Financial Resources to
          Countries in Course of Economic Development 1956-1959. Paris: OECD.
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. 1962. The Flow of Financial Resources to
          Countries in Course of Economic Development 1960. Paris: OECD.
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. 1963. The Flow of Financial Resources to
          Countries in Course of Economic Development 1961. Paris: OECD.
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. 1965. The Flow of Financial Resources to
          Less-Developed Countries 1956-1963. Paris: OECD.
United Nations Economic and Social Council. 1957. Financing of Economic Development -
        Information Concerning International Economic Assistance for the Less Developed
        Countries. Report by the Secretary-General E/3047. New York: United Nations.
United Nations Economic and Social Council. 1958. Economic Development of Under-Developed
         Countries - International Economic Assistance to the Under-Developed World 1956/57.
         Report by the Secretary-General E/3131. New York: United Nations.
United Nations Economic and Social Council. 1961. International Economic Assistance to the Less
         Developed Countries. Report by the Secretary-General. New York: UN Department of
         Economic and Social Affairs.

Secondary sources

Behrman, Jack N., and Raymond Mikesell. 1958. Financing Free World Trade with the Sino-Soviet
         Bloc. Princeton Studies in International Finance 8: 1 - 268.
Bittermann, Henry J. 1973. The Refunding of International Debt. Durham: Duke University Press.
Bordo, Michael, Owen Humpage, and Anna Schwartz. 2015. The Evolution of the Federal Reserve
         Swap Lines since 1962. IMF Economic Review 63(2): 353 - 372.
                                                                                                 56
Eichengreen, Barry J. 1993. Reconstructing Europe's Trade and Payments: The European Payments
         Union. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Inter-American Development Bank. 1966. European Financing of Latin America's Economic
         Development. Washington D.C.: Inter-American Development Bank.
Inter-American Development Bank. 1969. European Participation in the Financing of Latin American
         Development. Washington D.C.: Inter-American Development Bank.
James, Harold. 1996. International Monetary Cooperation Since Bretton Woods. New York: Oxford
         University Press.
Kaplan, Jacob and Günther Schleimiger. 1989. The European Payments Union: Financial Diplomacy
          in the 1950s. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Kriz, Miroslav A. 1947. Postwar International Lending. Princeton Essays in International Finance 8:
          1 - 36.
Mikesell, Raymond. 1948. Regional Multilateral Payments Arrangements. The Quarterly Journal of
          Economics 62 (4): 500-518.
Mikesell, Raymond. 1962. U.S. Private and Government Investment Abroad. Eugene: University of
          Oregon Press.
Mikesell, Raymond. 1966. Public International Lending for Development. New York: Random House.
Schenk, Catherine. 2010. The Decline of Sterling - Managing the Retreat of an International Currency
         1945 - 1992. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Shonfield, Andrew, and Susan Strange, eds. 1976. International Economic Relations of the Western
          World 1959 - 1971. New York City: Oxford University Press.
Toniolo, Gianni. 2005. Central bank Cooperation at the Bank for International Settlements 1930 -
          1973. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Trued, Merlin Nelson and Mikesell, Raymond. 1955. Postwar Bilateral Payments Agreements.
        Princeton Series in International Finance 4: 1 - 132.



4. Modern Era: 1970 - 2015


From 1970 onwards data on official lending has been systematically collected by international
organizations such as the World Bank and the OECD. Our database brings together data on official
grants from the OECD's creditor reporting system (CRS) and data on bilateral loans from the World
Bank's debtor reporting system (DRS). The latter is not publicly available, but has been obtained from
the World Bank upon request. For multilateral lending, we make use of several different sources. Aid
flows by development banks are mostly taken from the project level data published by AidData at
William & Mary (Tierney et al., 2011). In a few instances, we complement this rich data source with
additional transaction-level data from annual reports of creditors. Lending by regional financial
arrangements is taken from creditor organization annual reports and websites as well as from the



                                                                                                   57
database provided by Scheubel and Stracca (2016). For central bank lending, our collection of loans
stems from Central bank annual reports and from existing academic research.


Main Sources on bilateral creditors

OECD. 2019. Creditor Reporting System: Aid activities. OECD International Development Statistics.
Tierney, Michael J., Daniel L. Nielson, Darren G. Hawkins, J. Timmons Roberts, Michael G. Findley,
          Ryan M. Powers, Bradley Parks, Sven E. Wilson, and Robert L. Hicks. 2011. More Dollars
          than Sense: Refining Our Knowledge of Development Finance Using AidData. World
          Development 39 (11): 1891-1906.
World Bank. 2017. Debtor Reporting System: Database. Request for data extract filed at
        http://www.worldbank.org/en/access-to-information.

Main sources on multilateral creditors

Arab Monetary Fund. Various Years. Annual Report. Abu Dhabi.
Asian      Infrastructure Investment Bank.         2019.   Approved    Projects.     https://www.aiib.
            org/en/projects/approved/index.html.
Bank for International Settlements. Various Years. Annual Report. Basel: Bank for International
         Settlements.
Eurasian      Fund      for Stabilization and       Development.   2019.      ``Projects:   Dataset``.
            https://efsd.eabr.org/en/projects/.
European Commission. Various Years. Report to the European Parliament and the Council on the
         Implementation of Macro-Financial Assistance to Third Countries. Brussels.
European Commission. Various Years. The Commission's Annual Report to the Parliament and the
         Council on the Borrowing and Lending Activities of the Community. Brussels: European
         Commission.
European Commission. 2019. Balance of Payment (BoP) Assistance. Brussels: European Commission.
European Union. Various Years. "Official Journal of the European Union." Brussels.
European Economic Union. Various Years. Protocols on Financial and Technical Cooperation.
         Brussels: EUR-Lex.
Commission of the European Communities. Various Years. Annual Report from the Commission on
        the Implementation of Community Assistance to the Countries of East and Central Europe
        (PHARE). Brussels: European Economic Union.
Commission of the European Communities. Various Years. Agreements and Other Bilateral
        Commitments Linking the Communities with Non-Member Countries. Brussels: European
        Communities.
Commission of the European Communities. Various Years. Annual Report from the Commission on
        PHARE, Pre-Accession and Transition Instruments. Brussels: European Economic Union.
Commission of the European Communities. Various Years. General Report on Pre-Accession
        Assistance (PHARE - ISPA - SAPARD). Brussels: European Communities.



                                                                                                   58
European Commission. Various Years. Report from the Commission on Financial Assistance for
         Enlargement (IPA, PHARE, CARDS, Turkey Pre-Accession Instrument, Transition
         Facility). Brussels: European Commission.
European Commission. Various Years. Annual Report on the Implementation of the European
         Commission's External Assistance. Brussels: European Commission.
European Commission. Various Years. The TACIS Programme - Annual Report. Brussels: European
         Commission.
European Commission. 2009. Evaluation of the Council Regulation No 2698/2000 (MEDA II) and its
         Implementation - Final Report. Brussels: European Commission.
European     Investment Bank. 2019.         List   of   Financed     Projects.   http://www.eib.org/en/
           projects/loan/list/index.htm.
European Stability Mechanism. 2019. Financial Assistance. https://www.esm. europa.eu/financial-
         assistance.
Fondo Latinoamericano de Reservas. 2019. Historically Approved Credits. http://flar.net/.
Inter-American     Development      Bank.      2019.     Statement     of         Approved       Loans.
         https://www.iadb.org/en/idb-finance/statement-approved-loans.
New Development Bank. 2019. List of all Projects. https://www.ndb.int/projects/ list-of-all-projects/.
Scheubel, Beatrice, and Livio Stracca. 2016. Occasional Paper Series What Do We Know about the
          Global Financial Safety Net? Rationale, Data and Possible Evolution: Dataset. ECB
          Occasional Paper Series No. 177.
Tierney, Michael J., Daniel L. Nielson, Darren G. Hawkins, J. Timmons Roberts, Michael G. Findley,
          Ryan M. Powers, Bradley Parks, Sven E. Wilson, and Robert L. Hicks. 2011. More Dollars
          than Sense: Refining Our Knowledge of Development Finance Using AidData. World
          Development 39 (11): 1891-1906.

Secondary sources

Bederman, David J. 1988. The Bank for International Settlements and the Debt Crisis: A New Role for
        the Central bankers' Bank? Berkeley Journal of International Law 6(1): 91 - 121.
James, Harold. 1996. International Monetary Cooperation Since Bretton Woods. New York: Oxford
         University Press.
           James, Harold. 2012. Making the European Monetary Union. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
           University Press.


5. Country-specific sources

We cross-check and complement all of the above mentioned references by a large number of creditor-
specific data sources, in particular budget plans and annual reports. We list these sources by creditor
country and in alphabetic order.




                                                                                                     59
China:

Atkins, Lucas, Deborah Brautigam, Yuannan Chen, and Jyhjong Hwang. 2017. Challenges of and
         opportunities from the commodity price slump. CARI Economic Bulletin #1. China Africa
         Research Initiative, Johns Hopkins University School of Advanced International Studies,
         Washington DC: CARI.
Dreher, Axel, Andreas Fuchs, Bradley Parks, Austin M. Strange, and Michael J. Tierney. 2017. Aid,
         China, and Growth: Evidence from a New Global Development Finance Dataset. AidData
         Working Paper 46.
Bartke, Wolfgang. 1975. China's Economic Aid. London: C. Hurst.
Bartke, Wolfgang. 1976. The Agreements of the People's Republic of China 1949 - 1975. Hamburg:
         Institut für Asienkunde.
Copper, John. 2016. China's Foreign Aid and Investment Diplomacy. 3 vols. London: Palgrave
         Macmillan.
Custer, Samantha, Brooke Russell, Matthew DiLorenzo, Mengfan Cheng, Siddharta Ghose, Jacob
          Sims, Jennifer Turner, and Harsh Desai. 2018. Ties That Bind: Quantifying China's public
          diplomacy and its good neighbor effect: Dataset. https://www.aiddata.org/data/chinas-
          public-diplomacy-in-east-asia-and-pacific.
Gallagher, Kevin P. 2017. China's Global Energy Finance: Dataset. https://www.bu. edu/cgef/intro.
Gallagher, Kevin P., and Margaret Myers. 2019. China-Latin America Finance Database.
          https://www.thedialogue.org/maplist/ (accessed February 5, 2019)..
Law, Yu Fai. 1984. Chinese Foreign Aid: A Study of Its Nature and Goals with Particular Reference
         to the Foreign Policy and World View of the People's Republic of China, 1950 - 1982. PhD
         diss., University of Bielefeld.
Lin, Teh-chang. 1993. The foreign aid policy of the People's Republic of China: A theoretical analysis.
          PhD diss., Northern Illinois University.
Lowy Institute. 2018. Pacific Aid Map. https://pacificaidmap.lowyinstitute.org/.
Lowy Institute. 2018. Chinese Aid in the Pacific. https://chineseaidmap.lowy institute.org/.

France:

Duvergier, J. B., ed. Various Years. Collection Complete des Lois, Decrets, Ordonnances, Reglemens
          et Avis du Conseil-d'Etat. Paris: Bibliotheque Nationale de France.
Hayter, Theresa. 1966. French Aid. London: Overseas Development Institute.
Journal Officiel de la Republique Francais. Various Years. Lois et Decrets. Paris: Bibliotheque
         Nationale de France.
Le Ministre Secretaire D'Etat des Finances. Various Years. Comptes Rendus par les Ministres. Paris:
          L'Imprimerie Royale.
Ministere du Commerce, de l'Industrie, des Postes et des Telegraphes. Various Years. Annuaire
          Statistique. Paris: Bibliotheque Nationale de France.
Ministere de l'Europe et des Affaires etrangeres. 2019. Traites et accords de la France.
         https://basedoc.diplomatie.gouv.fr/.
Plessis, Alain. 1998. Histoires de La Banque de France. Paris: Albin Michel.

                                                                                                    60
Germany:

Cholet, Julia. 2011. Der Etat des Deutschen Reiches in der Bismarckzeit. Berlin: Berliner
         Wissenschaftsverlag.
Kaiserliches Statistisches Amt. Various Years. Statistisches Jahrbuch für das Deutsche Reich. Berlin:
          Kaiserliches Statistisches Amt.
Deutsche Bundesbank. Various Years. Geschäftsbericht. Frankfurt a. M.: Deutsche Bundesbank.
Kruse-Rodenacker, Albrecht, Horst Dumke, and Niklas von Götz. 1970. Kapitalhilfe: Probleme und
         Aufgaben. Berlin: Duncker & Humblot.
Reichstag des Deutschen Kaiserreichs. Various Years. Verhandlungen des Deutschen Reichstags.
         www.reichstagsprotokolle.de (accessed February 5, 2019).
Schmidt, Heide-Irene. 2003. Pushed to the Front: The Foreign Assistance Policy of the Federal
         Republic of Germany 1958-1971. Contemporary European History 12(4): 473-507.
Schnee, Heinrich, ed. 1920. Deutsches Kolonial-Lexikon. Leipzig: Quelle & Meyer.
White, John. 1965. German Aid - A Survey of the Sources, policies and Structure. London: Overseas
          Development Institute.
United Kingdom:

Bank of England. Various Years. Annual Report. London: Bank of England.
Clapham, J. H. 1945. The Bank of England: A History. London: The Macmillan Company.
Mackintosh, Athole and Andrzej Krassowski. 1963. British Aid. London: Overseas Development
         Institute.
Ministry of Overseas Development. 1966. Overseas Development - The Work in Hand. London:
          Ministry of Overseas Development
Scholes, Teophilus. 1899. The British Empire and Alliances: or, Britain's Duty to her Colonies and
          Subject Races. London: E. Stock.
UK House of Commons. Various Years. Appropriation Accounts. UK House of Commons
        Parliamentary Papers.
UK House of Commons. Various Years. Colonial Development Fund Accounts. UK House of
        Commons Parliamentary Papers.
UK House of Commons. Various Years. Finance Accounts of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
        and Ireland for the Financial Year. UK House of Commons Parliamentary Papers.
UK House of Commons. Various Years. UK Treaty Series. UK House of Commons Parliamentary
        Papers.
UK Foreign Office. Various Years. British and Foreign State Papers. London: Her Majesty's
         Stationary Office.

United States:

Bevans, Charles. Various Years. Treaties and Other International Agreements of the United States of
         America. Washington D.C.: Department of State.
Export-Import Bank of Washington. Various Years. Annual Report. Washington D.C.: Export-Import
         Bank.
                                                                                                     61
Export-Import Bank of Washington. Various Years. Report to Congress. Washington D.C.: Export-
         Import Bank.
Federal Reserve System. Various Years. Federal Reserve Bulletin. Washington D.C.: Federal Reserve.
Trundle, Sidney. 1950. The Export-Import Bank of Washington - Its Origins, Operations and
          Relationships with Other Governmental Agencies 1934 - 1950. PhD dissertation, Rutgers
          University.
US Agency for International Development. 2019. Greenbook - U.S. Overseas Loans and Grants.
        https://explorer.usaid.gov/reports.html/tab-greenbook.
US Department of Commerce. 1952. Foreign Aid by the United States Government 1940 - 1951.
         Washington D.C.: US Department of Commerce.
US Department of State. Various Years. Report to Congress on Lend-Lease Operations. Washington
         D.C.: US Department of State.
US Treasury. Various Years. Annual Report of the Secretary of the Treasury on the State of the
         Finances. Washington D.C.: US Treasury.
US Treasury. 2019. Exchange Stabilization Fund - History of Credit Operations.
         https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/international/ESF/Pages/history-index.aspx.
Williams, Benjamin. 1939. Foreign Loan Policy of the United States since 1933. New York City:
          Council for Foreign Relations.

Soviet Union and COMECON Countries:

Bach, Quintin. 2003. Soviet Aid to the Third World: The Facts and Figures. Lewes: Book Guild.
Central Intelligence Agency. Various Years. Communist Aid to Non-Communist Less Developed
           Countries. Langley, VA: Central Intelligence Agency.
Central Intelligence Agency. Various Years. Soviet Economic Assistance to the Sino-Soviet Bloc.
           Langley, VA: Central Intelligence Agency.
Shapiro, Leonard, ed. Various Years. Soviet Treaty Series. A Collection of Bilateral Treaties,
          Agreements and Conventions, Concluded between the Soviet Union and Foreign Powers.
          Washington D.C.: Georgetown University Press.
Triska, Jan and Robert M. Slusser. 1962. The Theory, Law and Policy of Soviet Treaties. Stanford:
           Stanford University Press.
Walters, Robert. 1966. Soviet Economic Aid to Cuba: 1959 - 1964. International Affairs 42 (1): 74-86.

Other creditor countries:

Boogaerde, Pierre. 1990. The Composition and Distribution of Financial Assistance from Arab
         Countries and Arab Regional Institutions. IMF Working Paper WP/90/67.
Takagi, Shinji. 1995. From Recipient to Donor: Japan's Official Aid Flows, 1945 to 1990 and Beyond.
          Princeton Essays in International Finance 164: 1 - 50.
Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development. Various Years. Annual Report. Kuwait City: Kuwait
         Fund.



                                                                                                    62
6. Coverage of multilateral creditors

This section provides an overview on the multilateral creditor organizations that are covered in our
international official lending database as well as the coding sources. The table distinguishes between
(i) organizations that have global coverage, (ii) stability arrangements that have regional membership
and specialize in the provision of balance of payments support, and (iii) regional development banks
that specialize in the provision of development finance to certain groups of countries. Our data
collection for the BIS and UN agencies is still ongoing.




                                  Table AI1. Coverage of multilateral creditors


  Global organizations                                           Time coverage    Main data sources

  Bank for International Settlements                               1930 - 2015    BIS Annual Reports
                                                                                  BIS Archive

  International Monetary Fund                                      1944 - 2015    Reinhart & Trebesch (2016)
                                                                                  IMF Annual Reports

  International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)     1947 - 2015    IBRD Statement of Loans
                                                                                  (available online)

  International Development Association (IDA)                      1961 - 2015    IDA Statement of Loans
                                                                                  (available online)

  League of Nations                                                1920 - 1939    Moody's Investment Manual
                                                                                  Flores and Decorzant (2015)

  United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)                      1979 - 2015    Annual Reports

  United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund           1979 - 2015    Annual Reports
  (UNICEF)

  United Nations High Commisioner for Refugees                     2005 - 2015    Annual Reports
  (UNHCR)

  United Nations Central Emergency Relief Fund                     2005 - 2015    Annual Reports
  (UNCERF)




                                                                                                            63
Regional Stability Arrangements                    Time coverage   Main data sources

Andean Reserve Fund                                  1978 - 1989   FLAR Website
                                                                   FLAR Annual Reports

Arabic Monetary Fund                                 1977 - 2015   AMF Annual Reports

BRICS Contingent Reserves Agreement                  2014 - 2015   Establishment Treaty
                                                                   (not activated)

Chiang Mai Initiative (CMI)                          2000 - 2009   Central Bank websites
                                                                   (not activated)

Chiang Mai Initiative Multilateralisation (CMIM)     2009 - 2015   Central Bank websites
                                                                   (not activated)

Eurasian Fund for Stability and Development          2010 - 2015   EFSD Annual Repots

European Payments Union                              1950 - 1958   BIS Annual Reports

European Monetary Fund (EMA)                         1958 - 1973   BIS Annual Reports

European MTFA Facility                               1971 - 1988   Official Journal of the EU

European Community Loan Mechanism                    1975 - 1988   Official Journal of the EU

European Balance of Payments Facility                1988 - 2015   Official Journal of the EU

European Financial Stability Mechanism               2010 - 2015   ESM Website

European Financial Stability Facility                2010 - 2015   ESM Website

European Stability Mechanism                         2012 - 2015   ESM Website

Latin American Reserve Fund                          1989 - 2017   FLAR Website
(Fondo Latino Americano de Reservas - FLAR)




                                                                                                64
Development Banks and other regional creditors   Time coverage   Main data sources


African Development Bank                           1967 - 2015   AidData
(AFDB)                                                           OECD CRS

African Development Fund                           1974 - 2015   AidData
(AFDF)                                                           OECD CRS

Andean Development                                 1988 - 2015   AidData
Corporation (CAD)                                                Annual Reports

Arab Bank for Economic                             1975 - 2015   AidData
Development in Africa (BADEA)                                    OECD CRS

Arab Fund for Economic and                         1974 - 2015   AidData
Social Development (AFESD)                                       OECD CRS

Asian Development Bank                             1968 - 2015   AidData
(AsDB)                                                           Annual Reports

Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank               2015 - 2015   Website
(AIIB)

Caribbean Development Bank                         1970 - 2015   AidData
(CDB)                                                            Annual Reports

Council of Europe                                  1958 - 2015   Annual Reports

European Bank of Reconstruction                    1991 - 2015   AidData
and Development (EBRD)                                           OECD CRS

Euratom                                            1958 - 1967   Official Journal of the EEC
                                                                 Moody's Investor Manual

European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC)           1951 - 1967   Official Journal of the EEC
                                                                 Moody's Investor Manual

European Development Fund                          1973 - 2015   AidData
                                                                 OECD CRS

European Investment Bank                           1959 - 2015   EIB Project History
                                                                 Website

European Union PHARE                               1989 - 2007   Annual Reports

European Union IPA                                 2007 - 2015   Annual Reports

Inter-American Development                         1959 - 2015   AidData
Bank (IADB)                                                      Annual Reports

International Fund for                             1977 - 2015   AidData
Agricultural Development                                         DRS



                                                                                               65
Islamic Development Bank                              1976 -2015    AidData
(IsDB)                                                              OECD CRS

New Development Bank                                  2014 - 2015   Website

Nordic Development Fund                               1977 - 2015   AidData
                                                                    OECD CRS

North American Development Bank                       1996 - 2015   AidData
                                                                    Annual Reports

OPEC Fund for International                           1976 -2015    AidData
Development (OFID)                                                  OECD CRS

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe   2005 - 2015   AidData
(OSCE)                                                              OECD CRS




                                                                                     66
