                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      WHY DOES CONSUMPTION FLUCTUATE IN OLD AGE AND HOW SHOULD
                     THE GOVERNMENT INSURE IT?

                                        Richard Blundell
                                       Margherita Borella
                                       Jeanne Commault
                                      Mariacristina De Nardi

                                       Working Paper 27348
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27348


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2020




Richard Blundell gratefully acknowledges financial support from the ESRC Centre for the Microeconomic
Analysis of Public Policy at the IFS (ES00116). We are grateful to Marco Bassetto for helpful comments
and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research, the CEPR, the Federal Reserve Bank of
Minneapolis, or the Federal Reserve System.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Richard Blundell, Margherita Borella, Jeanne Commault, and Mariacristina De Nardi. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Why Does Consumption Fluctuate in Old Age and How Should the Government Insure It?
Richard Blundell, Margherita Borella, Jeanne Commault, and Mariacristina De Nardi
NBER Working Paper No. 27348
June 2020
JEL No. D1,D11,D12,D14,E2,E21,H2,H31,H51

                                         ABSTRACT

In old age, consumption can fluctuate because of shocks to available resources and because health
shocks affect utility from consumption. We find that even temporary drops in income and health
are associated with drops in consumption and most of the effect of temporary drops in health on
consumption stems from the reduction in the marginal utility from consumption that they
generate. More precisely, after a health shock, richer households adjust their consumption of
luxury goods because their utility of consuming them changes. Poorer households, instead, adjust
both their necessary and luxury consumption because of changing resources and utility from
consumption.

Richard Blundell                                Jeanne Commault
University College London                       Sciences Po - EUI
Department of Economics                         28 Rue des Saints-Pères
Gower Street                                    75007 Paris
                                                France
London                                          jeanne.commault@gmail.com
England
r.blundell@ucl.ac.uk
                                                Mariacristina De Nardi
Margherita Borella                              University of Minnesota
Università di Torino                            1925 S 4th St
Dipartimento di Scienze Economico-Sociali       Minneapolis, MN 55455
e Matematico-Statistiche                        and Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis and CEPR
Torino, Italy                                   and also NBER
margherita.borella@unito.it                     denardim@nber.org
1    Introduction
    To what extent are households subject to risks and to what extent are they insured
by the government, themselves, their family, and their community? Given the im-
portance of this question, it is not surprising that many papers have offered different
perspectives on it, in the context of both developed and developing countries.
    To answer this question, the vast majority of these papers focus on people of work-
ing age and study the effects of income shocks on consumption. The key idea is that
income fluctuations that result in consumption fluctuations signal that households are
imperfectly insured. While this is a very sensible approach, the population is aging,
people across the world live much longer and, as they become older, health shocks
assume an increasingly important role. This has two important implications. The
first one is that health shocks are an additional important source of risk later in life.
The second one is that health shocks might affect both resources and the marginal
utility of consumption.
    Disentangling the causes of consumption changes due to shocks crucially deter-
mines how we should best insure people. Consider, for instance, a person hit by a
health shock that generates an income drop. Within this situation, there are two
possible scenarios. In one, this person's marginal utility function does not change
and any drop in consumption reflects a drop in resources. This can call for addi-
tional insurance to alleviate frictions that prevent people from smoothing out income
fluctuations: this is the traditional view that has been tested. But under a different
scenario, suppose that this person's health shock also reduces his or her marginal
utility from consumption, for instance because the person no longer derives the same
utility from traveling. This person's consumption might now fluctuate for two rea-
sons. One pertains to the fluctuation in resources. The other one pertains to the
fluctuation in the marginal utility caused by a change in heath. It could well be, for
instance if this person has a lot of assets, that he or she has no problem smoothing
out income fluctuations as desired, and that all fluctuations in consumption come
from a change in the utility of consumption resulting from a change in health.
    The implications in terms of insurance in these two scenarios are different: if the
person has no change in marginal utility from consumption as a result of these health
and income shocks but experiences a large drop in consumption, it is desirable to give
him or her transfers to smooth consumption and thus marginal utility fluctuations.


                                           2
In contrast, if health mainly reduces the marginal utility of consumption, giving re-
sources to a person affected by a negative health shock is not an effective policy (a
benevolent planner maximizing total utility would allocate less consumption to a per-
son whose marginal utility of consumption has decreased). Thus, optimal insurance
depends on why consumption fluctuates.
    In this paper, we measure the effects of both income and health shocks on con-
sumption among households over age 65 and we decompose the consumption response
to a health shock into its effect on resources (which can come from changes in both
income and expenses on medical goods and services, a category that we distinguish
from regular consumption), and its effect on the marginal utility from consumption
of goods and services.
    Our analysis requires observing, for the same household, income, health, and
broad-based consumption measures; and such data has been notably difficult to find.
To overcome this problem and pair income and health data together with consumption
data, we use the Consumption and Activities Mail Survey (CAMS) that is sent to a
subset of households enrolled in the Health and Retirement Survey (HRS) since 2001.
    The HRS is a longitudinal panel study that is conducted every other year and is
representative of the U.S. population over the age of 50 and their spouses. It collects
information on health status and income over the past year. The CAMS is conducted
on the off-years in between the main HRS years and collects information about con-
sumption in the contemporaneous year, that is, over the same period as reported
for health and income. Its consumption information is quite detailed and allows us
to build and analyze several consumption categories: food, utilities, and car-related
expenditures (repairs, insurance, and gasoline), which we classify as necessities; and
leisure and equipment (house, garden, clothing, and personal care goods and services),
which we classify as luxuries.
    To compute our measure of health, we follow Blundell, Britton, Costa-Dias, and
French (2017) and use the predicted value of a self-reported health index (the in-
dividuals' rating of their health status), regressed over a set of objective measures
(dummies for reporting difficulties in activities of daily living and dummies for hav-
ing certain health conditions, as diagnosed by a doctor). Because consumption data
is at the household level, our level of analysis is the household, and we take average
health of a household's members as an indicator of the health of that household.
    We focus on temporary shocks, which given the frequency of our data refer to


                                          3
changes in health that last at most two years. This allows us to cleanly sidestep the
well-known difficulty of disentangling the health and income effects of a permanent
health shock from its effect on expected lifespan and bequest motives.
    To identify the consumption response to these temporary health and income
shocks, we rely on a statistical decomposition method a la Blundell, Pistaferri, and
Preston (2008) (BPP). That is, we model the household's health and income as
transitory-permanent processes, which can be represented as the sum of a perma-
nent component that evolves as a random walk and of a transitory component that is
a moving average. As we show in Appendix B, these assumptions are well supported
for our age group. Our empirical strategy is to then instrument the effects of a cur-
rent change in health with that of a future change in health, which correlates with
the transitory part of a current health change but is uncorrelated with its permanent
component.
    Our method is more general than the original BPP estimator, in that we remain
agnostic about how households make their consumption decision. In fact, by focusing
only on the pass-through of transitory shocks, the assumption that log-consumption
evolves as a random walk can be relaxed (Kaplan and Violante (2010), Commault
(2020)). In addition, we do not need to assume that households know that the shock
is temporary and they might thus be mistaken about the shocks' duration.
    Our analysis yields several important and novel findings. First, after age 65 house-
holds are subject to large temporary shocks in both income and health. In terms of
magnitudes, the variance of the i.i.d. component of income explains 40% of the vari-
ance of changes in income, and the variance of the i.i.d. component of health explains
33% of the variance of changes in health (after we detrend all variables from the
effect of observed demographic characteristics). The bulk of these shocks cannot be
attributed to measurement error for two reasons: first, the HRS has been documented
to be of excellent quality1 and, second, we find that these transitory shocks have a
significant impact on households' decision variables.
    Second, these transitory shocks to income and health are correlated with each
other, and this correlation is statistically significant, confirming that even short-run
changes in health affect the resources available to households. Their magnitude im-
  1
    Hurd and Rohwedder (2009) discus the CAMS data quality and show that spending totals are
close to those measured in the Consumer Expenditures Survey (CEX) and the the age profiles of
wealth changes implied by spending and after-tax income are similar to the wealth change in the
HRS data. French, Jones, and McCauley (2017) find that the HRS data are of high quality.


                                              4
plies that a one standard-deviation decrease in health is associated with a 2% decrease
in current income.
    Third, income shocks affect non-durable consumption but not medical expenses.
Our estimated average pass-through of a transitory income shock to consumption
is 0.11. This means that a one unit increase in the transitory component of income
(corresponding to a 100% increase, that is a doubling, of current income) is associated
with an 11% increase in current non-durable consumption. This increase is roughly
homogeneous across consumption good categories, with leisure activities responding
more strongly. In addition, a positive transitory income shock raises the consumption
of (all categories of) necessities among low-wealth households and the consumption
of luxuries among high-wealth households.
    Fourth, the effect of health shocks are concentrated on leisure activities, car main-
tenance, and out-of-pocket medical expenses. Our estimates of the pass-through co-
efficients imply that a one standard deviation decrease in current health is associated
with a 9% decrease in leisure activities expenses, a 4% decrease in car maintenance ex-
penses, and a 9% increase in out-of-pocket medical expenses. Across levels of wealth,
a positive health shock raises the consumption of necessities and possibly of luxuries
(although the latter is less precisely estimated) among low-wealth households and
raises the consumption of luxuries among high-wealth households.
    To further examine the sources of these consumption responses, we then specify
a structural life-cycle model and estimate the respective contributions of the changes
in resources and in the utility from consumption. In our model, a household's con-
sumption decisions are the solution of an intertemporal problem in which utility is
separable in different consumption categories and medical consumption and the util-
ity derived from each consumption category can depend on the household's current
health status. We show that, in this framework, the response of a given category of
consumption to a transitory health shock can be written as the sum of the effect of the
health shock on resources and on the shape of the utility function during the current
period, and that it is possible to separately estimate the coefficients that govern the
effect of the change in resources and in health through the dependence of the utility
function on health.
    Our last main finding is that the effects of a health shock on consumption of non-
durable goods mainly come from a change in the utility of consuming them, rather
than from the effect of health on income, medical expenses, and other resources; and


                                           5
especially so for wealthier households. More specifically, looking into consumption
composition, we find that health has only a small effect on consumption of necessary
goods and that this effect comes from the impact of health on resources, rather than its
effect on the utility of consuming necessities. In contrast, health shocks significantly
impact the consumption of luxury goods, and this effect only comes from the utility
of consuming them, rather than from a change in resources driven by a change in
health. Splitting our sample into low- and high-wealth households, we find that the
effect of health on necessary goods (which is generated by a change in resources) is
only present among low-wealth households.
    By making several contributions, our paper relates to several important strands
of previous literature: the literature studying the impact of economic shocks on key
economic outcomes, the literature striving to identify the effects of health on the
utility function, the literature on household insurance, and the literature on old age
savings and risk. We turn to discussing our paper's contributions in the context of
each of these branches of the literature in the next section.


2    Our contributions in the context of the previous
     literature
    The motivation of our paper builds on the literature on consumption insur-
ance. Cochrane (1991) shows that under perfect insurance and absent preference
shocks, the log-consumption growth of an individual should be constant. Therefore,
a variable that is independent of preference shifts should have no impact on consump-
tion growth. Attanasio and Davis (1996) test his hypothesis using systematic shifts
in the hourly wage structure of households. More recent studies allow for endoge-
nous labor supply and thus for social insurance to generates labor distortions from
insurance (Farhi and Werning (2013), Golosov, Troshkin, and Tsyvinski (2016)).
    Krueger and Perri (2005) further analyze this question by studying the extent to
which empirically observed consumption smoothing (with respect to total income) is
consistent with two consumption models and Krueger and Perri (2006) find a lesser
increase in consumption inequality than in total income inequality over time. Blun-
dell and Preston (1998), Blundell, Low, and Preston (2013), and Blundell, Pistaferri,
and Preston (2008) derive expressions for the degree of consumption insurance to


                                           6
transitory and permanent shocks that are implied by a life-cycle model and estimate
it empirically. Gourinchas and Parker (2002) and Kaplan and Violante (2010) rely on
numerical simulations to quantify the degree of precautionary saving and consump-
tion insurance in realistically calibrated life-cycle models, respectively. Heathcote,
Storesletten, and Violante (2009) provide a review on other work studying the degree
of consumption insurance implied by a standard life-cycle model.
    In this paper, we find that a change in resources during old age affects the con-
sumption of necessities, in particular for households with low levels of wealth, which
confirms that even when controlling for changes in preferences, consumption is not
perfectly insured. Our approach is complementary to that of solving numerically a
structural model. The first four of our five main results rely on very few assump-
tions about household decision making and reveal that transitory income and health
shocks, which have been largely ignored by much of the structural literature so far,
are very important, are correlated with each other, and affect both consumption and
medical expenses. Our last result, that transitory health shocks affect the utility of
consumption does require us to make more assumptions on the household's decision
problem, but these assumptions are still more general than those adopted in the exist-
ing structural models that allow for health (and income) shocks. The large response
of consumption to changes in income and health that we observe is consistent with
the increasing earnings and consumption inequality over the life-cycle documented in
Storesletten, Telmer, and Yaron (2004)
    Our paper helps understanding the risks affecting savings and thus relates to stud-
ies on savings and risk during retirement. Love, Palumbo, and Smith (2009),
De Nardi, French, and Jones (2010), Poterba, Venti, and Wise (2018), and Blundell,
Crawford, French, and Tetlow (2016),2 study the rate of dissaving during retirement,
which is much slower than what is implied by the standard life-cycle model. The
two main explanations brought forward in this literature highlight the importance
of precautionary saving motivated by the risks that the elderly face late in life, par-
ticularly uncertain life spans and out-of-pocket medical and long-term-care (LTC)
expenses. Kopecky and Koreshkova (2014) estimate the share of savings explained
by the need to finance future out-of-pocket medical and nursing home expenses in
a calibrated life-cycle model, and find this share to be large. Braun, Kopecky, and
Koreshkova (2016) find that social insurance programs that help insure these risks,
  2
      For a review of this literature, De Nardi, French, and Jones (2016)


                                                  7
such as Medicaid and Supplemental Security Income, have a substantial impact on
welfare.
    Most of the literature on old age savings and risk ignores temporary shocks in
income and health and assumes that health does not affect a household utility from
consumption. In contrast, we find that these temporary shocks are important and
that they influence both households' resources and utility from consumption. It is
thus essential to evaluate the implications of our findings not only in terms of optimal
household insurance, but also in terms of their implications for savings and exposure
to risk and the extent to which current government taxes and transfers help insure
these risks.
    Our work is also related to the literature that tests for the possible dependence of
utility from consumption on health status (Viscusi and Evans (1990), Evans and
Viscusi (1991), Finkelstein, Luttmer, and Notowidigdo (2009), Finkelstein, Luttmer,
and Notowidigdo (2013)). Although they yield a fairly wide range of estimates, most
of these studies find that such a dependence cannot be rejected when measured using
self-reported compensating differentials for exposure to health risk or questions about
general happiness as a proxy for utility.
    Like many of these studies, we find that bad health tends to reduce household's
marginal utility from consumption. We make this result sharper by looking into
the effects of temporary shocks, which allows us to abstract from the confounding
effects that permanent or persistent health shocks have on one's life expectancy (and
thus also strength of a potential bequest motive) and by avoiding using happiness or
self-reports rather than observed economic outcomes. We also find that this health-
consumption dependence is largest for luxury goods, as we are able to disentangle the
share of the response of consumption that comes from the dependence of the utility
function on health for each type of consumption separately.
    Finally, more generally, our paper relates to the literature that examines the
impact of health shocks on economic outcomes. Several studies analyze the
impact of permanent or persistent shocks such as the diagnosis of a chronic disease, an
hospital admission, or a car crash (Dobkin, Finkelstein, Kluender, and Notowidigdo
(2018), Morrison, Gupta, Olson, Mstat, and Keenan (2013)), or shocks to a compos-
ite measure of health or ability (Meyer and Mok (2016), Poterba, Venti, and Wise
(2015), Poterba, Venti, and Wise (2017)). They find that permanent (or persistent)
bad health shocks are significant and have a large and negative effect on impor-


                                           8
tant economic outcomes such as earnings, medical expenses, and the probability of
bankruptcy. Compared with these papers, we also find evidence of large and transi-
tory health and income shocks that have effects on consumption and out-of-pocket
medical expenses.
    Other papers study the impact of one-time income shocks to consumption deci-
sions. Most empirical studies find that these shocks have an effect on consumption,
whether the change comes from a tax rebate, a lottery gain (Fagereng, Holm, and
Natvik (2018)), or a change in current assets--which is equivalent to a transitory
change in income--(Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2013) Cloyne, Huber, Ilzetzki, and Kleven
(2019)). We confirm this result for households over age 65, whose consumption sig-
nificantly responds to transitory income shocks.
    Some works examine the impact of health on food and housing consumption.
Chung (2013) finds that the onset of an initial chronic illness is associated with a
drop in food expenses, although these expenses recover over time. Similarly, Meyer
and Mok (2016) find that becoming disabled is associated with a drop in food and
housing consumption, and their results suggest some role for the effect of health on
resources, such as individual savings and family support, and that social insurance
helps households mitigate this drop. We complement this literature looking at the
effect of transitory heath and income shocks and in finding that a transitory change
in resources only affect the consumption of necessities of poorer households.
    Compared with the papers on the impact of health shocks on economic outcomes,
our paper deepens our understanding of the risks faced by older households in that
it also finds evidence of large transitory health and income shocks, of out-of-pocket
medical expenses rising when health temporarily worsens, and of a positive correlation
between transitory health and income shocks. Our findings thus suggest that, even
though households over age 65 are covered by Medicare, the income and health risks
that they face during old age are even larger than previously assumed.


3    The data and our variables of interest
   Our data come from the Health and Retirement Study (HRS), a longitudinal sur-
vey that is representative of the U.S. population over the age of 50 and their spouses.
We combine information from the HRS core interviews and from the Consumption
and Activities Mail Survey (CAMS), a supplementary study collecting data on house-

                                          9
hold spending that is administered to a subset of HRS respondents. Both surveys are
biennial, and our merged sample covers the years 2001 to 2013. Appendix A describes
our sample selection in detail.


3.1    Consumption and medical expenses

 Consumption
 Necessities    Food                     Food at home, food away from home
                Utilities                Electricity, water, heat, phone and internet
                Car-related              Car insurance, car repairs, gasoline
 Luxuries       Leisure                  Trips and vacations, tickets, sport equipment,
                                         hobbies equipment, contributions to
                                         charities, gifts
                Equipment                House supplies, house services,
                                         yard/garden supplies,
                                         yard/garden services, clothing,
                                         personal care equipment and services
 Medical exp.
                Drugs                    Drugs
                Medical serv. and sup.   Medical services
                                         Medical supplies


                Table 1: Consumption and medical expenses categories


    Both consumption and medical expenses come from CAMS. The top panel of
Table 1 lists the 21 items that we include in non-durable consumption and shows how
we construct non-durable consumption subcategories by aggregating the original 21
categories. The bottom panel of the table lists the three items that we include in
out-of-pocket medical expenses.
    In Table 2, we present the level and composition of these different categories of
expenses. The average level of expenses in nondurable consumption is 25,004 per year
in 2015$. We break it down into five categories that represent at least ten percent
of the households' expenses in nondurables. The table shows that the two most
prominent categories, which each gather a little more than one quarter of nondurable
expenses, are food and leisure activities. Among low-wealth households, expenses
in food, utilities, and car maintenance, are higher than in the whole sample, which
is why we consider them necessities. Among high-wealth households, expenses in


                                          10
                                             All    Low wealth   High wealth
          All nondurables, mean            25,004     15,335       27,718
            Food, mean                      6,574      4,821        7,064
            Food, share                    28.6%      32.5%         27.5%
            Utilities, mean                5,592      4,335         5,948
            Utilities, share               24.7%      28.5%         23.6%
            Car maintenance, mean           3,504      2,580        3,754
            Car maintenance, share         16.1%      17.6%         15.6%
            Leisure activities, mean        6,607      1,908        7,926
            Leisure activities, share      20.3%      11.5%         22.8%
            Equipment, mean                 2,761     1,775         3,046
            Equipment, share               11.1%      11.7%         10.9%
          All medical expenses, mean       3,071       2,554        3,186
            Drugs, mean                     1,417     1,362         1,438
            Drugs, share                   53.9%      59.3%         52.3%
            Services and supplies, mean     1,658      1,198        1,752
            Services and supplies, share   48.9%      45.2%         49.9%

Table 2: Consumption and medical expenses composition, means in 2015 dollars and
         shares in percentages


luxuries represent a higher share of the budget than in the whole sample, and the
share of expenses in equipment is almost the same as in the whole sample, which is
why we consider them luxuries. In the bottom part of the table, we report medical
expenses. Their average level is 3,071 per year in 2015$, almost evenly split between
drugs and medical services and supplies.


3.2    Health index
    The construction of our health index follows a similar strategy to that used by
Blundell, Britton, Costa-Dias, and French (2017): we instrument self-reported health
by objective health measures. This means that the changes in our health index stem
from the changes in self-reported health that are driven by underlying changes in
objective measures or health. Thus, we are eliminating the changes in self-reported
health that are not caused by any objective change and we are not considering changes
in objective measures that do not translate into changes in self-reported health.
    More specifically, the health index that we construct for each person is the pre-
dicted value from a regression of the self-reported health status of that person on
objective health measures, which are dummies for reporting difficulties in activities


                                           11
of daily living (ADLs) and dummies for having has had certain health conditions
diagnosed by a doctor.3 Our regression also includes age dummies, year dummies,
education dummies, and initial health status. To obtain a household health index for
couples, we average the two instrumented self-reported health indices computed for
husbands and wives separately.




                                                                              4.5
                  4




                                                                              3.5
                  3
       Health Index




                                                                   Health Index
                                                                              2.5
                  2




                                                                              1.5
                  1




                      65      70    75         80   85   90                         0   10   20   30   40     50      60   70   80   90   100
                                         Age                                                            Asset percentile




                           Figure 1: Health index by age (left panel and wealth (right panel)

    We construct our health measure so that a higher health index corresponds to
a better health. The left panel of Figure 1 displays our health index by age and
highlights that, although the average health index decreases as households age, the
change is modest: it goes down from 3.2 at age 65 to 3.0 at age 90. This modest
decrease is consistent with selection, that is, that healthier households live longer, but
also it is also consistent with a large share of the changes in health being transitory
rather than permanent: as their effect fades after one period, they do not generate a
decrease in health over the life-cycle.
    The right panel of Figure 1 shows our health index by wealth percentiles, where
the gradient is much larger than by age. It highlights a steady increase from the 10th
to the 100th wealth percentile--the first 10 percentiles corresponding to households
with debt but, often, with the income potential to repay it, while households around
the 10th percentile have no debt but no wealth and no means to repay it--. This
   3
     Our ADLs measures refer to whether the head and spouse experience difficulty walking across
the room, dressing up, bathing or showering, eating, getting in or out of bed, using the toilet,
walking several blocks, walking one block, sitting for two hours, getting up from a chair after sitting
for long periods, climbing several flights of stairs without resting, climbing one flight of stairs without
resting, lifting or carrying weights over 10 pounds, stooping kneeling, or crouching, reaching arms
above shoulder level, pushing or pulling large objects, and picking up a dime from the table. The
health conditions are a cancer, diabetes, high blood pressure, arthritis, a psychological illness, lung
problems, heart problems, and a stroke.


                                                              12
change and the classic idea that households with less wealth might be less able to
self-insure against shocks motivate our choice to break down our sample by wealth
and examine how differently households with different amounts of wealth respond to
transitory health shocks.


3.3     Income and wealth
    Wealth is the sum of all assets less all debt. We categorize as low-wealth the
households in which the real wealth per adult equivalent (one adult is worth one, two
or more adults are worth the square root of 2, and other minor family members are
not counted) is below 75,000 in 2015$. This corresponds to the first 20th percentile
of the wealth distribution. We categorize as high-wealth the remaining households.
    Our measure of income includes earnings (wages, salaries, bonuses), capital in-
come (business or farm income, self-employment, rents, dividend and interest income,
and other asset income), private pensions (income from employer pension or annu-
ity), benefits (social security retirement income, income from transfer programs and
workers' compensations), and other income (alimony, other income, lump sums from
insurance, pension, and inheritance), of both household's head and spouse, if present.
    Figure 2 shows the evolution of various income components by age and for our two
wealth groups.4 It highlights that, while benefits (which include social security and
other government transfers programs) are the most important income component for
households over age 65, earnings and pensions are also substantial, and especially so
for high-wealth households.


4       Income and health risks
    We assume that the evolution of both health and income are exogenous and that,
after the elimination of demographics, detrended health and log-income (which we
denote with a tilde) can be represented as a transitory-permanent process,5 that
is, as the sum of a permanent component that evolves as a random walk, and of
a transitory component that is an i.i.d. shock, that is, an MA(0) process. Our
    4
     For this graph, we equivalize income by dividing couples' income by the square root of two. In
addition, we draw the age pattern relative to the cohort born in 1940-1949.
   5
     With the same abuse of notation as with consumption, we put the tilde on y , while it is log-
income ln(yt ) that is detrended from the effect of demographics.


                                                13
                                  60




                                                                                                                                                                   60
    Income (000s of 2015 dollars)




                                                                                                                                     Income (000s of 2015 dollars)
                     40




                                                                                                                                                      40
         20




                                                                                                                                          20
                   0




                                                                                                                                                    0
                                       65   70             75                                       80      85             90                                           65    70                  75         80     85          90
                                                                Age                                                                                                                                    Age

                                            Other                         Benefits                           Pensions                                                             Other                  Benefits    Pensions
                                            Capital inc.                  Earnings             60                                                                                 Capital inc.           Earnings
                                                                 Income (000s of 2015 dollars)
                                                                      20        0 40




                                                                                                    65      70             75                                     80         85                  90
                                                                                                                                 Age

                                                                                                            Other                    Benefits                                 Pensions
                                                                                                            Capital inc.             Earnings




Figure 2: Equivalized income components by age, in thousands of 2015 dollars for cohort
          born in 1940-1949. Top left panel: low wealth households (< 75k equivalized
          wealth); top right panel: high wealth households ( 75k equivalized wealth);
          bottom panel: whole sample.


assumptions are supported by Appendix B, which reports the autocovariances of both
health and log-income growth, and highlights that these covariances are consistent
with our assumptions (and inconsistent with the permanent components being an
AR(1) processes with coefficients very different from one and with the transitory
components being MA(1) processes).

                                                                                                    ~ t =  h + h ,
                                                                                                    h                            h
                                                                                                                                 t   h
                                                                                                                                   = t     h
                                                                                                          t    t                      -1 + t ,                                                                                       (1)

                                                                                              y
                                                                                   ln(~
                                                                                      y t ) = t + y
                                                                                                  t,
                                                                                                                                     y
                                                                                                                                     t   y
                                                                                                                                       = t      y
                                                                                                                                          - 1 + t .                                                                                  (2)

   Given these assumptions, we can express health growth and log-income growth as

                                                                                                          ~ t =  h + h - h
                                                                                                          h                                                                                                                          (3)
                                                                                                                t    t   t-1


                                                                                                                    y
                                                                                                         ln(~
                                                                                                            y t ) = t + y   y
                                                                                                                        t - t-1 .                                                                                                    (4)

                                                                                                                                14
   We make the following assumptions about the distribution of the shocks in the
economy

      i The shocks h ,  h , y ,  y , are drawn independently over time and across house-
        holds; however, they are not necessarily drawn from the same distributions
        during each period and for each household.

   ii The contemporaneous household's transitory and permanent shocks are inde-
      pendent of one another, but the transitory health and income shocks can be
      correlated, and the permanent health and income shocks can be correlated.


4.1      Identification and estimation
    The identification problem stems from the fact that we observe changes in health,
  ~
h, and in log-income, ln(~   y ), but we do not observe the changes in their transitory
and permanent components. To overcome the problem, our identification strategy
follows that of Meghir and Pistaferri (2004).
    Using equations (3) and (4), and variance and covariance formulas, we obtain the
following formulas for the variance of transitory shocks

                              var(h          ~     ~
                                  t ) = cov (ht , -ht+1 ),                           (5)

and

                          var(y             yt ), -ln(~
                              t ) = cov (ln(~         yt+1 )).                       (6)

The intuition is that changes in health (or log income) at t + 1 are independent of
the changes in the permanent component of health (or log income) at t, which affect
health (or log-income) at period t and t + 1 in the same way, but vary negatively with
the change in the transitory health (or log income) shock at t, which affect health (or
log-income) at period t more than at t + 1.
    We can express the variance of permanent shocks as

                           h
                       var(t          ~ t , h
                                            ~ t-1 + h
                             ) = cov (h                   ~ t+1 ),
                                                    ~ t + h                          (7)

                           y
                       var(t ) = cov (~
                                      yt , ~
                                           yt-1 + ~
                                                  yt + ~
                                                       yt+1 ).                       (8)


                                           15
Indeed, the change in health (or log-income) between t + 1 and t - 2 is independent
of transitory shocks that occur at t - 1 and at t, which have not yet realized at t - 2
and already dissipated at t + 1, but captures the permanent shock at t, which is not
yet realized at t - 2 and still affects health at t + 1.
    We can also identify the covariance between the transitory income and health
shocks from the two following moments (the covariance is thus overidentified):

                               cov (h   y                ~ t+1 ),
                                                   yt , -h
                                    t , t ) = cov (~                                              (9)

                               cov (h   y          ~
                                    t , t ) = cov (ht , -~
                                                         yt+1 ).                                 (10)

    We construct detrended health and income, that is, net from observed demo-
graphic characteristics, as detailed in Appendix A. We then use equations (7), (8)
, (9), and (10) to estimate the variances and covariances with a generalized method
of moments (GMM). All observations are pooled together in the estimation, but the
residuals are clustered at the household level and allow for arbitrary correlation be-
tween the observations from the same household. The weighting matrix of the GMM
is robust to heteroskedasticity.


4.2     Income and health risk results
   We use a measure of income is "net income" and includes all income, net of taxes
and transfers. Thus, it reflects any household self-insurance through savings and
labor supply and all government insurance through taxes and transfers.
   Table 3 highlights that, even at advanced ages, households face substantial net
income risk. The magnitude of transitory income risk is large, with a variance of
0.088, statistically significant at 1%. Because the variance of detrended net (log)
income growth, var(ln(~     yt )), is the sum of var(y         y               y
                                                     t ), var (t-1 ), and var (t ), it means
that var(y                                                                  6
           t ) explain 41% of the variance of total net income growth. High-wealth
households face higher variances of both transitory and permanent income shocks.
   To further explore the sources of income risk for older households, Table 4 shows
the standard deviation of the change of unexplained (log) net income components
(upper panel) and of total income excluding some income components. The upper
   6
    Assuming var(y            y
                    t )  var (t-1 ), which is not a strong assumption when we pool all years together,
current and past transitory shocks explain 82% of the variance of log-income growth.



                                                 16
                                            All      Low wealth        High wealth
                      var(y
                          t)             .088***       .067***           .093***
                                          (.005)        (.009)            (.005)
                      Obs.                 5105          1000              4105
                           y
                      var(t  )           .029***        .018*            .031***
                                          (.005)         (.01)            (.006)
                      Obs.                 3494           655              2839
                      var(ln(~
                             yt ))       .215***       .167***           .226***
                                          (.007)        (.013)            (.008)
                      Obs.                 5105          1000              4105
                      Standard errors in parentheses. * at 10%, ** at 5%, *** at 1%

         Table 3: Variance of the transitory and permanent shocks to net income


panel of the table shows that benefits display (unsurprisingly) very little variation
and that the vast majority of households in our sample do receive them (8,855 out
of a total of 9,132). Pensions display more variation than benefits and less than half
of our households receive them. Capital income displays the largest variation and is
received by over half of our households. The bottom part of the table shows that
removing various income components in turn tends to raise the variation in gross
income, with the exception of other income. For the bottom portion of the table, we
do not report the number of observations by row, because it is, by construction, the
same as the observations for total net income (and total gross income).
    Turning to our results for the health shocks, Table 5 highlights that households
face substantial health risk. The variance of the transitory health shocks is 0.02 and
is statistically significant at 1%. The variance of the permanent shocks, estimated
on a smaller sample because the identification requires a longer panel, is also signif-
icant at 1%, and its magnitude is very similar, at 0.019. Because the variance of
changes in health, var(h    ~ t ), is the sum of var(h ), var(h ), and var( h ), it means
                                                       t         t-1          t
that var(h  t ) explain  31%  of   the  variance of total net income growth.7
                                                                              Contrary to
income shocks, low-wealth households are the ones facing higher variances of both
transitory and permanent health shocks: the variance of the transitory health shocks
   7
    As in the case of income, his is true assuming var(h                  h
                                                             t )  var (t-1 ), which is not a strong
assumption when we pool all years together. Relaxing this assumption to compute them separately,
and restricting the sample to the observations over which the variance of permanent shocks is
estimated, and relaxing does not change our results. In that case, the variance of the change in
health over time is 0.06, the variance of current transitory shocks is 0.019, and the variance of past
transitory shocks is 0.022.



                                                    17
                                               Total      Low wealth    High wealth
         Benefits                              0.42          0.44          0.41
                                              ( 8,855 )     ( 2,381 )     ( 6,474 )
         Pensions                                 0.79       0.68          0.81
                                              ( 4,242 )     ( 764 )       ( 3,478 )
         Capital income                           2.27       2.53          2.24
                                              ( 5,200 )     ( 501 )       ( 4,699 )
         Earnings                                 1.11       1.04          1.13
                                              ( 1,735 )     ( 389 )       ( 1,346 )
         Other                                    1.31       0.59          1.39
                                               ( 106 )       ( 15 )        ( 91 )
         Total gross income                       0.52       0.46          0.54
         Gross income excluding pensions          0.63       0.53          0.66
         Gross income excluding capital           0.56       0.47          0.58
         Gross income excluding Earnings          0.64       0.60          0.66
         Gross income excluding Other             0.50       0.44          0.52
         Net income including capital             0.47       0.43          0.49
                                              ( 9,132 )     ( 2,457 )     ( 6,675 )



Table 4: Standard deviation of the change of unexplained (log) income components. Upper
         panel: income components. Lower panel: gross income minus various income
         components. Number of observations with non-zero income in parentheses.


is twice as large among low-wealth households than for high-wealth households, 0.035
compared with 0.017 and permanent health risk is also almost twice as large among
low-wealth households than high-wealth households, 0.032 versus 0.017. Thus, this
table, in conjunction with the right panel of Figure 1 reveals that not only low-wealth
households are less healthy than high-wealth households but also experience more
health fluctuations, both transitory and permanent.
    The third line of the table indicates that there is a significant covariance between
the transitory income and health shocks, with a point estimate of 0.03. Given our
estimate of var(h       t ), this means that the pass-through of a transitory health shock to
                   y
          cov (h ,   )
income, var(th )   t
                       , is close to 0.15. Thus, a one standard deviation change in health,
                 t
that is a 0.141 level change in the health index, is associated with a 0.14  0.15 = 0.02
percentage change in income. The covariance between the transitory health and in-
come shocks has the same magnitude among low-wealth and high-wealth households,
but is only precisely estimated among the high-wealth.
    To further investigate the determinants of a change in our health index, Table 6


                                             18
             Table 5: Variance of the transitory and permanent health shocks

                                         All      Low wealth        High wealth
                      var(h
                          t)          .020***       .035***           .017***
                                       (.001)        (.004)            (.001)
                      Obs.              5105          1000              4105
                      var(th)         .019***       .032***           .017***
                                       (.002)        (.005)            (.002)
                      Obs.              3494           655              2839
                               y
                      cov (h
                           t , t )     .003**         .003             .003**
                                       (.001)        (.003)            (.001)
                      Obs.              5105          1000              4105
                      var(h~ t)       .064***       .104***           .054***
                                       (.002)        (.007)            (.002)
                      Obs.              5105          1000              4105
                      Standard errors in parentheses. * at 10%, ** at 5%, *** at 1%



presents the results from a regression of our health index (net of the effect of demo-
graphics) over dummies for the occurrence of a change in our objective measures of
health that lasts only one period. We select only the objective measures for which
we can observe at least 20 events of a one unit decrease-then-increase-back change
(or increase-then-decrease-back).8 The results show that all types of temporary de-
terioration in health have a negative impact on our health index and that most of
these effects are statistically significant. In terms of magnitudes, Table 6 shows that,
everything else equal, reporting decreased ability to climb several flights of stairs for
one period implies a reduction in one's health index of 0.07, decreased ability to climb
one flight of stairs a 0.096 decrease, decreased ability to lift and carry 10 lbs a 0.152
decrease, decreased ability to push or pull large objects a 0.184 decrease, scoring one
unit worse on the CESD (Center for Epidemiological Studies Depression) scale (that
goes from 0 to 5) a 0.045 decrease, decreased ability of the spouse to push or pull
large objects a 0.154 decrease, and finally, the spouse scoring one unit worse on the
CESD scale, implies a 0.055 decrease. Note that the variance of transitory shocks is
0.02, which implies that a transitory shock of one standard deviation corresponds to
a 0.141 change in the health index.
   8
    For the questions about the difficulty of doing certain tasks, the range of values goes from 1
('Not at all difficult') to 4 ('Very difficult/can't do'). For the CESD (Center for Epidemiological
Studies Depression), the range of values goes from 0 to 5, and an increase in the score corresponds
to a higher intensity of depression.



                                                   19
                                                       Change in health index
             Diff. climb sev. flt stair - head                 -.07**
                                                               (.033)
             Diff. climb one flt stair - head                 -.096**
                                                               (.049)
             Diff. lift/carry 10 lbs - head                  -.152***
                                                                (.05)
             Diff. push/pull large obj. - head               -.184***
                                                               (.034)
             CESD score (for depression) - head              -.045***
                                                               (.013)
             Diff. climb sev. flt stair - spouse                -.083
                                                               (.052)
             Diff. push/pull large obj. - spouse             -.154***
                                                               (.042)
             CESD score (for depression) - spouse            -.055***
                                                               (.018)
             Observations                                      4,922

                 Table 6: Temporary health changes and the health index


5       The pass-through of health and income shocks
        to consumption and medical expenses
    While we continue to assume that income and health evolve according to the
processes that we have specified and estimated in the previous section, we now turn
to describing our assumptions for the growth of our other variables of interest, which
are consumption and medical expenses and their subcomponents. For brevity, we
formalize our assumptions for consumption, with the understanding that we make
the same kind of assumptions for medical expenses (and the subcomponents of both
consumption and medical expenses).
    We allow for the growth in log-consumption to follow a very general specification.
After detrending log-consumption from the effects of demographic characteristics and
denoting the resulting variable with a tilde9 , we assume it to be a flexible function
of current and past realizations of transitory and permanent shocks to income and
health, and of current and past realizations of other shocks  c that may capture
    9
    With an abuse of notation, we put the tilde on c, while we assume that it is log-consumption
ln(ct ) that is linear in demographic characteristics and detrended.



                                                 20
measurement error or consumption-specific shocks

             ct ) = ft (y
          ln(~                   y h          h y          y   c h          h c          c
                        t , ..., 1 , t , ..., 1 , t , ..., 1 , t , t , ..., 1 , t , ..., t-1 ).   (11)

It is important to note that this specification encompasses the consumption func-
tions derived from many structural life-cycle models as special cases. For instance,
in a simple life-cycle model with only one risk-free asset, consumption is a function
of assets, permanent income, and the current transitory shock (plus past transitory
shocks when they are persistent), which is encompassed by our specification: iterating
backwards, because the level of assets is a function of past consumption, past assets,
past permanent income, and past transitory shocks, and because permanent income,
under our assumptions, is a function of the current permanent shock and past perma-
nent income, consumption can be written as a function of all of the current and past
permanent and transitory shocks of the household, as in equation (11). The same
reasoning extends to the presence of health shocks.
    We define the pass-through of transitory shocks to consumption ( ) as the ratio
of the covariance between log-consumption growth and a contemporaneous transitory
shock in either income or health over the variance of the same shock:

                             h     cov (ln(~ct ), ht)            ct ), h
                                                         cov (ln(~      t)
                           =                  h
                                                      =            h
                                                                                                  (12)
                                        var(t )              var(t )
                                                  y
                             y     cov (ln(~ct ), t )           ct ), y
                                                        cov (ln(~      t)
                                 =           y        =           y       .                       (13)
                                        var(t )            var(t )

    The right hand side of the equalities derives from the assumption that shocks at
t are orthogonal to variables at t - 1. Thus, the covariance between ln(ct-1 ) and t
is zero, so the pass-through rewrites as a ratio of the covariance between the levels of
log-consumption and the shocks over the variance of the shocks.
    An interpretation of the pass-through coefficients popularized by Kaplan and Vi-
olante (2010) is that they represent the share of the variance of the transitory shocks
that is passed to log-consumption, net of the effect of demographics. The pass-through
coefficient also coincides with the average elasticity of consumption to a transitory
shock, E [ dln(~
             dh
               ct )
                    ], when log-consumption is linear in the shocks (Blundell, Pistaferri,
               t
and Preston (2008)) or when log-consumption is quadratic in the shocks and the dis-
tribution of the shocks is not skewed, or when the shocks are normally distributed
(Commault (2020)).

                                                  21
5.1    Identification and implementation
   Our identification strategy follows that developed in Blundell, Pistaferri, and Pre-
ston (2008) but relaxes the assumption that log-consumption is a random walk (as in
Kaplan and Violante (2010), Commault (2020)). It relies on the intuition that future
changes in health (or in income), only covary with current expenses through current
transitory shocks

                              ct ), h
                      cov (ln(~                          ~ t+1 )
                                                  ct ), -h
                                    t ) = cov (ln(~                               (14)

The covariance between log-consumption growth and the transitory income shock is:

                            ct ), y
                    cov (ln(~                   ct ), -ln(~
                                  t ) = cov (ln(~         yt+1 ))                 (15)

In contrast, it is not possible to estimate the pass-through to permanent shocks
without more stringent restrictions about the evolution of consumption.
    Since the variances of the income and health shocks are identified from equations
(7) and (8), the pass-through coefficients can be estimated as follows

                         h             ci,t ), -h
                               cov (ln(~            ~ i,t+1 )        h
                      c =                                     =    c              (16)
                                      ~ i,t , -h
                                 cov (h          ~ i,t+1 )
                         y     cov (ln(~ci,t ), -ln(~    yi,t+1 ))       y
                      c      =                                     =   c          (17)
                                       yi,t ), -ln(~
                               cov (ln(~                 yi,t+1 ))

Similarly, the pass-through of the transitory health and income shocks to medical
expenditures can be estimated as follow:

                        h      cov (ln(mi,t ), -h   ~ i,t+1 )       h
                      m =                                     =    m              (18)
                                      ~ i,t , -h
                                 cov (h         ~ i,t+1 )
                        y      cov (ln(mi,t ), -ln(~     yi,t+1 ))     y
                      m      =                                     =  m           (19)
                                       yi,t ), -ln(~
                               cov (ln(~                yi,t+1 ))

   To implement our estimators, we detrend consumption and medical expenses from
some observed characteristics, as we do for health and income (see Appendix A for
details), and estimate equations (16), (17), (18), and (19) with the generalized method
of moments (GMM), clustering the residuals at the household level, and using a
weighting matrix that is robust to heteroskedasticity.


                                               22
                                    Income shock                     Health shock
                                All    Low w. High w.           All    Low w. High w.
                  h
 Nondurables    c           .109***      .23**   .087**      .173**    .325***      .094
                             (.036)     (.101)   (.039)       (.085)     (.12)     (.112)
 Necessities                 .089** .332***       .046         .082    .321***      -.041
                              (.04)     (.109)   (.042)       (.089)    (.131)     (.114)
    Food                       .073     .385**    .018         .065    .627***      -.224
                             (.063)     (.194)   (.066)       (.151)    (.266)     (.182)
    Utilities                 .091*    .292***    .056         .014      -.242      .146
                             (.054)     (.122)    (.06)       (.132)    (.197)     (.171)
    Car maintenance           .086*      .246*    .058        .27**    .692***      .053
                             (.047)     (.133)    (.05)       (.116)    (.199)     (.143)
 Luxuries                     .105*       -.21   .16***     .361***     .354*      .365*
                             (.063)     (.175)   (.066)       (.147)    (.212)     (.191)
    Leisure activities       .191**      -.243  .268***      .63***      .533     .681***
                             (.092)     (.326)   (.088)       (.225)    (.357)     (.284)
    Equipment                   .04     -.332*     .105       .269*      .043      .385*
                             (.068)     (.174)   (.074)       (.155)    (.222)     (.199)
                  h
 Medical exp.    m             .074       .026    .082      -.607*** -1.22***       -.291
                             (.099)     (.295)   (.103)       (.231)    (.354)      (.29)
    Drugs                      .012       .117    -.006     -.607*** -.948***       -.431
                             (.104)     (.285)   (.111)       (.242)     (.37)     (.308)
    Med. serv. & supplies     -.108      -.215    -.089        -.048     -.292      .078
                             (.145)       (.4)   (.155)       (.358)    (.537)     (.452)
 Obs.                         5193       1019     4174         5105      1000       4105
 Standard errors in parentheses. * at 10%, ** at 5%, ***   at 1%

                           Table 7: Pass through estimates


5.2    Pass-through to expenses
    How do consumption expenditures and out-of-pocket medical expenses move with
temporary changes in health and income? The top part of Table 7 reports the effects
of transitory income and health shocks on consumption expenditure. Starting from
income shocks, the top-left side of the table shows that the pass-through coefficient
of income shocks to nondurable consumption is 0.109 and is significant at the 1%
confidence level: it means that a temporary increase in income is associated with a
temporary increase in consumption. This compares with a 0.05 pass-through coeffi-
cient in Blundell, Pistaferri, and Preston (2008), although, in the same sample, the
coefficient increases substantially when relaxing the assumption that log-consumption
growth is a random walk (Commault (2020)), as we do here.


                                          23
    Looking at disaggregated consumption expenditure categories reveals that, among
necessities, the response of expenses on car maintenance drives the pass though result,
while among luxuries, expenses on leisure activities increase when the households over
age 65 that constitute our sample experience a temporarily high income shock.
    The break down of the response of consumption expenditure to an income shock
by wealth is particularly interesting and highlights two important features of the
data. First, the overall response of consumption expenditure is twice as large for
the low-wealth households than for the overall population of older households. Sec-
ond, the breakdown by consumption categories reveals that very different categories
respond for low- and high-wealth households. Low-wealth older households respond
to a positive income shock by spending more on necessities such as food, utilities,
and car maintenance, while high-wealth households respond by spending more on
leisure activities. A possible interpretation of these findings is that older households
have trouble self-insuring their consumption, even against temporary shocks. More
specifically, because low-wealth households are more constrained, we see this effect
even in necessary consumption, while higher-wealth households tend to be satiated
in necessities but are still imperfectly insured in their consumption of luxury goods.
    Turning to the effect of an income shock on medical expenses (bottom left hand
panel in Table 7), reveals that there are no statistically significant effects of an income
shock on the medical expenses of older households, even when we split them by wealth.
    The right-hand-side part of Table 7 reports the effects of a transitory health shock
on consumption (top portion) and medical expenses (bottom portion). In our overall
sample of households over age 65, non-durable consumption responds strongly to a
transitory health shock: consumption increases when health increases temporarily,
with a point estimate of 0.173, statistically significant at the 10% confidence level.
This means that a one standard deviation transitory decrease in health, that is, a
0.141 level decrease, is associated with a 0.173 × 0.141 = 2% decrease in expenditures
on nondurables. The consumption breakdown reveals that this effects comes from
increases in spending on car maintenance (0.27) and on leisure activities (0.63). This
means that a one standard deviation transitory decrease in health, that is, a 0.141
level decrease, is associated with a 0.27 × 0.141 = 4% decrease in spending on car
maintenance and with a 0.63 × 0.141 = 9% decrease in spending on leisure activities.
From our discussion in section 3.2, a one-standard deviation decrease in health status
can correspond for instance to a shift from reporting 'a little difficulty' to push or pull


                                            24
large objects to reporting 'some difficulty' in doing so for one period. The breakdown
by wealth reveals that, among the 66+ with low wealth, the pass-through of transitory
shocks to consumption expenditures (0.325) is twice as large as in our overall sample
of 66+, and that it is driven by increases in spending on food consumption and on car
maintenance expenditure. Among the 66+ with high wealth, households experiencing
a transitory health improvement spend more in leisure activities (0.681), and vice-
versa for a transitory health deterioration.
    The bottom-right-hand side of the table reports the response of out-of-pocket
medical spending to a transitory health shock. The pass-through of transitory changes
in health to medical expenses is negative, large, at -0.607, and statistically significant
at the 1% confidence level. This means that a one standard deviation transitory
decrease in health, that is, a 0.141 level decrease, is associated with a 9% increase
in medical expenses (and vice-versa). Breaking down the effect of a health shock on
the components of medical expenses, we find that only drugs respond significantly to
transitory health shocks and drive the overall response of medical expenses.
    Importantly, we find the effect of a temporary change in health is heterogeneous by
wealth level. The pass through coefficient is almost twice as large (-1.220) and sta-
tistically significant at the 1% confidence level for older households with low-wealth,
but is much lower -0.291) and not statistically significant even at the 10% confidence
level among the older households with high wealth. This finding is consistent with
the fact that older low-wealth households, on average, spend about half in medical
insurance compared with high-wealth households, even after removing the effect of
demographics.10 This large and significant response suggests that, despite Medicare,
which all household heads receive although the spouse might not, medical expenses are
not perfectly insured against health shocks. This is in contrast to the pass-through of
a transitory income shock on medical expenses, which, as we have already discussed,
are small and not significant.
    The findings from our 'pass through' analysis of temporary changes in health and
income can be summarised as:
   · First, out-of-pocket medical expenses move with health shocks but not with
     income shocks. This suggests that out-of-pocket medical spending in medical
     expenses is well insured against income shocks after age 65. Perhaps unsurpris-
  10
   The net (residual) expense in medical insurance is on average 1.772 among older low-wealth
households and 3.055 among older high-wealth households in 2015 $.


                                             25
        ing given that people in this age group are covered by Medicare health insurance
        and have already accumulated assets for their retirement.
    ·   Second, shocks to health and income are associated with changes in consump-
        tion.
    ·   Third, the changes in consumption associated to health shocks tend to be larger
        than those associated with income shocks.
    ·   Fourth, the fact that consumption fluctuates when income fluctuates but that
        medical expenses do not fluctuate with income shocks, suggests that health
        shocks can have a potentially important role in affecting a household's needs to
        consume.
    ·   Finally, the breakdown in consumption categories shows that necessities move
        with health for lower wealth households, while luxury consumption moves with
        health for higher-wealth households.
    Our findings thus show that temporary changes in income and health affect con-
sumption in old age but do not address our main question: To what extent do con-
sumption fluctuations later in life reflect lack of insurance against income fluctuations
as opposed to fluctuations in one's needs to consume? Our next section imposes more
structure to our problem to address this question.


6       Structural decomposition of the responses
   To gain a better understanding of the drivers of consumption fluctuations in old
age, we specify a fully structural model in which health affects the utility from con-
sumption and derive its testable implications. More specifically, we assume that
each household chooses its consumption and medical expenses from age 66 (which
we renormalize as period 0) and until a maximum age T by solving the following
maximization problem:

                      T                     K
           max                        h
                             t E0 st (t )         k (ht )u(ck             ~ t ) - (ht )
                                                            t ) + (ht )v (m               (20)
           {ct }T
                t=0   t=0                   k=1




                                                   26
subject to the following constraints

                                                                  K
         pt+1 at+1 = (1 + rt )pt at + pt yt -   pm     ~ t)
                                                 t mt (m      -         pk  k
                                                                         t ct   0  t  T,   (21)
                                                                  k=1

         ck
          t  0      0  t  T,  1  k  K,                                                     (22)
         aT  0,                                                                            (23)

where we assume that utility is time additive, that  is the discount factor, that
      h
st (t   ) is the cumulative survival probability of a household age t (conditional of
                                                                           h
having been alive at age 66, and a permanent health component t              ), and that the
term (ht ) captures one's utility cost of being in poor health. The expected value
of future utility is taken with respect to one's health evolution (which affects both
one's survival and marginal utilities from consumption) and with respect to uncertain
income.
     Utility within a period is a function of K consumption goods ck and total medical
expenses m     ~ t+s , which include medical expenses paid both out-of-pocket and by pri-
vate and public insurance. The utilities of different consumption goods and medical
expenses depend on the household's current health status through the coefficients
k (ht ) and (ht ). We assume that the period utilities of consumption are isoelas-
                        c1-
tic, with u(ct ) = 1t- , and that the period utility of out-of-pocket medical expenses,
v (m~ t ), is a flexible function.
     The price of consumption good k is denoted by pk     t , the price of medical expenses
       m
by pt , and the average price index by pt , which is used to define real assets and
real income. During each period, the household earns a net income pt yt , which is
stochastic.
     To account for the fact that part of medical expenses are insured, we allow for the
out-of-pocket portion paid by the households to be a flexible function of total medical
expenses consumed, mt (m       ~ t ).
     Health and income follow the same transitory-permanent processes that we spec-
ified in equations (1) and (2).
     Taking the first order conditions of the maximization problem with respect to




                                                 27
consumption good k we obtain the following Euler equation:

                                                                       h
                                                                st+1 (t +1 )  pk
                                                                               t /pt
           u (ck                   k
               t )k (ht ) = Et u (ct+1 )k (ht+1 )                     h      k
                                                                                      (1 + r).                     (24)
                                                                  st (t ) pt+1 /pt+1

It means that a household chooses its consumption of good k so its marginal utility
of consuming k at t, k (ht )u (cki,t ), equals its expected future marginal utility of con-
                                                                                  pk
suming k at t + 1, Et [k (ht+1 )u (ck i,t+1 ), weighted by their relative prices pk
                                                                                    t
                                                                                      and the
                                                                                  t+1
strength of (deterministic) intertemporal substitution motives  (1 + r).
    We derive each side of this Euler equation with respect to a change in the value
of the transitory health shock:

dck
  t       k            dht              k          dat+1 dck
                                                           t+1      k             st+1 (th
                                                                                          +1 )  pk
                                                                                                 t /pt
  h
    u ( c   )
          t k  (ht ) +     
                         h k
                             (ht )u ( c t ) = Et [    h da
                                                               u (c    )
                                                                    t+1 k (ht+1 )       h      k
                                                                                                       ] (1 + r).
dt                     dt                           dt     t+1                      st (t ) pt+1 /pt+1
                                                                                                 (25)

Substituting for at+1 using equation (19) at l = t, substituting for dx/d = dln(x)/d×
x, and rearranging, it rewrites:
                                                                        dat+1 /pt
                         effect of the shock on real future assets                            effect of a change
                                                                           dh
                                                                            t                in future assets on
                                                                                            current consumption
  dln(ckt)        dln(yt ) pt yt dln(mt ) pm
                                           t mt                          dln(cl      l l
                                                                               t ) p t ct
      h
           =          h
                                -    h
                                                -                                                   Ak
                                                                                                     t             (26)
    dt              dt      pt     dt       pt                    l=k
                                                                           dht      pt
                                          contribution of change in resources
                              = 0 if the shock does not affect income nor other spending

               effect of the shock on effect of a change
                current health = 1 in current health on
                                     current consumption
                       dht                    k
           +                                 Bt             ,
                       dht
               contribution of change in marginal utility
                       = 0 if 1 (.) is a constant




                                                       28
with:
                                dck       -u (ck                     h
                                               t+1 ) k (ht+1 ) st+1 (t+1 )   pk
                            Et [ dat +1
                                   t+1
                                                 k
                                           -u (ct )     (h
                                                       k t )         h     k
                                                                              t
                                                                 st (t ) pt+1 /pt+1
                                                                                    ] (1   + r)
            Ak
             t   =                       dck        k                     h                              (27)
                             ck            t+1 -u (ct+1 ) k (ht+1 ) st+1 (t+1 )
                                 k                                                 pk
                              t pt
                     ck
                      t +     pt
                                   E t [              k
                                         dat+1 -u (ct ) k (ht )       st (t ) pk
                                                                          h
                                                                                    t
                                                                                          ] (1    + r)
                                                                                t+1 /pt+1
                                                       k (ht ) u (ck
                                                                   t)
             k                                         k (ht ) -u (ckt)
            Bt =                        dck+1 -u (ck                     h                               (28)
                             ck  k
                              t pt                 t+1 ) k (ht+1 ) st+1 (t+1 )     pk
                     ck
                      t +     pt
                                   Et [ dat          k
                                          t+1 -u (ct )   k (ht )         h)
                                                                     st (t     pk
                                                                                    t
                                                                                          ] (1    + r)
                                                                                t+1 /pt+1



     This decomposition shows that there are two reasons why the consumption of good
k can respond to a temporary change in health in this model. First, if the change
in health affects income, medical expenses--say a decrease in health raises one's out-
of-pocket medical bill for instance--, or expenses in other consumption goods, it
modifies the amount of assets that can be passed on to the next period. This change
in resources at the next period modifies the consumption of good k at the next period.
Thus, to keep the first order condition at equilibrium, the household must reacts by
smoothing its consumption path and adjusting it current consumption of good k. This
                                                          dyt            dln(cl      l l
                                                                               t ) pt ct  dmt pm
is captured by the first term in equation (26). Indeed d    h -                          - d    t
                                                                   l = k   d h     p          h
                                                            t                t       t+1      t
measures the change in the amount of resources that would be passed on to the next
period in the absence of any adjustment in the current consumption of good k, and
Akt , which multiplies it, the quantity by which the current consumption of good k
must adjust for the Euler equation to keep holding when future assets decrease.
     Second, if k (ht ) does vary with health, a temporary change in health affects the
the strength of the utility derived from consuming good k at t. Current consumption
must then adjust so the marginal utility of current consumption, which is temporarily
modified by the health shock through the change in k (ht ), remains equal to the
expected marginal utility of future consumption, whose strength k (ht+1 ) is unaffected
when the shock is temporary and ht+1 is unaffected. This is captured by the second
                                   dht
term in equation (24). Indeed, d     h measures the magnitude of the change in current
                                     t
health caused by a transitory health shock, which is equal to one from our specification
                               k
of the health process, and Bt    the amount by which the current consumption of good k
must adjust to account for the change in k (h). Note that, if the utility of consuming
good k is independent of one's health, that is, if k (h) is a constant with k (h) = 0,
        k
then Bt   is zero. In that case, this second channel is not active and consumption only
responds to a transitory health shock to the extent that this shock affects current


                                                         29
income, medical expenses, or the consumption of other goods.
   The same reasoning yields that the response of consumption to a transitory income
shock is:
                    =1                                                
          dln(ckt)
                      dln(yt ) pt yt   dmt pm
                                            t ln(mt )                       dln(cl      l l 
                                                                                  t ) p t ct  k
              y    =      y          -   y            -                                      A    (29)
            dt          dt pt+1        dt     pt+1                   l =k
                                                                              dyt     pt+1  t

                                           contribution of change in resources
                               = 0 if the shock does not affect income nor other spending
                                       dht k
                   +                       Bt
                                       dyt
                       contribution of change in marginal utility
                               = 0 if 1 (.) is a constant


6.1    Shift in utility and consumption by levels of wealth
    Expression (28) shows that, in the value of B , the impact of a given shift    (h)
                                                                                   (h)
                                                                                       in
the weight put on consumption interacts with the functional form of utility through
 u (c)
-u (c)
       . In particular, the value of -u (c)
                                      u (c)
                                            varies with levels of consumption, thus with
underlying levels of wealth, but not in the same way for all functional forms:
                                     u (c)
   · when u(c) is quadratic,        -u (c)
                                             is decreasing in c
                                        u (c)
   · when u(c) is exponential,         -u (c)
                                                is constant with respect to c
                                     u (c)
   · when u(c) is isoelastic,       -u (c)
                                             is increasing in c
    Consider a type of good such that the utility derived from it is piecewise linear,
say because there is some form of satiation associated with this good before which the
marginal utility decreases very steeply with consumption, and after which it decreases
much more slowly with consumption. The households that consume low levels of this
good have a high value of -u      (c)
                                 u (c)
                                       , so a given shift   (h)
                                                            (h)
                                                                is associated with a high B,
and their consumption responds substantially to a shift in the weight put on current
consumption. On the contrary, households that consume sufficiently high levels of
this good have a low value of -u        (c)
                                      u (c)
                                            , and their consumption is not very responsive
to a shift in utility. Now, if for another type of good the utility is exponential or
isoelastic, then -u (c)
                   u (c)
                         is constant or increasing in c, and households that consume low
levels of this other type of good respond similarly or even less to a shift in the weight
put on current consumption than households that consume high levels of this good.

                                                    30
 aaaaa Marg. utility




                                                            aaaaa Marg. utility
                                      Necessities after                                                  Luxuries after
                                      Necessities before                                                 Luxuries before




                       cLW cLW
                             cHWcHW                                               cLW   cLW        cHW      cHW
                            Consumption                                                       Consumption

Figure 3: Effect of a shift in the weight put on utility for a linear and an exponential
          utility functions and for low-wealth and high-wealth households


    Figure 3 illustrates the value of     (h) u (c)
                                         (h) -u (c)
                                                     for different types of utility functions.
Indeed, it pictures the effect on consumption of a shock that divides  by two (pos-
sibly because of an underlying shock to h), keeping the marginal utility of current
consumption constant. Deriving each side of u (c) = cst with respect to a change in
delta, the variation in consumption is dshock dc
                                                    = d/dshock
                                                        delta
                                                                u (c)
                                                               -u (c)
                                                                      . Thus, the variation in
consumption on the graphs correspond to the value of the denominator in B .
    On the left hand side, the utility function that is affected by a shock to  is piece-
wise linear, with a steep decrease marginal utility with the first units of consumption
up to a kink, which can be interpreted a point where households are close to satiation.
For this reason, we refer to this function that the one associated with necessities. The
function in blue is  bef ore u (.) at the initial, larger value of  . The function in red
is  af ter u (.), in which delta is smaller and such that  af ter =  bef ore /2. The lower
dashed line corresponds to the value of u (c) for a household with a large level of
wealth (denoted with an index HW ), thus a high level of consumption, and a small
level of u (c). The level of consumption is therefore not too far from the satiation
kink. Because utility is linear and the level of consumption quite high, a shift in 
has a modest effect on consumption, which moves from the blue cHW to the red cHW .
The higher dashed line corresponds to the value of u (c) for a household with a low
level of wealth (denoted with an index LW ). Because the household has less wealth,
it consumes less, and the marginal utility is higher. The graph shows that, for a
low-wealth household, the effect of a shift in  on consumption is much stronger: the


                                                       31
gap between before and after the shock, that is, between the blue and red values of
cLW is much larger. Thus, the same shift in  produces a large shift in the consump-
tion of this type of good (for instance necessities) for low wealth households, but no
adjustment for high wealth households.
    On the right hand side, the graph now represents the effect of shift in  when
the utility function is exponential, which for instance could be the function that
households use to value luxury goods. The shift in  is the same as on the right hand
side. In blue the function is  bef ore u (.), and in red is  af ter u (.), with  af ter =  bef ore /2.
The lower dashed line represents the constant marginal utility of a household with
a high level of wealth, thus a low value of  af ter u (.). In that case, the change in
consumption caused by the shift in  is quite substantial: the gap between the blue
and red values of cHW is large. A household with low wealth reacts in a very similar
way, and the change in consumption before and after the shift in  is identical to that
of high wealth households. Thus, the initial functional form of utility determines how
important is the impact of a shift in the weight put on utility is, and how this impact
varies with initial levels of marginal utility (thus with initial levels of wealth).


6.2     Identification and implementation
    Our objective is to measure the respective sizes of these two effects: the contribu-
tion of the change in resources, and the contribution of the change in marginal utility.
Assuming that the elasticities to shocks, , and the effects A and B are approximately
homogeneous across households and periods, the average of expressions (24) and (27)
across households and periods is:11
  11
    The pass-through coefficients are typically assumed to be constants in the early semi-structural
estimation literature (Blundell, Pistaferri, and Preston (2008)). If that is the case, the fact that Akt
       k
and Bt   vary across households drives two different biases, likely of opposite directions with one bias
making E[Ak                                                                 k
             t ] larger than our estimate of A and the other making E[Bt ] larger than our estimate
of B (if B and A covary positively which they do across low-wealth and higher-wealth). Which bias
dominates depends on the respective gaps between E[1/Ak                  k                    k   k
                                                           t ] and 1/E[At ] and between E[Bt /At ] and
    k             k
E[Bt ] × E[1/At ].




                                                  32
      dln(ckt)      h       h   pt y t       m
                                          h pt mt                  h   pl  l
                                                                        t ct
 E[       h
               ] = ck    y             - m        -               cl         Ak +             Bk
        dt                      pt+1         pt+1           l=k
                                                                       pt+1
                                                                                     contribution of change
                                                                                       in marginal utility
                                  contribution of change in resources               = 0 if 1 (.) is a constant
                                       = 0 if the shock does not
                                   affect income nor other spending

                                                                                                             (30)
      dln(ck
           t)   y         pt y t       m
                                    y pt mt                   y   pl  l
                                                                   t ct                   y
 E[       y ] = ck               - m        -               cl          Ak +           h B
                                                                                           k
                                                                                                            . (31)
        dt                pt+1         pt+1          l =k
                                                                  pt+1
                                                                                contribution of change
                                                                                  in marginal utility
                                contribution of change in resources            = 0 if 1 (.) is a constant
                                     = 0 if the shock does not
                                 affect income nor other spending


To estimate the terms in (30) and (31), we note that the same Ak and B k appear
in the two equations. Thus, we have two equations and two terms that we want to
identify, as the other terms in (30)-(31) can be either observed directly or estimated
from other moments. Indeed, real income (with tomorrow's average price as the
                   pt                                    pl
reference price) pt +1
                       yt , real consumption expenses pt+1t
                                                             cl
                                                              t , and real medical expenses
  m
 pt
    m are observed for each households. The pass-through coefficients  can be
pt+1 t
estimated together with Ak and B k : the pass-through coefficients of transitory health
                                                              h         y
and income shocks to each category of consumption l,         cl
                                                                 and   cl
                                                                          , are identified from
equations (16) and (17); the pass-through coefficients of transitory health and income
                                    h     y
shocks to medical expenses,        m and m , are identified from equations (18) and (19);
                                                                    y
the pass-through of income to a transitory health shock,           h , and the pass-through
                                              h
of health to a transitory income shock,      y , are identified from:


                                ^y = cov (ln(yt ), -ht+1 )
                                                                                                             (32)
                                 h
                                       cov (ht , -ht+1 )
                                ^h = cov (ht , -ln(yt+1 )) .
                                                                                                             (33)
                                 y
                                     cov (ln(yt ), -ln(yt+1 ))

   The estimation is similar to the one used to estimate the pass-through coefficients
only. We use a GMM, with a weighting matrix that clusters at the household level
and is robust to heteroskedasticity.




                                                   33
                                                                   All     Low wealth   High wealth
 Nondurables
    h
  c                                                               .196**    .381***       .083**
                                                                  (.086)     (.121)       (.115)
 Pass-through of resources (A)                                   .002***     .007*        .002**
                                                                  (.001)     (.004)       (.001)
 Pass-through of health through shift in utility (B )             .173**    .346***        .081
                                                                  (.086)     (.121)       (.112)
 Obs.                                                              4975        956         4019
 Necessities
    h
  c                                                                 .1       .38***        -.037
                                                                  (.09)       (.13)       (.115)
 Pass-through of resources (A)                                   .002**      .01***        .001
                                                                 (.001)      (.004)       (.001)
 Pass-through of health through shift in utility (B )             .086      .339***        -.047
                                                                  (.09)       (.13)       (.115)
 Luxuries
    h
  c                                                              .379***     .389*        .374**
                                                                  (.148)     (.223)       (.189)
 Pass-through of resources (A)                                     .002       -.01        .003**
                                                                  (.001)     (.008)       (.001)
 Pass-through of health through shift in utility (B )            .358***       .4*         .33*
                                                                  (.148)     (.226)       (.189)
 Obs.                                                              4971        954         4017
 Standard errors in parentheses. * at 10%, ** at 5%, *** at 1%

                                        Table 8: Decomposition


6.3      Decomposition results
    The first part of Table 8 presents the results of the decomposition of the pass-
through of transitory health shocks to all nondurable consumption. The overall pass-
through coefficients of transitory health shocks to nondurables are very similar to
those reported in Table 7, with the slight gap coming from the difference in sample.
Over the whole sample, the pass-through of a change in resources, A, is statistically
significant. Its value of 0.002 indicates that. Given that we compute that a one unit
change in the current health index is associated with a $11,312 change in resources, on
average in the sample, this channel contributes 11.312 × 0.002 = 0.023 to the 0.196
response of consumption to a one unit change in the current health index. When
the pass-through can be interpreted as an elasticity, it means that, through its effect


                                                      34
on resources alone, a one-unit decrease in current health is associated with a 2.3%
decrease in the consumption of nondurables. Apart from the resource channel, current
health can affect current consumption through a shift in utility, and we find that,
keeping resources constant, the pass-through of changes in current health to current
consumption is statistically significant and equal to 0.173. When the pass-through
can be interpreted as an elasticity it means that, through its effect on the ability to
derive utility from consumption, a one-unit decrease in current health is associated
with a 17.3% decrease in the consumption of nondurables. Thus, the dependence of
utility on health explains 88% of the pass-through of temporary health shocks to the
consumption of nondurables. Among low-wealth households, consumption responds
even more to temporary health shocks, with a pass-through of 0381 and both the
resource pass-through and the shift in utility pass-through are larger. Among high-
wealth households, the pass-through of transitory shocks to consumption is much
smaller, at 0.083. The resource pass-through is small but statistically significant. The
pass-through of current health through a shift in utility is not precisely measured.
From expression (28), note that extent to the shift in utility affects consumption
depends on the shape of the utility function. In particular, if the ratio -u (c)
                                                                            u (c)
                                                                                  is very
small, for instance because consumption is close to a satiation kink, a shift in the
ability to derive consumption is not going to affect consumption too much, which
will remain close to the satiation kink even after the value of consuming today has
decreased.
    The second and third parts of the Table presents the decomposition of the re-
sponses of necessities and luxuries. First, we examine the response of necessities.
Overall in the population, we find a small and insignificant impact of temporary
health shocks on the consumption of necessities. However, the pass-through of a
change in resources to current consumption, A, is statistically significant at the 1%.
Its level is the same as for nondurable consumption, 0.002. Because a temporary
change in current health is associated with a $11,312 change in resources, on average
in the sample, the change in resources contributes 0.023 to the pass-through of tem-
porary health shocks to the consumption of necessities, which is probably too little
to make this pass-through significant. The pass-through of temporary health shocks
through the shift in utility, B , is not statistically significant. The break-down by
levels of wealth reveals a lot of heterogeneity. Temporary health shocks have a large
and significant impact on the consumption of necessities among low-wealth. It comes


                                           35
both from the effect of resources, which is five times larger than in the whole sample,
and from the effect of a a change in health on the utility function. Among households
with high levels of wealth, both the pass-through of resources and of health through
a shift in utility are small and non-significant. The latter is possibly due to the fact
that high-wealth households are close to the point of satiation in their consumption
of necessities.
    When we turn our attention to look at the pass-through to luxuries, which is
statistically significant and large, at 0.379, the opposite is true: the estimate of the
pass-through of resources, A, is not statistically significant (and the point estimate
remains small), while the estimate of the pass-through of health through a shift in
utility, B , is large and significant at the 1% level. This means that a change in future
resources plays a limited role in the response of the consumption of luxuries, while
the shift in utility plays a large role. The point estimate of B is 0.358, which means
that the change in health through the shape of the utility function explains 94% of
the total pass-through of a transitory health shock to the consumption of luxuries.
Among low-wealth households, temporary health shocks are associated with a (less
precisely measured) change in the consumption of luxuries, although only the health-
dependent channel is active. Among older high-wealth households, the consumption
of luxuries respond significantly to temporary health shocks, and the response is
driven by both resources and the effect of health on the utility function, with the
estimate of A being modest but significant at the 5% level and the estimate of B
being large and significant at the 10% level. This is consistent with a situation in
which high-wealth households are not satiated in luxuries, so a shift in their ability
to derive utility from them has a large impact on their consumption of them.


7    Conclusions
    We show that income and health risks are pervasive in old age and that households
over age 65 experience both permanent and transitory income and health shocks.
    We also document that even transitory income and health shocks trigger signifi-
cant consumption responses, and that, in terms of the sign of the response, a decrease
in health is associated with a decrease in consumption (and vice-versa). We find im-
portant heterogeneity in these responses across consumption categories and levels of
wealth. In our overall sample, a negative income shock reduces consumption across

                                           36
a variety of categories of goods, while a negative health shock primarily reduces ex-
penses on car maintenance and leisure activities. More specifically, among low-wealth
households, a negative income shock mainly reduces expenses on food and utilities,
while a negative health shocks generates a drop in expenses on car maintenance.
Among high-wealth households, both negative income and health shocks reduce ex-
penses on leisure activities.
    We also develop a life-cycle framework to determine what drives the response of
consumption to a transitory health shock. We find that, in the response of total non-
durable consumption both the resource channel and the shift in utility due to health
status channel are significant. However, the resource channel contributes much less,
while the shift in utility explains most of the response of nondurable consumption.
Considering the responses of necessities and luxuries separately, we find that on aver-
age in the population, the resource channel is only significant for necessities, that is,
a change in resources significantly affects the of consumption necessities (and this is
driven by low-wealth households) but not that of luxuries. Contrary to that, the shift
in utility channel is only significant for luxuries, that is, a change in current health
significantly affects the consumption of luxuries through the shift in the utility func-
tion that it causes (and this driven by both low-wealth and high-wealth households)
but not that of necessities.




                                           37
References
Attanasio, O. and S. Davis (1996). "Relative Wage Movements and the Distri-
  bution of Consumption." Journal of Political Economy 104.6, pp. 1227­62.
Blundell, R., H. Low, and I. Preston (2013). "Decomposing changes in income
   risk using consumption data." Quantitative Economics 4.1, pp. 1­37.
Blundell, R., L. Pistaferri, and I. Preston (2008). "Consumption Inequality
   and Partial Insurance." American Economic Review 98.5, pp. 1887­1921.
Blundell, R. and I. Preston (1998). "Consumption Inequality and Income Un-
   certainty." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 113.2, pp. 603­640.
Blundell, Richard, Jack Britton, Monica Costa-Dias, and Eric French (Aug.
   2017). "The impact of health on labour supply near retirement."
Blundell, Richard, Rowena Crawford, Eric French, and Gemma Tetlow
   (2016). "Comparing Retirement Wealth Trajectories on Both Sides of the Pond."
   Fiscal Studies 37.1, pp. 105­130.
Braun, R. Anton, Karen A. Kopecky, and Tatyana Koreshkova (Mar.
  2016). "Old, Sick, Alone, and Poor: A Welfare Analysis of Old-Age Social In-
  surance Programmes." The Review of Economic Studies 84.2, pp. 580­612.
Chung, YoonKyung (2013). "Chronic Health Conditions and Economic Out-
  comes." working paper.
Cloyne, James, Kilian Huber, Ethan Ilzetzki, and Henrik Kleven (2019).
   "The Effect of House Prices on Household Borrowing: A New Approach." Amer-
   ican Economic Review 109.6, pp. 2104­36.
Cochrane, J. (1991). "A Simple Test of Consumption Insurance." Journal of Po-
  litical Economy 99.5, pp. 957­76.
Commault, J. (2020). "How Does Consumption Respond to a Transitory Income
  Shock? Reconciling Natural Experiments and Semi-Structural Methods." working
  paper.
De Nardi, Mariacristina, Eric French, and John B. Jones (2010). "Why Do
  the Elderly Save? The Role of Medical Expenses." Journal of Political Economy
  118.1, pp. 39­75.
De Nardi, Mariacristina, Eric French, and John Bailey Jones (2016). "Sav-
  ings After Retirement: A Survey." Annual Review of Economics 8.1, pp. 177­204.



                                      38
Dobkin, Carlos, Amy Finkelstein, Raymond Kluender, and Matthew J.
  Notowidigdo (2018). "The Economic Consequences of Hospital Admissions."
  American Economic Review 108.2, pp. 308­352.
Evans, William N and W Kip Viscusi (1991). "Estimation of State-Dependent
  Utility Functions Using Survey Data." The Review of Economics and Statistics
  73.1, pp. 94­104.
Fagereng, A., M. Holm, and G. Natvik (2018). "MPC Heterogeneity and House-
   hold Balance Sheets." 7134.
Farhi, Emmanuel and Iv´   an Werning (2013). "Estate Taxation with Altruism
   Heterogeneity." American Economic Review 103.3, pp. 489­95.
Finkelstein, Amy, Erzo F. P. Luttmer, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo (2009).
   "Approaches to Estimating the Health State Dependence of the Utility Function."
   American Economic Review 99.2, pp. 116­121.
Finkelstein, Amy, Erzo F. P. Luttmer, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo (2013).
   "What Good Is Wealth Without Health? The Effect Of Health On The Marginal
   Utility Of Consumption." Journal of the European Economic Association 11,
   pp. 221­258.
French, Eric, John Jones, and Jeremy McCauley (Jan. 2017). "The Accuracy
   of Economic Measurement in the Health and Retirement Study." Forum for Health
   Economics and Policy 20.
Golosov, Mikhail, Maxim Troshkin, and Aleh Tsyvinski (2016). "Redistri-
  bution and Social Insurance." American Economic Review 106.2, pp. 359­86.
Gourinchas, P-O. and J. Parker (2002). "Consumption Over the Life Cycle."
  Econometrica 70.1, pp. 47­89.
Heathcote, J., K. Storesletten, and G. Violante (May 2009). "Quantitative
  Macroeconomics with Heterogeneous Households." Annual Review of Economics
  1.1, pp. 319­354.
Hurd, Michael D. and Susann Rohwedder (2009). "Methodological Innovations
  in Collecting Spending Data: The HRS Consumption and Activities Mail Survey."
  Fiscal studies 30(3-4), 435­459.
Kaplan, G. and G. Violante (2010). "How Much Consumption Insurance beyond
  Self-Insurance?" American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2.4, pp. 53­87.




                                       39
Kopecky, Karen A. and Tatyana Koreshkova (2014). "The Impact of Medical
  and Nursing Home Expenses on Savings." American Economic Journal: Macroe-
  conomics 6.3, pp. 29­72.
Krueger, Dirk and Fabrizio Perri (2005). "Understanding Consumption Smooth-
  ing: Evidence from the U.S. Consumer Expenditure Data." Journal of the Euro-
  pean Economic Association 3.2-3, pp. 340­349.
Krueger, Dirk and Fabrizio Perri (2006). "Does Income Inequality Lead to
  Consumption Inequality? Evidence and Theory -super-1." Review of Economic
  Studies 73.1, pp. 163­193.
Love, David A., Michael G. Palumbo, and Paul A. Smith (2009). "The
  trajectory of wealth in retirement." Journal of Public Economics 93.1, pp. 191
  ­208.
Meghir, C. and L. Pistaferri (2004). "Income Variance Dynamics and Hetero-
  geneity." Econometrica 72.1, pp. 1­32.
Meyer, Bruce and Wallace K. C. Mok (2016). "Disability, Earnings, Income
  and Consumption." Social Insurance Programs (Trans-Atlantic Public Economics
  Seminar, TAPES). NBER Chapters. National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Mian, A., K. Rao, and A. Sufi (2013). "Household Balance Sheets, Consumption,
  and the Economic Slump." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 128.4, pp. 1687­
  1726.
Morrison, Edward, Arpit Gupta, Lenora Olson, Lawrence Mstat, and Heather
  Keenan (Jan. 2013). "Health and Financial Fragility: Evidence from Car Crashes
  and Consumer Bankruptcy." SSRN Electronic Journal.
Poterba, James, Steven Venti, and David Wise (2015). What Determines
  End-of-Life Assets? A Retrospective View. NBER Working Papers 21682. National
  Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Poterba, James M., Steven F. Venti, and David A. Wise (2017). "The asset
  cost of poor health." The Journal of the Economics of Ageing 9.C, pp. 172­184.
Poterba, James M., Steven F. Venti, and David A. Wise (2018). "Longitu-
  dinal determinants of end-of-life wealth inequality." Journal of Public Economics
  162. In Honor of Sir Tony Atkinson (1944-2017), pp. 78 ­88. issn: 0047-2727.
Storesletten, Kjetil, Christopher I. Telmer, and Amir Yaron (2004). "Con-
   sumption and risk sharing over the life cycle." Journal of Monetary Economics
   51.3, pp. 609­633.

                                        40
Viscusi, W Kip and William N Evans (1990). "Utility Functions That Depend
   on Health Status: Estimates and Economic Implications." American Economic
   Review 80.3, pp. 353­374.




                                    41
Appendix A: The HRS and CAMS data and our variables

Data and sample selection
    The data for our empirical analysis are drawn from the Health and Retirement
Study (HRS), a longitudinal survey that is representative of the U.S. population over
the age of 50 and their spouses. We combine information from the HRS core interviews
and from the Consumption and Activities Mail Survey (CAMS), a supplementary
study collecting data on household spending that is administered to a subset of HRS
respondents. Our merged sample is biennial and covers the years 2001 to 2013.
    Table 9 presents the sample selection. We combine information from the core
interviews (that is, in the HRS) and from CAMS that refer to the same household
and calendar year and obtain a sample of 24,981 household-year observations. We
then remove households whose head is above age 90 or below 50, and observations
with missing demographic or health information. After these screens, we are left
with 23,171 household-year observations. Of these, about 30% of observations have
at least one missing item in consumption. For these, we impute consumption items
as described later in this Appendix. After imputing consumption items, we remove
outliers. To do so, we first, we drop observations with non-durable consumption or
household income less than 100$ (in 2015 prices) and then drop the top and bottom
1% of the change in log consumption, income, and medical expenditures. After this
cleaning, there were 28 observations with log income growth larger than 6, and we
drop those too. We are left with 21,994 observations, 600 of which do not report
health information and we thus drop them. Finally, we select households whose head
is 65 or above. Our final sample contains 13,059 observations. After taking first
differences and dropping those observations whose future health or income change is
not observed, we are left with 5,095 observations that used in the estimation of the
pass-through coefficients.


The CAMS questionnaire
   The CAMS questionnaire was sent to 5,000 families in 2001. The same households
received the questionnaire in all the subsequent waves. Additional subsamples were
added in 2005 and in 2011, to cover also the newly introduced cohorts (the Early
Baby Boomers entered the HRS in 2004, and the Mid Baby Boomers in 2011).

                                         42
   Sample Selection                                      Selected      Selected
                                                              out             in
   Answering to CAMS & HRS                                                24,981
   Interview in subsequent year                               1,014       23,967
   Head's age less than 50 or more than 90                      695       23,272
   Missing demographic variables                                101       23,171
   Income, consumption or medical expense outliers            1,177       21,994
   Missing health                                               600       21,344
   Head's age less than 65                                    8,285       13,059
   First differencing data                                                 9,133
   Future health and income changes not observed              4,038        5,095


             Table 9: Sample Selection, after merging to HRS main data


    We merge information from CAMS and HRS when they refer to the same house-
hold and to the same calendar year. This amounts to merge each CAMS wave to the
subsequent HRS wave, as in the HRS income refers to the previous calendar year.
While in CAMS interviews are always conducted in September/October, in the HRS
a fraction of households are interviewed in the year following the regular interview
year. Considering households interviewed in both CAMS and HRS, in most years only
about half percent of interviews were conducted in the following year (wave 10 being
an exception, with a higher fraction of late interviews). We drop all those households
with a late interview as their incomes cannot be matched to consumption in CAMS.
After matching income and consumption referring to the same year we have a sample
of 24,981 observations, and after dropping individuals aged less than 50 or more than
90, we are left with 23,272 observations.
    Table 10 lists which consumption items are included in our analysis.




                                         43
 Year                          2001     2003   2005-2013    Consumption      Med exp.
 Utilities                     Yes       Yes      Yes         Included
 Housekeeping Supplies                   Yes      Yes
                            Combined                         Combined
 Yard Supplies                           Yes      Yes
 Housekeeping Services         n.a.      Yes      Yes         Included
 Gardening/Yard Services       n.a.      Yes      Yes         Included
 Clothing                      Yes       Yes      Yes         Included
 Personal care                 n.a.      Yes      Yes         Included
 Vacations - tickets           Yes       Yes      Yes         Included
 Hobbies                                 Yes      Yes
                            Combined                         Combined
 Sports Equipment                        Yes      Yes
 Contributions - gifts         Yes       Yes      Yes         Included
 Food/Drink Grocery            Yes       Yes      Yes         Included
 Dining Out                    Yes       Yes      Yes         Included
 Health Insurance              Yes       Yes      Yes                      Not included
 Drugs                         Yes       Yes      Yes                       Included
 Health Services               Yes       Yes      Yes                       Included
 Medical Supplies              Yes       Yes      Yes                       Included
 Auto Insurance                Yes       Yes      Yes         Included
 Vehicle Services              Yes       Yes      Yes         Included
 Gasoline                      Yes       Yes      Yes         Included

Table 10: Nondurable categories of consumption and medical expenditures in CAMS. Not
          available (n.a.) items are imputed.


     Table 11 shows that about 70% of the consumption questionnaires were fully
completed, while 14% have 1 missing item, 5% have 2 missing items and 9% have 4
or more missing items. When considering the missing patterns over time for the same
household, depending on items, 80-85% of missing values are missing for just one 1
year, while 90-95% are missing for one or two years for the same household. Hence,
it is very unusual that the same household has many missing values over the years on
the same item.




                                        44
   Number of                                         year
   missing items     2001    2003    2005         2007    2009    2011    2013    Total

   0                  66.9    68.3    67.6         70.8    70.9    70.8    71.2    69.5
   1                  14.6    14.9    14.8         12.9    15.5    14.2    12.1    14.1
   2                   5.4     5.1     4.6          4.5     4.4     4.6     4.1     4.7
   3                   2.6     2.7     3.1          2.3     2.7     2.6     2.0     2.6
   4+                 10.5     9.0     9.9          9.4     6.5     7.8    10.6     9.2
   Total             100.0   100.0   100.0        100.0   100.0   100.0   100.0   100.0


        Table 11: Percentage of households by number of missing items by year.


Imputation procedure
    We impute each consumption item in the following way. We impute the mean
as the prediction from a fixed-effect regression. Then, we add an error term to that
prediction, to tackle the attenuation in the variance of the distribution of the imputed
values (David et al., 1986, French and Jones, 2011).
    To compute the fixed-effect regressions, we pool all years to estimate, for each item
                                                  m
m, Itemm = z m + f m + m , and compute Itemit = zit ^      m+f  ^m , for each household i
                                                                 i
and year t. We then use the estimated fixed effect to compute the prediction for the
                                                      m
same household in a different time period s : Itemis = zis ^    m +f  ^m . If a household
                                                                       i
                                                       ^m
appears with a non-missing item only once, and no fi can be estimated, we impute
the missing items with a similar, year by year, OLS regression.
    The explanatory variables used in the regressions are: a set of dummies for age
of head, set of dummies for age of wife (if present), dummies for health self-reported
status, self-reported health interacted with education of the head, region of residence,
region of residence interacted with education, education of the head interacted with
marital status (married, partnered, never married, separated, divorced), total house-
hold income (real), social security of the spouse (real), pension of the spouse (real),
total household wealth (real), total household income interacted education of the
head, total wealth interacted with education of the head and with year, price index
for non-durable expenditure, price index for the commodity to which the regression
refers.
    Then, to reduce the attenuation bias induced by the imputation procedure, we
proceed as follow. For each household i for which Itemm is observed, we calculate


                                             45
                           m                                                             m
the predicted value Itemit = zit ^     m + f ^m , and the residual e
                                              i                    ^it = Itemm it - Itemit .
                                             m
Then, we sort the predicted value Itemit into deciles and keep track of all values of
^it within each decile. Next, for every individual j with missing Itemm we impute
e
     m
Itemjt = zjt ^+ f ^m . Then we impute e  ^jt for household with missing item m by finding
                                                                             m
a random individual i in the non-missing sample with a value of Itemit in the same
              m                                                               m
decile as Itemjt , and set e     ^it . The imputed value of Itemm
                           ^jt = e                                  jt is Itemjt + e
                                                                                   ^jt .
    We impute each item separately, and then construct non durable expenditure
as the sum of the items with imputed values replacing missing values. The model
predicts a small number of negative expenditure amounts, that we set to zero.


Variables Definition
    Non-durable consumption includes 21 items: electricity, water, heating, phone
and house supplies, house and garden supplies and services, food, dining out, clothing,
vacations, tickets, hobbies, sport equipment, contributions and gifts, personal care,
auto insurance, vehicle services, and gasoline. The items personal care, housekeeping
services and gardening services were not collected in 2001 and are imputed for that
year. Expenditures on each item are deflated by the corresponding item-specific price
index of the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS).
    Food is the sum of expenditure on food and beverages, including alcoholic, and
dining and/or drinking out, including take out food.
    Leisure activities is the sum of expenditure on trips and vacations; tickets to
movies, sporting events, and performing arts; sports, including gym, exercise equip-
ment such as bicycles, skis, boats, etc.; hobbies and leisure equipment, such as pho-
tography, stamps, reading materials, camping, etc.
    Equipment is the sum of expenditure on housekeeping supplies, cleaning and
laundry products; housekeeping, dry cleaning and laundry services, hiring costs for
housekeeping or home cleaning, and amount spent at dry cleaners and laundries;
gardening and yard supplies and services; clothing and apparel, including footwear,
outerwear, and products such as watches or jewelry; personal care products and
services.
    Utilities is the sum of expenditure on electricity; water; heating fuel for the home;
telephone, cable, internet.
    Car, gasoline and other is the sum of expenditure on vehicle insurance; vehicle


                                            46
maintenance; gasoline; contributions to religious, educational, charitable, or political
organizations; cash or gifts to family and friends outside the household.
    Medical expenses includes 3 items: drugs, health services, and medical supplies.
We construct this variable from the raw CAMS data set. Expenditures on each item
are deflated by the item-specific index provided by the BLS.
    Drugs is expenditure on prescription and nonprescription medications: out-of-
pocket cost, not including what's covered by insurance.
    Medical services and supplies is the sum of expenditure on health care services
(out-of-pocket cost of hospital care, doctor services, lab tests, eye, dental, and nursing
home care) and medical supplies (out-of-pocket cost, not including what's covered by
insurance).
    Household Income Income is observed in the core part of the HRS. Our baseline
measure of income includes earnings, that is wages, salaries, and bonuses; capital
income, which includes business or farm income, self-employment, rents, dividend
and interest income, and other asset income; pensions, that is income from employer
pension or annuity; benefits, including social security retirement income, income from
transfer programs and workers' compensations; and other income, which includes
alimony, other income, lump sums from insurance, pension, and inheritance, referring
to both the head and the spouse if present. All income variables refer to calendar
year prior to the HRS main interview. Income is deflated using the price index for
total consumption provided by BLS.
    Income Tax is taken from the RAND files, which use the NBER TAXSIM to
impute the income tax.
    Assets Net worth is also observed in the HRS. We define it as the sum of all
assets--primary residence, secondary residence, real estate other than primary and
secondary residence, vehicles, businesses, Individual Retirement Account (IRA) and
Keogh accounts, stocks, mutual funds, and investment trusts, checking, savings, or
money market accounts, Certificate of Deposit (CD), government savings bonds, and
T-bills, bonds and bond funds, and all other savings--minus all debts--all mort-
gages/land contracts on primary and secondary residence, other home loans, other
debt--of the head and spouse (if present) of the household. This variable is taken
from the RAND version of the HRS and refers to the time of the interview. Assets are
deflated using the price index for total consumption provided by BLS. For couples,
assets are divided by the square root of 2 to take into account family size.


                                           47
    Demographic variables All demographic and health variables refer to the time
of the interview.


Health index
    To construct an index for health, we instrument self-reported health with objective
measures, including difficulties in activities of daily living (ADLs), mental health, and
illnesses reported by a doctor, following Blundell, Britton, Costa Dias, French (2016).
In particular, our health index is the predicted value from a regression of self-reported
health status on age dummies, year dummies, education dummies, initial health and
labor market status, and objective measures such as difficulties in activities of daily
living (ADL) or other activities, illnesses reported by a doctor, and an indicator for
mental health (the complete list is in Table 12).
    Mental health is measured by an index constructed by RAND using a score on the
Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression (CESD) scale. The CESD score is the
sum of six negative indicators minus two positive indicators. The negative indicators
measure whether the interviewed declared to have experienced over the week prior to
the interview the following feelings, all or most of the time: depression, everything is
an effort, sleep is restless, felt alone, felt sad, and could not get going. The positive
indicators measure whether the interviewed felt happy and enjoyed life, all or most
of the time. As the CESD score is missing for about 4% observations, we impute it
by running a fixed effect regression of CESD score on a polynomial in age, marital
status, income, labor force status, difficulties in ADLs and in other activities. The
regressions are run separately for men and single and married women. In this way,
we are able to recover about half missing values.
    To get a household health index for couples, we average the two instrumented
self-reported health indices computed for husbands and wives separately.


Detrending from the effect of demographics
    In our analysis, we consider the net values of health, income, medical expenses,
and consumption, that is, after the effect of observed characteristics is removed. To
this end, we run ordinary least square (OLS) regressions of the level of the health index
and the logarithm of income, the medical expenses items, and the consumption items
on dummies for year, year of birth, education, race, employment status, whether

                                           48
               Health variables
                Difficulties in ADLs
                                                    walking across room
                                                         getting dressed
                                                   bathing or showering
                                                                  eating
                                                   getting in-out of bed
                                                         using the toilet
                Difficulties in other activities
                                                  walking several blocks
                                                       walking one block
                                                    sitting for two hours
                                                 getting up from a chair
                                           climbing several flt of stairs
                                           climbing one flight of stairs
                                         stooping, kneeling, crouching
                                               lifting or carrying 10 lbs
                                                       picking up a dime
                                                          extending arms
                                       pushing or pulling large objects
                Mental health
                                            CES-D score for depression
                Doctor reported
                                                                  cancer
                                                                diabetes
                                                    high blood pressure
                                                                arthritis
                                                   psychiatric problems
                                                            lung disease
                                                        heart problems
                                                                  stroke


Table 12: Objective health variables used in the analysis. All variables are 0/1 (No/Yes),
          except for CES-D which is from 0 to 8.




                                           49
there are income recipients other than the head and the spouse in the household,
region, marital status, and number of household residents. We also add interactions
terms (education and year, race and year, education and employment status) and
we interact all variables with a binary variable picking up the age group (less than
65 and above 65). We run the regressions separately for couples, single men, and
single women, allowing the effect of the observed characteristics to vary across these
categories. The top left graph of Figure 4 shows the health index by age, while the
top right one and bottom one display the age pattern of the logarithm of consumption
and net income, respectively. The shaded areas represent plus or minus one standard
deviation of the total (grey+blue) and unexplained (blue) component of the variable.



                                                                                       3.5
                 5




                                                                                       3
                 4




                                                                                Log Consumption
                                                                                          2.5
            Health Index
                 3




                                                                                  2
                 2




                                                                                       1.5
                 1




                                                                                       1




                           65   70   75                     80   85   90                          65   70   75         80   85   90
                                          Age                                                                    Age
                                                 4.5
                                                 4
                                           Log Net Income
                                                3.5
                                                 3
                                                 2.5




                                                            65   70   75                          80   85   90
                                                                            Age




Figure 4: (Good) Health index by age (top left graph), logarithm of consumption (top
          right graph), and logarithm of net income by age (bottom graph). Shaded areas
          represent plus or minus one standard deviation of the total (grey+blue) and
          unexplained (blue) component of the variable.


Appendix B: Income and health dynamics
    To better evaluate our assumptions about the evolution of income and health,
Table 13 reports the autocovariances of log-income growth and health growth, and
shows that both income and health are well represented by an MA(0) transitory
income component and a random walk permanent component. More specifically,
this table shows that the covariance between log-income growth at t and t + 1 is

                                                                           50
                                        ln(yt )       ln(yt+1 )      ln(yt+2 )
                   cov (ln(yt ), .)     .215***       -.088***         .008
                                         (.007)         (.005)        (.005)
                   Obs.                   5105           5105          3180
                                          ht           ht+1          ht+2
                   cov (ht , .)         .064***        -.02***         .003
                                         (.002)         (.001)        (.002)
                   Obs.                   5105           5105          3127
                   Standard errors in parentheses. * at 10%, ** at 5%, *** at 1%

          Table 13: Autocovariance of log-income growth and health growth


statistically significant at the 1% confidence level, while it is no significant between
t and t + 2. This is consistent with transitory income being an MA(0) process and
thus being i.i.d. In fact, if it were an MA(k) process with k > 0, then the covariance
between log-income growth at t and t + 2 would be significant. In addition, if the
permanent component of log-income were an AR(1) with a coefficient different from
one, rather than a random walk, the covariance between log-income growth at t and
all future periods would be significant, and we fail finding evidence that it is.




                                                 51
Appendix C: Structural decomposition

Derivation
    The intermediate steps to move from equation (25) to equation (26) in section 6
are as follows. Equation (25) is:

dck
  t       k             dht              k          dat+1 dck
                                                            t+1      k               st+1 (th
                                                                                             +1 )  pk
                                                                                                    t /pt
  h
    u ( c t ) k (ht ) +     
                          h k
                              (ht )u ( c t ) = Et [    h da
                                                                u (c t+1 ) k (ht+1 )       h      k
                                                                                                          ] (1 + r).
dt                      dt                           dt     t+1                        st (t ) pt+1 /pt+1
                                                                                                    (25)

We divide each side by u (ck
                           t )k (ht ):


dck
  t   dht k (ht ) u (ck
                      t)         dat+1 dck        k                     h
                                         t+1 -u (ct+1 ) k (ht+1 ) st+1 (t+1 )  pk
                                                                                t /pt
  h
    -   h  (h )         k
                          = Et [    h da            k                   h     k
                                                                                      ] (1 + r).
dt    dt k t -u (ct )             dt     t+1 -u (ct )   k (ht ) st (t ) pt+1 /pt+1

We take datd+1 /pt
               h   out of the expectation operator (since it is known at t), and substitute
       dyt pt /pt   dm pm /p    dck pk /p       dcl pl /p
it with dh - tdth t - tdth t - l=k tdth t on the right hand-side using the
budget constraint (21) at period t:

    dck
      t   dht k (ht ) u (ck
                          t)                           dyt pt /pt dmt pm
                                                                       t /pt   dck  k
                                                                                 t pt /pt                           dcl  l
                                                                                                                      t pt /pt
      h
        -                      =                                 -           -            -
    dt      h  (h )
          dt k t -u (ck     t)                           dh         dh            dh                        l=k
                                                                                                                      dh
             dck
               t+1-u (ck                      h
                       t+1 ) k (ht+1 ) st+1 (t+1 )      pkt
    ×   Et [                                                    ] (1                     + r) .
             dat+1 -u (ckt )   k (ht )   s  (
                                           t t
                                              h
                                                )  p k
                                                     t+1 /p t+1
                                                    k
                                                   Et


                              dck  k
                                t pt /pt
We shift the term                dh
                                         Etk   from the right-hand side to the left-hand side:

dck
  t     pk
         t                      dht k (ht ) u (ck
                                                t)                  dyt pt /pt dmt pm
                                                                                    t /pt                         dcl  l
                                                                                                                    t pt /pt
    1 +     Etk             -                        =                        -           -                                  Etk .
dht     p t                     dt k t -u (ck
                                  h  (h )
                                                  t)                  d   h      dh                        l =k
                                                                                                                    dh

                                                                                                                  dck       dln(ckt) k
Now, we move from level changes to log changes, and substitute using                                              dh
                                                                                                                    t
                                                                                                                        =     dh
                                                                                                                                    ct ,
                                                                                                                    t           t
dyt pt /pt       dln(yt )pt /pt       dmt pm
                                           t /pt       dln(mt )pm
                                                                t /pt              dcl       dln(clt) l
  dh
             =       d  h       y t ,   dh
                                                   =        dh
                                                                      mt ,   and   dl
                                                                                     t
                                                                                         =     dh
                                                                                                     ct   for all l = k :
                                                                                     t           t



dln(ckt)   k   ck
                t pt
                    k
                                          dht k (ht ) u (ck
                                                          t)                  dln(yt ) yt pt dln(mt ) mt pm
                                                                                                          t                                dln(cl    l l
                                                                                                                                                t ) ct p t
         c t +        Etk             -                        =                            -               -                                              Etk .
  dht           p t                       dt k t -u (ck
                                            h  (h )
                                                            t)                  d h     pt     d h     pt                         l =k
                                                                                                                                             dh pt



                                                                 52
Rearranging, this writes:

                                                                                              k (ht ) u (ck
                                                                                                          t)
dln(ckt)     dln(yt ) yt pt dln(mt ) mt pm
                                         t            dln(cl    l l
                                                           t ) ct p t        Etk        dht k (ht ) -u (ckt)
    h
         =       h
                           -    h
                                           -                                  k   k   +   h          k pk    .
  dt           d       pt     d       pt                dh pt           ck
                                                                            c   p   k   dt ck + t t E k
                                                                                                    c
                                                                         t + pt E t
                                                                              t t
                                               l =k                                         t         pt   t

                                                                             Ak
                                                                              t
                                                                                                     k
                                                                                                    Bt




                                         53
