                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                SEARCHING FOR APPROVAL

                                         Sumit Agarwal
                                          John Grigsby
                                          Ali Hortaçsu
                                         Gregor Matvos
                                           Amit Seru
                                          Vincent Yao

                                      Working Paper 27341
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27341


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2020




We thank Matteo Benetton, Peter DeMarzo, Jean-Pierre Dubé, Andreas Fuster, Jean-Francois
Houde, Matt Gentzkow, Ralph Koijen, Aviv Nevo, Chris Palmer, Tarun Ramadorai, Nick
Roussanov, Tobias Salz, Johannes Stroebel, Adi Sunderam, Motohiro Yogo as well as seminar
participants at the 2019 American Economic Association Meetings, Banff Empirical
Microeconomics Workshop, FTC Microeconomics Conference, NBER IO Meetings, University
of Chicago, University of Pennsylvania, Columbia University, Northwestern University, UBC
Sauder, UT Austin and Stanford GSB for useful comments. Kyeongbae Kim provided
exceptional research assistance. First Version: September 2016. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Sumit Agarwal, John Grigsby, Ali Hortaçsu, Gregor Matvos, Amit Seru, and Vincent
Yao. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Searching for Approval
Sumit Agarwal, John Grigsby, Ali Hortaçsu, Gregor Matvos, Amit Seru, and Vincent Yao
NBER Working Paper No. 27341
June 2020
JEL No. G21,G5,G51,G53,L00

                                           ABSTRACT

We study the interaction of search and application approval in credit markets. We combine a
unique dataset, which details search behavior for a large sample of mortgage borrowers, with loan
application and rejection decisions. Our data reveal substantial dispersion in mortgage rates and
search intensity, conditional on observables. However, in contrast to predictions of standard
search models, we find a novel non-monotonic relationship between search and realized prices:
borrowers, who search a lot, obtain more expensive mortgages than borrowers' with less frequent
search. The evidence suggests that this occurs because lenders screen borrowers'
creditworthiness, rejecting unworthy borrowers, which differentiates consumer credit markets
from other search markets. Based on these insights, we build a model that combines search and
screening in presence of asymmetric information. Risky borrowers internalize the probability that
their application is rejected, and behave as if they had higher search costs. The model rationalizes
the relationship between search, interest rates, defaults, and application rejections, and highlights
the tight link between credit standards and pricing. We estimate the parameters of the model and
study several counterfactuals. The model suggests that "overpayment" may be a poor proxy
for consumer unsophistication since it partly represents rational search in presence of
rejections. Moreover, the development of improved screening technologies from AI and big
data (i.e., fintech lending) could endogenously lead to more severe adverse selection in
credit markets. Finally, place based policies, such as the Community Reinvestment Act, may
affect equilibrium prices through endogenous search responses rather than increased credit risk.


Sumit Agarwal                                           Gregor Matvos
National University of Singapore                        Kellogg School of Management
Mochtar Raidy Building                                  Northwestern University
15 Kent Ridge Drive                                     2211 Campus Drive
Singapore                                               Global Hub 4361
ushakri@yahoo.com                                       Evanston IL, 60208
                                                        and NBER
John Grigsby                                            gregor.matvos@kellogg.northwestern.edu
Department of Economics
University of Chicago                                   Amit Seru
1160 East 58th Street                                   Stanford Graduate School of Business
Chicago, IL 60637                                       Stanford University
jgrigsby@uchicago.edu                                   655 Knight Way
                                                        and NBER
Ali Hortaçsu                                            aseru@stanford.edu
Kenneth C. Griffin Department of Economics
University of Chicago                                   Vincent Yao
1126 East 59th Street                                   Georgia State University
Chicago, IL 60637                                       J. Mack Robinson College of Business
and NBER                                                35 Broad Street NW
hortacsu@uchicago.edu                                   Atlanta, GA 30303
                                                        wyao2@gsu.edu
1 Introduction
Consumer credit markets exhibit substantial price dispersion. Borrowers with similar characteristics obtain credit

with substantially dierent interest rates or fees in both mortgage markets (Gurun et al. 2016, Allen et al. 2014,

Woodward and Hall 2012, Stroebel 2015), credit card markets (Ausubel 1991, Calem and Mester 1995, Agarwal,

Chomsisengphet, Stroebel and Mahoney 2018), and auto loan markets (Argyle, Nadauld, and Palmer, 2019).                 A

leading explanation of these facts is consumer search.      Less sophisticated borrowers search less, and consequently

settle for more expensive nancial products.      Low sophistication in search is also a frequent explanation for high

cost of credit for less educated, poor, low credit score (subprime), or minority borrowers. While search is one of the

primary explanations of these facts, it is rarely observed in the data. In fact, the empirical literature studying search

mainly infers search behavior from the price distribution, or, in rare cases, measures search behavior from surveys,

which are rarely linked to consumers' choices.

   We study consumer search in the $2 trillion per year mortgage origination market using a unique and proprietary

panel dataset of conforming mortgages from a large government sponsored entity (GSE) in the United States. By

matching these data with consumer credit reports from a large national credit bureau, we provide a unique look at

the relationship between search behavior and borrower outcomes, such as origination mortgage rates, delinquency

and application acceptance decisions, conditional on a large set of observed borrower and loan characteristics.

   Using this data and a quantitative model, we show that in order to understand search behavior in the mortgage

market, one must acknowledge a key distinction between credit markets and markets for non-nancial consumer

goods: sellers in credit markets reject some borrowers because they care about borrowers' credit risk.        Payos to

sellers of most consumer products do not depend on    who   purchases their product for a given price. Credit providers'

prots, on the other hand, depend directly on the probability that their customers repay their loans. As a result,

creditors such as mortgage lenders, evaluate borrowers' creditworthiness, and then approve or reject customers based

on this evaluation.   If an application is rejected, customers must search for a mortgage with another lender.       We

show that incorporating this approval process dierentiates search in the mortgage market from search in markets

for standard goods, such as books or autos. Indeed, this approval process is not limited to the mortgage market. It is

a common feature in obtaining a credit card, student and small business loans, or in auto loans, and a similar process

takes place in the insurance industry, where applicants are screened for underlying risks. However, most empirical

search models of do not account for this important distinction between credit and other goods.

   Detailed data linking individual mortgage choices and search behavior from a large secondary market participant

allows us to document the central fact in the paper. Borrowers, who search a lot, obtain higher rate mortgages than

borrowers, who search little. The fact that mortgage rates, inclusive of all fees, do not decline monotonically with

search is very robust.   It survives across dierent subsamples of borrowers, after extensive controls for borrowers'

characteristics using data that lenders use to set mortgage rates, and after conditioning both on location and orig-

ination date. This result cannot be generated by canonical search models such as Carlson and McAfee (1983), or

those, which have been applied to the market for books (De Los Santos et al. 2012), mutual funds (Hortacsu and

Syverson 2004, Roussanov et al. 2018), auto loan market (Argyle, Nadauld, and Palmer, 2019) and the mortgage



                                                            2
market (Woodward and Hall 2012). Sorensen (2000, 2001) documents patterns in the market for prescription drugs

that are consistent with common search models; the market for mortgages therefore diers in some key respects.

   We document two additional facts, which show that standard search models need to be amended when applied

to credit markets. First, borrowers who search are more likely to be delinquent or default on the loans ex post, even

conditional on very detailed ex ante measures of their creditworthiness from the lenders' perspective, such as FICO,

LTV, DTI. Second, linking approval data with search, we show a robust negative relationship between the probability

of mortgage approval and the number of searches. This is the case even in a narrow time window during which prior

borrower searches are not observed by the lender. Standard search models, lacking any notion of creditworthiness

or application rejection, have to be altered to match the fact that borrowers who search more are more likely to fall

into delinquency and have their applications rejected.

   To rationalize these patterns, we develop a search model which incorporates the application screening process

observed in credit markets. Borrowers search for mortgages sequentially in a market with posted prices. We depart

from standard search models by letting borrowers dier in their ability to repay the loan, and assuming that this

creditworthiness is private information. The correlation of creditworthiness and willingness to pay for a loan can be

positive or negative, which is traditionally linked to either adverse or advantageous selection. Critically, our model

captures the basic features of the institutional setting: after a mortgage application is submitted, lenders conduct an

in-depth screen of the borrower to obtain an imperfect, but informative signal regarding her creditworthiness. Upon

this review, the lender can either approve a mortgage, or reject the application. If the application is rejected, the

borrower must search for another lender, incurring her search cost once more.

   The approval process aects borrowers' search, because they account for the possibility of their application being

rejected. This possibility of rejection looms larger for borrowers with low creditworthiness, because an in-depth check

by the lender is likely to reveal bad information. Therefore, they are more willing to accept a high interest rate to

avoid future search. In other words, because of the possibility of rejection, low creditworthiness borrowers will search

as if they were nancially unsophisticated, high search cost borrowers. This simple intuition has several implications.

   First, one cannot infer consumers' nancial sophistication, i.e. search costs, from the prices they pay. Borrowers

who pay higher interest rates than other similar borrowers, such as minority borrowers, are often labeled nancially

unsophisticated. This intuition also arises in traditional search models: consumers with high search costs, i.e. low

nancial sophistication, are the ones who pay high prices. In fact, this idea is central to identication of search costs

from the data (e.g. Hortacsu and Syverson (2004), Allen, Clark and Houde (2014), Roussanov et al. (2018)). This

intuition has been used to shape policy geared towards low nancial sophistication borrowers. Our model suggests

that this inference is problematic in credit markets: consumers are willing to pay high prices as a rational response

when searching in presence of rejections. Suppose minority borrowers pay higher rates than non-minority borrowers,

all else equal.   Our model suggests an alternative plausible explanation for such pattern: it would be a rational

response of minority borrowers if they face higher rejection rates.

   Second, the approval process generates endogenous adverse selection. Since low creditworthiness borrowers behave

as if they have higher search costs, such borrowers are endogenously more likely to take up expensive mortgages,




                                                           3
leading rms charging higher prices to have lower quality borrowers on average. Adverse selection arises even when

creditworthy borrowers have a higher willingness-to-pay for loans, which would result in        advantageous   selection in

standard frameworks. This result suggests that adverse selection could be endemic in credit and insurance markets,

in which lenders screen and reject borrowers.

   We estimate the model using a maximum likelihood procedure which utilizes the joint distribution of search,

interest rates, default, and application approval.       The estimated model successfully replicates the qualitative and

quantitative patterns we observe in the data. First, frequent-searchers pay higher interest rates. These borrowers

are, on average, of low unobserved creditworthiness. On the other hand, they pay high rates because of their search

behavior and      not directly   due to their low creditworthiness. Their low creditworthiness implies that their mortgage

applications have been rejected many times. Because the chance of future rejection is high, they are willing to accept

mortgages with high interest rates. In other words, it is the high probability of rejection that induces the relationship

between interest rates and search.

   Second, our model can explain the relationship between search, default, and loan approvals. Because frequently re-

jected borrowers are likely of low creditworthiness, these frequent-searchers are more likely to default ex post. Further-

more, informative screening reveals frequent-searchers to be creditworthy less frequently than it does for infrequent-

searchers. This generates the negative relationship between search and application approval that is observed in the

data. Jointly, the relationship between search, interest rates, default, and application acceptance/rejection rates is

consistent with the one proposed by the model.

   As further validation of the mechanism proposed by the paper, we examine a population of borrowers who face

almost no possibility of their mortgage application being rejected as a placebo test of our model. These borrowers,

with approval rates of almost 98.75%, dier substantially from the overall population, whose rejection probability is

approximately      18%.   Our model predicts that, in the absence of any possibility of application rejection, borrowers

should behave as if they were searching in any standard consumer goods market, such as the market for books. In other

words, if they do not fear rejection, borrowers who search more do so to obtain cheaper mortgages, so there should

be a   negative   relationship between search and realized prices. Strikingly, the data show that mortgage origination

rates are monotonically decreasing in the frequency of search for the population of rarely-rejected borrowers. This

stands in stark contrast to the patterns for the population at large. These results provide additional support for our

model, and suggest that the non-negative relationship between search and mortgage rates for the overall population

is indeed driven by the approval process rather than some other unobservable borrower characteristic.

   The model estimates imply that screening is quite informative: high types are approved with a probability which

is 81 percentage points higher than low types. Consistent with the existing literature on search in mortgage markets,

the mean search cost is large, with each additional search being equivalent to paying an additional 29.7 basis points

on a loan (bp), which equates to a cost of $30 per month for an average-sized loan in our sample, or about $1,800 if

the loan is renanced or paid o in 5 years. In addition, consumers dier in search costs, with standard deviation of

11.8 bp.

   The estimated model permits several counterfactuals, which illustrate that incorporating search and rejections




                                                               4
can be critical to analyzing policies aimed at credit markets.           We rst consider the impact of tightened lending

standards of the sort seen during the nancial crisis of 2008 (Mian and Su 2009, Stroebel 2015) and more recently

as COVID-19 pandemic has spread.
                                        1 Instead of modeling tightened lending standards as a contraction in supply, we

model them as an increase in rejections of mortgage applications. Our model allows us to study the crisis situations

mentioned above when mortgages are cheap if you can get one.                  We show that lenders' reduced willingness to

approve mortgages increases mortgage rates in equilibrium despite no increases in mortgage cost. Tighter lending

standards also increase the impact of high search cost. In other words, keeping creditworthiness xed, the impact is

largest for the least nancially sophisticated borrowers. We show that lender rejection and pricing are complements in

equilibrium, resulting in substantially higher transaction and posted prices than individual responses would predict.

We estimate that tighter lending standards during the crisis increased average mortgage rates by 25 bp, a substantial

change of a half a standard deviation.

   We next use the model to evaluate the overall equilibrium eect of lenders' ability to screen and reject credit

applicants.    The counterfactual illustrates that lenders' ability to screen results in a large transfer of rents from

borrowers to lenders across the creditworthiness spectrum. The impact of screening is largest for low-type borrowers,

who are more willing to accept expensive mortgages in face of increased rejection. This behavior by low types allows

lenders to increase rates in equilibrium, spilling over to high-type borrowers who now face higher posted rates. The

impact is large: removing screening from the model reduces mean realized rates by 25bp. The upper bound benet

of screening on annual bank prots is $36 billion. This is approximately 21% of aggregate bank prots in the data.
                                                                                                                                 2

Screening is therefore a key feature of the mortgage market, and signicantly contributes to price variation, search

costs, and bank prots. This is especially important given the growth of new screening technologies with the rise of

big data and AI in nancial technology, which, as Brunnermeier et al. (2020) point out, could lead banks to know

borrowers' default risks better than even the borrowers themselves.

   Next, we pursue two counterfactual exercises to address the question of discrimination. First, our model is suited

for the analysis of a realistic redlining policy, in which a portion of lenders in the market discriminate by lowering

approval rates for borrowers from the discriminated group.           Such policies are increasingly a cause for concern by

policymakers as they worry about AI and big data based algorithms generating such behavior by new ntech

lenders (Fuster et al. 2020). Discrimination of this sort is more subtle, and diers from explicitly denying credit

to the discriminated group, or charging dierent prices. We show that such policies are sustainable in a sequential

search equilibrium.     What's more, the redlining behavior induces borrowers from the discriminated group to pay

higher interest rates on average, even if they purchase a mortgage from a lender that itself does not engage in

redlining. Such discriminated groups behave as though they are nancially unsophisticated, but are in fact rationally

responding to the increased rejection probability into their reservation rates. Our estimates imply that if half of the

lenders in a region rejected borrowers from the discriminated group at twice the rate of non-redlining lenders, average

realized mortgage rates increase by 29 bp. Although this rise is concentrated amongst the discriminated group, for

   1 https://www.mpamag.com/news/fewer-people-qualify-for-mortgage-as-lenders-tighten-credit-in-march-220187.aspx   [Accessed   on
4/22/2020]
   2 The   banking sector earned prots of $171.3 billion in 2017 according to the FDIC. See:   https://money.cnn.com/2017/03/03/
investing/bank-profits-record-high-dodd-frank/index.html,      accessed April 7, 2020




                                                                5
reasons already discussed, those not belonging to the discriminated group also suer higher rates. Our ndings have

obvious implications for regulators as they reveal the large quantitative impact potential redlining by ntech lenders

may have on the broader mortgage market.

    Finally, we study the impact of place based policies which force or incentivize lenders to pool borrowers across

creditworthiness ranges within geographic areas.
                                                         3 We consider a counterfactual exercise in which borrowers of both

high and low creditworthiness in the market are accepted at the same increased rate. One might conjecture that

this should increase the interest rates in the market due to increased credit risk. We nd the opposite, with a mean

rate decline of 27 bp. Intuitively, because of lower probability of rejection, low-type borrowers' eective search costs

decrease, putting downward pressure on interest rates. The reverse is true for high-type borrowers, but the eect is

smaller. The resulting equilibrium features large gains by low-types, and small losses by high-type borrowers, and

lenders. Thus, place based policies like Community Revinvestment Act (CRA) move equilibrium prices signicantly

through endogenous search responses, which can undo the eect of increased credit risk.

    Overall, our results suggest that search in credit markets diers substantially from search in other product markets.

Those who search more pay higher prices for mortgages.                 This is due to the presence of an informative screening

and rejection process. The possibility of application rejection inates borrowers eective search costs and generates

endogenous adverse selection, even if low creditworthy borrowers do not have disproportionately high willingness-to-

pay for a mortgage. Accounting for this informative screening process has important consequences for the design of

policies that shift credit access, such as the various place-based policies put in place over recent years.

    As noted above, our paper contributes to the recent literature on price dispersion and choice frictions in the

mortgage market (Gurun et al 2016, Allen et al. 2014, Woodward and Hall 2012, Alexandrov and Koulayev 2017).

Allen et al.    (2019) conduct a detailed study of the role played by incumbency advantage and market power on

search outcomes in the Canadian mortgage market. Search frictions similarly give banks market power in our model,

however our focus is on the role played by the screening/rejection mechanism on search behavior rather than the

bargaining process between borrowers and lenders. Ambokar and Samaee (2019b),
                                                                                                 4 assess the importance of search

costs and market power for inaction in the mortgage renance market. They nd that search costs signicantly inhibit

renancing, both directly and by indirectly giving market power to banks. Ambokar and Samaee focus on the causes

and consequences of inaction in the mortgage renance market using models in which borrowers' creditworthiness

is known. In contrast, we examine the importance of informative screening and approval in the face of asymmetric

information for mortgage pricing and search behavior. We illustrate that the screening and credit approval process is

critical for understanding how consumers search for credit products, and more broadly, products in which the seller's

payo depends on buyer's characteristics, such as insurance.

    The role played by switching costs/consumer inertia in the context of health insurance choices was studied by

Handel et al. (2015). In their setting, consumers self-select into a contract from a menu of contracts, as in a number

   3 Examples   are the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA), which impelled lenders in particular locations to increase their application
acceptance probabilities for all borrowers, or the GSE Declining Market Policy of 2008.
   4 Ambokar    and Samaee (2019a) incorporate mortgage search and renancing in a New Keynesian macro model. In their model, the
transmission of monetary policy is dampened relative to benchmark by reducing the benet of renancing for non-searchers. Much of
this operates through banks' ability to statistically discriminate by charging borrowers without multiple searches a higher interest rate
in the belief that they are non-searchers and thus captive shoppers.




                                                                   6
of recent theoretical papers on the role of search frictions in environments with adverse selection (e.g. Lester et al.

(2016), Guerrieri et al. (2010)). In our model, borrowers are oered only one contract, and screening is performed

through a noisy technology reecting the mortgage approval process. While the menu of contracts approach depicts

many insurance markets accurately, we believe our model is a more realistic description of the mortgage market  the

largest consumer credit market for households in the U.S., as well as other consumer credit markets. Finally, rational

inattention has been proposed as a possible explanation for dispersion in mortgage rates, and the low take-up of

benecial renancing opportunities (Andersen et al. 2015). Although these behavioral models provide one possible

microfoundation for large search costs, they do not easily lend themselves to the direct study of search behavior,

which is the focus of this paper.

   More broadly, our paper links to the literature using quantitative models to study the eect of competition in

nancial markets (Benetton, 2018; Koijen and Yogo, 2016, 2020; Agarwal, Stroebel and Mahoney 2018; Argyle,

Nadauld, and Palmer, 2019; Buchak et al. 2018, 2020, Gilbukh and Goldsmith-Pinkham, 2020, Piazzesi, Schneider,

and Stroebel, 2020). Our model diers with its focus on the interaction of search and rejection. Our counterfactuals

are related to a literature on how market structure alters the pass through of monetary policy to mortgage rates

(Scharfstein and Sunderam 2017; Wong, 2019). Our model highlights that the search response interacts with the

rejection and pricing behavior of intermediaries, shaping policy outcomes.

   The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we describe the mortgage application process

and institutional background of the mortgage market. Section 3 describes the data used in our empirical analysis.

In section 4, we present the basic facts of search in mortgage markets, as well as the relationship between search and

prices. We present our model of search with screening in section 5. Section 6 presents additional evidence in support

of the screening mechanism central to our model, such as the relationship between search and both delinquency and

approval probabilities. We describe the estimation of our model in section 7 and report its results. Finally, section

8 presents our counterfactual analyses. Section 9 concludes.




2 Credit Application Process and Inquiries
The formal process of acquiring a mortgage starts with the borrower ling an application. In the application, the

borrower provides information required by the lender, such as her income, occupation, and assets. Next, the lender

assesses the borrower's creditworthiness. The credit report of the borrower is pulled by the lender to determine

the borrower's eligibility for specic loans, and the interest rate that should be charged to the borrower. This pull

is recorded as an inquiry by the credit bureau. In processing the loan, the lender veries the borrower's eligibility

for loan terms. This involves verifying a borrower's income, assets and other nancial information. In addition, the

lender initiates an appraisal of the property, which is critical in determining the loan-to-value ratio. After gauging

creditworthiness of the applicant, the lender can either approve a mortgage, or reject the application.

   If the application is rejected, the borrower must search for another lender. If the application is approved, the

nal contract terms oered to the borrower are settled at this point. The last step involves closing the deal where




                                                          7
various contractual documents are signed. The borrowers pay for the cost of obtaining their credit report, the home

appraisal fee, and any loan processing costs.
                                                      5 Once the mortgage is settled, borrowers make monthly payments 

either directly to the lender or to a separate loan servicer, depending on the loan.

   We use the credit bureau data on total inquiries to capture the intensity of borrower search.                          We limit the

search window to within 45 days of the nal mortgage application , following the credit bureau denition of search.

Credit bureaus entitle borrowers searching for a mortgage to a shopping window of 45 days during which multiple

credit checks from mortgage lenders aect a borrower's credit score as if they were a single inquiry.
                                                                                                                      6 This shopping

window starts with the rst credit check by a mortgage lender, and applies only to credit checks from mortgage

lenders and brokers; other inquiries, such as those related to credit card applications, are registered separately. As a

result, borrowers are not punished for search in this 45 day window. To record searches, the credit bureau takes the

last mortgage application of a borrower, and looks back 45 days prior.

   Formal credit inquiries might also be triggered by lenders when consumers search for other credit products. In

particular, when consumers search for credit cards or other revolving lines of credit (such as home equity line of credit

or HELOCs), lenders also pull the credit score of the borrower to assess their creditworthiness. These would also

be recorded as part of the total inquiries in the credit bureau data.                  We check whether non-mortgage inquiries

contaminate total inquiries in two ways. One, using credit bureau data merged with approved loan information, we

measure the share of mortgage-related inquiries
                                                          7 as a proportion of total inquiries for a given borrower in the one

month prior to her mortgage origination. The one month window reects the fact that data on inquiry purpose are

available only from one month prior to mortgage origination. Despite the short window of one month, we nd that

more than 80% of total inquiries during this period are agged as mortgage related. Given it usually takes more

than one month from the original inquiry to close the mortgage, the true share is likely to be higher.

   Two, we consider increases in credit limits for non-mortgage consumer credit products as possible evidence of

active credit search in prior months. We focus on HELOC and credit card accounts, which also require a formal

credit inquiry before approval. The instance of such credit limit changes is on average, 0% in both the month that

the mortgage is originated as well as in the month preceeding origination. Notably, HELOC credit limits change

by around 2% on average starting three months after mortgage origination. Similarly, credit card limits change by

approximately 15% beginning two months after mortgage origination. These results provide additional evidence that

consumers' search for credit cards or other unsecured credit is quite limited during the period over which we examine

mortgage credit related inquiries. These observations suggest that these non-mortgage inquiries will not pollute the

interpretation of total inquiries as mortgage search. This result is expected: the decision to take up a mortgage is

households' largest credit decision. As a result, borrowers tend to be quite careful before applying for a mortgage.

Since credit scores are adversely impacted when borrowers take up credit products, they have strong incentives not

to formally search for other credit products such as credit cards before applying for a mortgage.

   It is possible that borrowers search for mortgages informally without a credit pull, for example, by searching for

   5 Borrowers   will usually pay between 2 and 5 percent of the purchase price in closing fees, with an average of $3,700, according to a
recent Zillow survey (https://www.zillow.com/mortgage-learning/closing-costs/, accessed February 7, 2018).
   6 https://www.consumernance.gov/ask-cfpb/what-exactly-happens-when-a-mortgage-lender-checks-my-credit-en-2005/
   7 As determined by the credit bureau.



                                                                    8
lenders and interest rates oered on the internet. However, the nal terms that are oered to the borrower depend

on her observable creditworthiness and value of the house. Lenders can therefore oer full contract terms only after

verifying the borrower's credit score (an inquiry) and knowing the house characteristics. Consequently, our measure

appropriately captures borrower search over formal terms across lenders.




3 Data and Summary Statistics
We draw two random samples from a unique proprietary dataset obtained from a large government sponsored entity

(GSE) in the United States. Our rst sample contains 5.36 million applications for mortgages intended to purchase

or renance a single family property, from 2001 to 2013. The loans are originated by a variety of lenders and conform

to GSE standards. We consider only loan applications with a single applicant, because they tend to have cleaner

search histories at the time of application. We observe the last application by the borrower, and record all inquiries in

the 45 days prior to this application. The sample contains common underwriting variables, including borrower credit

score, backend debt-to-income (DTI) ratio, loan-to-value (LTV) ratio of the mortgage, mortgage contract choice,

loan purpose (purchase vs renancing), occupancy (primary residence vs investment property), application date and

property location, for both approved and rejected loan applications.

   Our second dataset contains approximately 1.3 million mortgages that were originated between 2001 and 2011.

The shorter time period relative to application sample above reects data sharing constraints with the GSE. At

origination, we observe the borrower's credit score, the LTV ratio, the loan characteristics (origination balance and

term), interest rate (inclusive of fees and points), the backend DTI ratio, whether the loan was originated through

a broker, loan purpose, occupancy, and the location of the mortgaged property (zip code, MSA and state).                                    In

addition, we also have information on some of borrower's demographics, including years of school, age, gender and

their monthly income at origination. The inquiries are measured 45 days prior to mortgage approval. Once the loan

is originated, a servicer reports monthly performance until the end of our performance period, December 2014, or the

loan terminates. A loan can terminate when the borrower chooses to prepay, or forecloses (defaults) on the property.

We dene default to include both foreclosures and those that have missed at least three monthly payments. The

data contain mortgages originated by 175 unique lenders across the full United States.
                                                                                                           8

   Using the social security numbers of borrowers, we merge these data with applicants' credit reports provided by

a consumer credit bureau which reveal the outstanding debt balances and, crucially, the number of inquiries on the

individual's le at the time of the loan application.

   Table 1 reports summary statistics for our sample. Our data consist of prime borrowers. Therefore the average 725

FICO score of approved borrowers substantially exceeds that of the US population, which was 688 in April 2011,
                                                                                                                                        9 The

average combined loan-to-value (CLTV) ratio was 73.8% and average back-end debt-to-income ratio was 37.6. Based

on observables, applicants were slightly less creditworthy, with average FICO of 707, and average CLTV of 75.3%.


   8 To   limit the inuence of outliers, we winsorize applications and loans lying above the 99th percentile of inquiries, interest rates, DTI,
or LTV ratios.
   9 http://www.co.com/en/blogs/risk-compliance/us-credit-quality-continues-climb-will-level/,         retrieved November 11, 2016.




                                                                       9
This dierence suggests that less creditworthy borrowers face a lower probability of their mortgage applications being

accepted. There is substantial heterogeneity in observed creditworthiness in our pool. The standard deviation of

FICO scores is 62.5 in the loan-level dataset, and 71.6 in the application dataset. We see similarly large standard

deviations in both CLTV and DTI ratios. Indeed, these loans are not without credit risk: the annualized default

rate is 2.3% in our sample.

   Our dataset includes loans originated through the housing boom, bust and recovery. Table 2 reports summary

statistics for our two datasets across three origination periods. Almost half of our observed loan applications came

before the house price peak in the fourth quarter of 2006. The other half of applications are split evenly between the

crisis period (fourth quarter of 2006 through fourth quarter 2009) and the post-crisis period (2010 and later). In our

loan-level sample, 43.6% were originated before the crisis, 41.7% were originated during the crisis period, and 14.7%

were originated in 2010 or later. The timing dierence between these two samples can be partially explained by the

shorter time frame of the loan-level dataset.




4 Price Dispersion and Dierences in Search
Dierences in mortgage rates across borrowers have frequently been attributed to costly search.
                                                                                                             10 However, there

is little direct measurement of search behavior in this market. Here we describe the basic patterns of search in the

data. We rst document substantial price dispersion in the mortgage market. We then use our novel data on search

to show dierences in search behavior among borrowers. Last, we turn to the central fact motivating our paper: the

relationship between search and mortgage rates.




4.1 Price dispersion in the mortgage market
In the mortgage market, borrowers with similar characteristics pay substantially dierent interest rates in the same

location, and at the same point in time. This has been shown in the US subprime market (Gurun et al. 2016), as well

as in Canada (Allen et al. 2014). Borrowers pay substantially dierent mortgage rates in our sample as well, even

after adjusting these rates for points and fees. We present the full distribution of rates across three origination time

periods in Figure 1A, showing substantial rate dispersion. Figure 1B presents interest rates for three dierent FICO

based creditworthiness subsets. There is substantial mortgage rate dispersion within every subset, with interest rates

diering over      3   percentage points (pp) within each group.        These dierences are costly.      The average loan in our

data is originated for $169 thousand, so each        pp   represents an additional $1,200 in interest expense every year for a

30-year xed rate mortgage (FRM).

   Dierences in mortgage rates may simply reect dierences in borrowers' observables. To argue that true price

dispersion exists in this market, one would ideally show that two borrowers in the same market, at the same time,

with the same characteristics, paid dierent mortgage rates. We apply this intuition in a regression framework, and




  10 See   e.g. Gurun et al 2016, Allen et al. 2014, Woodward and Hall 2012, Alexandrov and Koulayev 2017.




                                                                  10
estimate the following specication:

                                                      ritm = Xi + µt + µm + itm ,

in which      ritm    represents the origination rate of borrower        i   at time    t   in market   m. Xi   are the borrower and loan

characteristics, such as FICO score, LTV, DTI, income, years of education, the type of the mortgage, and whether

the borrower is an investor. It is worth reiterating that we observe the actual characteristics, rather than a noisy

proxy derived from borrowers' locations (e.g., years of education in a zipcode), as is used by the majority of mortgage

research. In order to compare borrowers in the same market at the same point in time, we condition on state xed

eects     µm ,     and on time xed eects      µt .   Our data set was collected by the lender for the purposes of making the

loan and selling it to GSEs. Thus, the controls we observe and use closely approximate the variables used to set loan

rates: the     R2     from the above regression is 0.796.

   The object of interest is the residual of the regression above. Mortgages with negative (positive) residuals are

cheaper (more expensive) than the mean mortgage with the same characteristics. The distribution of these residuals

(Figure 1C) is compressed relative to the distribution of raw origination rates, suggesting that at least some of

the dispersion in rates is driven by observed borrower dierences. However, a substantial amount of residual rate

dispersion remains. A borrower at the          10th    percentile of the distribution pays an origination rate that is           0.9pp   lower

than that paid by the borrower at the                90th   percentile of the distribution.        At the average loan amount of $169

thousand, this dierence results in $1,080 larger mortgage cost per year. Our estimates of residual price dispersion of

41bp are similar to 50bp found in Allen et al.              (2014). Meanwhile Gurun et al. (2016) nd a coecient of variation of

0.23 and 0.19 in their data on xed- and adjustable-rate mortgages, respectively, compared with 0.15 in our data.
                                                                                                                                            11

Overall, borrowers with the same characteristics, in the same market, borrowing from the same lender at the same

point in time pay substantially dierent mortgage rates.




4.2 Borrower Search, Sophistication, and Creditworthiness
Given the large dierences in mortgage rates, borrowers should have substantial incentives to search. In this section

we document that dierent borrowers search dierent amounts. What's more, borrower sophistication, as proxied by

their education, does not explain much variation in search. Dierences in borrower creditworthiness, which do not

play a role in standard search models, have substantially more success.

   As we later illustrate, rejections of mortgage applications play a critical role in search. Therefore, it is important

to distinguish between two groups: borrowers who apply for mortgages, and borrowers who have obtained a mortgage.

The median borrower who obtains a mortgage does not search much, having only 2 inquiries on her record (Figure

2, Panel A). In fact, a borrower in the          75th       percentile searches 3 times. Mortgage applicants search substantially

more, with a median of 9 (Panel B). This result suggests that borrowers who frequently search are less likely to be

approved for a mortgage. We explore this fact more directly in Section 6.2.



  11 To   test whether brand preferences or non-price aspects of a particular lender account for the observed price dispersion, we add
lender×origination quarter xed eects. Adding these increases the            R2   from 0.80 to 0.81 and reduces the residual standard deviation
from   41bp   to   40bp.


                                                                       11
   Borrower characteristics such as education, income, age, and race have been used as proxies for consumer sophis-

tication in the literature (Woodward and Hall 2012, Gurun et al 2016). One may argue that sophisticated consumers

should have lower search costs, and therefore search more.              To explore this further, consider dierences in search

across FICO levels in Figure 2C, and across educational attainment in Figure 2D. Consistent with intuition, the most

educated borrowers search most, but the dierence is slight and statistically insignicant. FICO, which measures

creditworthiness, is among the strongest predictors of search: low FICO scores (below 620) search substantially more

than borrowers with high FICO scores (above 720).
                                                            12 These simple facts suggest that dierences in creditworthiness

play an important role in understanding search in the mortgage market.

   We examine whether consumer sophistication and creditworthiness proxies are correlated with search more sys-

tematically using the following regression:




                                                      sitm = Xi + µmt + itm                                                        (1)



in which    i   indexes the mortgage applicant or borrower in market            m   at time   t.    The dependent variable     sitm   is

the number of inquiries, or an indicator that the borrower belongs to the               nth   quartile of search, scaled by 100 for

legibility. We examine the conditional correlation between search and borrower characteristics, such as their FICO

score, education, income and race. To ensure that the correlation between characteristics and search is not driven

by local or aggregate conditions, we include the location-time xed eect                  µmt .     Any dierences in the regulatory

environment are also absorbed by the location xed eect. We present the results in Table 3.

   Panel A reports estimates for our sample of mortgage applicants, while Panel B reports estimates for our sample

of mortgage borrowers.         Borrower characteristics such as education and race are correlated with the amount of

search, but the simple correlations are not consistent with the intuition that sophisticated borrowers search more.

More critical to our argument, more creditworthy borrowers search less, even conditional on other characteristics,

suggesting an important role for creditworthiness in understanding consumer search behavior. The estimates from

rst column suggest that a borrower with a FICO score which is one standard deviation above the mean has 3.8 fewer

inquiries on average in the application data, and 0.39 fewer inquiries in the realized loan data, conditonal on other

observable characteristics. These are large magnitudes relative to the mean inquiries in both datasets (as reported in

Table 1). Analysis in last four columns of both panels suggests that this pattern is driven by borrowers who search

more. However, college educated borrowers, traditionally considered sophisticated, have 0.11 fewer inquiries than

non-college borrowers at the time of mortgage origination.




4.3 Do Borrowers Who Search More Obtain Cheaper Mortgages?
The benchmark consumer search model suggests that search and transacted prices are negatively correlated. Though

we more formally illustrate this in Section 5.5.1 the intuitive idea is as follows. Low search cost (nancially savvy)

consumers nd searching cheap.            This low search cost allows them to search more, and nd cheaper products.

  12 The   FICO score was designed as a measure of creditworthiness, but has also been used as a measure of consumer sophistication. If
FICO proxied only for nancial sophistication, one would expect the opposite: low FICO borrowers should search less, not more.




                                                                   12
Conversely, high search cost (nancially unsophisticated) consumers are willing to accept higher prices in order to

avoid frequently paying their high search cost. As a result, they search less and consequently nd more expensive

products on average.

   We rst plot the average mortgage rate as a function of search for borrowers in Panel A of Figure 3.                          Under

the benchmark model, the average price (origination rate) should monotonically decline with search.                       Figure 3,

suggests this is not the case. As the number of searches increases from one to three, the interest rate indeed declines.

However, past three inquiries, additional search is correlated with increased mortgage rates. High-inquiry borrowers,

who search a lot, obtain worse (more expensive) mortgages than borrowers, in the middle of the search distribution.

In the rest of this section, we present a broad array of tests to show this pattern is robust.

   Figure 3 cuts the data on several other dimensions, which may drive search and mortgage pricing - FICO, race,

income, and education - and plot the relationship between search and interest rates for each group. The same pattern

persists for low, middle and high FICO scores, low, middle and highly educated populations, for black, white, and

Hispanic borrowers, as well as for low, middle, and high income borrowers (see Appendix Figure A1). These univariate

cuts of data suggest that the non-decreasing relationship between the amount of search and mortgage rates is not

driven by borrower characteristics.

   We next explore the relationship between mortgage rates and search in a regression framework, in which we can

control for dierences across markets, as well as borrower and mortgage characteristics. We estimate the following

regression




                                         ritm =        s 1{si = s} + µt + µm + Xi + itm                                           (2)
                                                  s2

where   i   indexes the borrower who takes up a mortgage in market           m   at time   t.   The dependent variable   ritm   is the

mortgage rate. The independent variable of interest is the amount of search the borrower undertook before taking

up a mortgage,       si .   The coecients of interest    s    measure the mean change in mortgage rates for a borrower who

searched    s   times, relative to a borrower who only searched once. To ensure that the correlation between search and

mortgage rates is not driven by borrower or mortgage characteristics, we include extensive controls in               Xi ,   such as

the borrower's FICO score, loan to value ratio (LTV), investor status, product type (ARM vs FRM, purchase vs

renance), and backend DTI ratio. We also absorb any inuence of local supply or demand conditions by inclduing

time xed eect         µt    and location xed eect      µm .   These xed eects also absorb any aggregate uctuations, such

as changes in the risk premia, or persistent dierences across markets. We cluster standard errors at the state                      ×
origination quarter level. In eect, we consider two borrowers in the same location, at the same point in time, with

the same observable characteristics, and compare how the interest rate charged on their mortgage diers with the

amount of search.

   Figure 4 plots the coecients          s .   As the gure suggests, borrower, location, or time dierences do not drive

the relationship between search and interest rates. Increased search has a U-shaped, or even monotically increasing

relationship with interest rates. Furthermore, these results persist if we estimate equation (2) for dierent borrower




                                                                   13
creditworthiness (FICO) levels, as shown in Panels B through D of Figure 4. If anything, the results are even more

striking than the baseline. As in Figure 3, the low and medium FICO borrowers who search more pay the highest

rates. We repeat the test in other sub-populations, which have been used to proxy for consumer sophistication or

creditworthiness: race, education, and income. For brevity, we estimate a quadratic relationship between search and

interest rates, rather than a fully non-parametric relationship, and present the results in Table 4. Frequent-searchers

pay higher rates than borrowers who search only once, controlling for dierences across borrowers, across every sub-

population. This is true for low, middle and highly educated populations, for black, white, and Hispanic borrowers,

as well as for low, middle, and high income borrowers.

   Finally, Appendix C tests robustness of these patterns by estimating equation (2) across a number of subsamples.

In particular, Appendix Figure A6 estimates equation 2 controlling for a richer set of covariates, namely the set of

loan-level price adjustment (LLPA) factors used by Fannie Mae. In each case, we observe a U-shaped or positive

relationship between search and interest rates in the data. Overall, the predictions from the standard search models,

that more search is correlated with lower mortgage rates is rejected. We therefore develop a theory, which is able to

generate these patterns.




5 Model
We now extend the standard sequential search model by adding an application approval process, which mimics the

institutional features of the mortgage market described in Section 2.     The model serves three primary purposes.

First, with this narrow modication, the model can explain patterns of search, price, mortgage approvals, and loan

performance in the data. It can explain the observed U-shaped or positive relationship between search and realized

prices in the mortgage market. It also yields new testable predictions, which we test and verify in section 6. Second,

it permits a deeper understanding of search in markets of asymmetric information and approvals, illustrating why

adverse selection can be endemic in these markets even if preferences point to advantageous selection. Third, the

model is both tractable and realistic enough to be estimated, and allows us to conduct policy-relevant counterfactual

analyses in Section 8, which allow us to measure the value of screening borrowers to the intermediation sector, and

evaluate the introduction of new screening technologies.

   Our model is an extension of the standard sequential search model proposed by Carlson and McAfee (1983)

and McCall (1970).    Indeed, if all applications are accepted, the model nests this canonical model of sequential

search. As in standard models, lenders post interest rates for mortgages, and borrowers search for these mortgages

sequentially, incurring a constant search cost for each sampled rate.    Borrowers can choose to apply for the rate

draw if it is suitably attractive, or forgo the rate and continue searching by paying her search cost. However, unlike

standard search models, applications are subject to approval by the lender. Upon receiving a mortgage application,

lenders can perform an in-depth credit check to obtain imperfect, but informative information on the borrower's

creditworthiness. The credit check is valuable, because creditworthiness is private information of the borrower, and

aects the lender's prots. The lender can either approve a mortgage, or reject the application. If the application is




                                                           14
rejected, the borrower must search for another lender.

    The correlation of creditworthiness (private information) and willingness to pay for a loan can be positive or

negative, which is traditionally linked to either adverse or advantageous selection.                              As we show, adverse selection

arises in equilibrium, but it is driven by the approval process, not the standard correlation between credit quality

and willingness to pay.




5.1 Setting
5.1.1       Borrowers


Consumers are indexed by                iz   and have two characteristics: search cost           ci  G (c),    and probability of repaying a loan

in full    xz  {xh , xl },   with       P r (xz = xh ) = .    Borrowers with high repayment ability (creditworthiness), are more

likely to repay a loan than borrowers with low repayment ability:                          xh > xl .13     Creditworthiness and search costs are

i.i.d   across consumers and types.
                                   14 A consumer                iz 's   utility from obtaining a mortgage from lender             j   at rate   rj   is:



                                                                 uij = -rj + xz .


Consumers prefer loans with lower interest rates. Further, to illustrate that standard adverse/advantageous selection

does not drive our results, we allow consumers with dierent creditworthiness to have dierent preferences over

obtaining a mortgage. If            <0         then less creditworthy borrowers are more willing to take up mortgages, similar to

standard adverse selection models. Conversely, if                 >0          then more creditworthy borrowers are more willing to take

up a mortgage, a feature generally attributed to advantageous selection models. As we will soon see, this parameter

has no bearing on consumer search, and would only aect mortgage take-up on the extensive margin. We do not

incorporate default into consumer's utility in the model: if worse consumers sort to higher interest rates, it is not

because they nd the option to default more valuable.
                                                                         15



5.1.2       Lenders and Mortgage Approval


Lenders post mortgage interest rates.                  Lenders choose from a menu of                   K   discrete potential rates to oer,          rk 
{r1 , . . . , rK }.16   Lender   j 's   expected prot on a loan to type            z   at rate   k   is:



                                                                         ~z - m,
                                                                zjk = rk x




   13 We provide some empirical evidence that two types are sucient in capturing most of the richness in                the data in Appendix B
   14 The i.i.d. assumption is useful to cleanly separate the eect of search costs from creditworthiness.
   15 Indeed, there is no large dierence in the relationship between search and interest rates for borrowers            who default on their loans ex
post compared with those who do not: re-estimating equation Equation 1 for these two populations yields similar estimates of                    s .   See
Appendix Figure A2.
   16 We   transform the problem of choosing an oered rate may into a discrete choice problem. This assumption generates equilibrium
existence in the presence of adverse selection, which can otherwise be problematic. Given that most mortgage rates (97.4% of our data)
are oered in discrete 1/8pp increments this is also a reasonable approximation of the institutional environment.




                                                                              15
in which       x
               ~z   denotes the expected repayment from a $1 loan to a borrower with repayment ability                                       xz .   Each lender

faces a common expected cost                    m,   which comprises the cost of capital, as well as regulatory and administrative costs.

      We depart from the standard sequential search model by assuming that the potential borrower observes her

creditworthiness,           xz ,   but the lender does not. Before obtaining a mortgage, the borrower is subject to an application

approval process.             The lender carries out an in-depth check of applicants' creditworthiness, which generates an

informative, but imperfect, signal                   si  {sh , sl }.        If the borrower is of repayment ability         xz ,   the probability that she

is revealed as a high type is             pz = P r (sh |xz ) .         The in-depth review is informative           ph  pl ,   so high repayment ability

borrowers are more likely to be revealed as such. We assume that applications generating signal                                             sh   (indicating the

borrower is high type) are approved, while those generating                                sl   are rejected. We nest the benchmark model without

approvals by assuming screening is uninformative,                             ph = pl = p.


5.2 Consumer search (Demand)
In this section we analyze how consumers search for mortgages given the distribution of rates, and the approval

process used by the lenders. Let                 H (~
                                                    r)   be the perceived distribution of rates oered in the market. Consumers know

the distribution of oered rates                  H (~
                                                    r)   in the market, but do not know which lenders oer each particular rate. As a

result, consumers must search for the lowest rates in the market. Search occurs sequentially. Each period, borrower

i   of type    z    pays search cost       ci    and draws a rate             r   from the oered rate distribution         H (·).       As is standard, draws

are   i.i.d.   with replacement. A borrower decides whether to accept the rate oer                                   r   and apply for the mortgage, or

reject the oer and continue searching next period. If she applies, her application is approved with probability                                              pz
and she drops out of the market. If, however, her application is rejected, or she chooses not to apply for the loan,

she searches again.
                             17

      To characterize optimal search behavior, consider a consumer of type                                 iz   who was oered a mortgage with a rate

r.   She will keep searching as long as her cost                      ci   of searching is smaller than the expected gain of searching once more:


                                                              r
                                            ci                    P r (sh |xz )((-r
                                                                                  ~ + xz ) - (-r + xz ))dH (~
                                                                                                            r)
                                                          r
                                                                  pr. approval          better mortgage
                                                                   r
                                            ci        pz              (r - r
                                                                           ~) dH (~
                                                                                  r)
                                                                  r


      where    r    is the lowest rate oered in the market. The expected gain has two components. The rst is the potential

gain from nding a lower rate mortgage,                        (r - r
                                                                   ~).       The second is the probability the borrower will be approved for the

mortgage once she nds it,                pz .   If borrowers are always approved                 pz = 1,   then this condition reduces to the standard

search problem of Carlson and McAfee (1983).                                 The fact that they may be rejected for a mortgage in the future

increases the borrower's incentive to accept a more expensive mortgage.

                       
      Denote by       riz   the highest rate that the borrower with search cost                      ci   and repayment type        z   would accept. At this


     17 Borrowers    cannot recall previously observed oered rates. Because borrowers employ a reservation price strategy, observed rates are
irrelevant unless they were on rejected applications. Therefore, this assumption is equivalent to assuming that lenders will not be willing
to approve a rejected borrower's future applications.




                                                                                      16
rate, the borrower is indierent between searching further and accepting the mortgage:


                                                                                
                                                                               riz
                                                                                       
                                                               ci = pz               (riz -r
                                                                                           ~) dH (~
                                                                                                  r)                                                     (3)
                                                                          r

                                                                                                                                                
The borrower will optimally apply for any mortgage oered to her with interest rate less than or equal to                                       riz , and will

                                           
reject any mortgage oer above             riz .   Interestingly, the choice of which mortgages to accept is independent of whether

there is underlying adverse or advantageous selection in the mortgage market, as                                           xz   drops out of the borrower's

decision.
         18

    As is standard in models of sequential search, reservation rates are an increasing function of search costs. From

the perspective of an individual borrower, the approval process exacerbates search costs.                                            We can see this more

formally by re-writing eq. (3):


                                                                               
                                                                              riz
                                                                   ci                 
                                                                      =             (riz - r) dH (r)                                                     (4)
                                                                   pz     r

The search condition may therefore be rewritten into a form isomorphic to the standard search problem, in which

                                                               ci
the borrower searches with a search cost of
                                                               pz . This result also implies that without the knowledge of the approval

process, one cannot infer the borrowers' search cost distribution from the price distribution alone.



5.2.1       Approval Process Induced Adverse Selection


In search markets, borrowers sort to lenders who oer dierent prices. The informative approval process leads to

sorting on creditworthiness, resulting in adverse selection. Formally, consider two borrowers with the same search

costs, but dierent creditworthiness. Then, from equation (3), we have:


                                                                                                 
                                                      rih                                       ril
                                                                                                        
                                           ph               (rih   - r) dH (r) = pl                   (ril - r) dH (r) .
                                                  r                                         r

                                  
ph > pl     implies that   rih < ril .   That is, less creditworthy borrowers are willing to accept higher mortgage rates than

more creditworthy borrowers with the same search cost. For adverse selection to occur, the approval process must be

informative. Despite underlying asymmetric information, if rejection rates are the same for both types of borrowers,

pl = ph ,     we revert to a model with no adverse selection.                             Adverse selection arises even if high quality borrowers

value mortgages more, i.e. if             > 0.     A positive correlation of creditworthiness and willingness to pay for a loan is

traditionally linked to advantageous selection. In our model, adverse selection arises in equilibrium, but it is driven

by the approval process, not the standard correlation between credit quality and willingness to pay.

    To better illustrate the adverse selection problem, we present a numerical example. Figure 5A shows the distri-

bution in reservation interest rates for high and low creditworthy types with the same normally-distributed search


  18 Note    that all borrowers will continue to search until a mortgage is originated. This arises due to the implicit assumption that all
borrowers nd it worthwhile to take a mortgage. If borrowers instead had some outside option u to not receiving a mortgage, dierent
values of   may correlate with dierent realized shares of high and low types in the population - in essence  may aect the equilibrium
value of    or the total market size. This paper's focus is on the search behavior of borrowers, taking as given the composition of borrowers
in the market. As a result, we abstract from this consideration.




                                                                                     17
cost distribution. Creditworthy types are less willing to accept higher rates. If they nd an expensive mortgage, they

keep searching. Less creditworthy borrowers, on the other hand, will apply for expensive mortgages, understanding

that the chances of mortgage approval are low in the future. Figure 5B shows how creditworthiness of the pool of

borrowers changes as oered rates increase.                Low interest rate mortgages attract borrowers of both high and low

repayment ability. The market for expensive mortgages, on the other hand, is predominantly occupied by low type

borrowers with high reservation rates. Dierences in approval rates across types therefore lead to adverse selection.




5.3 Interest rate setting (Supply)
Lenders only accept borrowers who apply for their loan and whose credit check generates a positive signal                                      sh .   Because

borrowers sort, setting the interest rate aects both the probability of repayment on their pool of mortgages, and

the expected quantity of mortgages the lender will underwrite,                           S (qh (rj ) + (1 - )ql (rj )),         where   S   is the total size

of the market and        qz (r)   is the share of the type       z   market a bank charging a rate                   r   can expect. We assume that

screening is valuable, which is consistent with observing rejected applications in the mortgage market. The expected

prots from charging an interest rate            r   are thus:
                                                                19



                                   E[(r|m)] = S [qh (r) (r · x
                                                             ~h - m) + (1 - )ql (r) (r · x
                                                                                         ~l - m)]


    where    qz (r)   represents the market share of type            z   individuals that a bank oering rate                r   captures. Letting      fz (r )
be the density of reservation interest rates for borrowers of type                         z,   Appendix D.2 shows that


                                                                                 
                                                                                      fz (r ) 
                                                           qz (r) =                          dr                                                           (5)
                                                                             r        H (r )

    Intuitively, undirected search implies that a lender charging a rate                          r   obtains a fraction    1/H (r )    of the market for

borrowers with reservation rate         r ,   and can capture the mass of individuals with reservation rates above                              r.Note   that

since the function mapping oered interest rates to market shares depends on the distribution of reservation rates in

the market, the distribution of search costs for participants in the market will inuence banks' rate setting decision

and expected prots. In essence, search costs give banks market power. This force is present in many models with

search, such as the one employed by Salz (2017) to study the eects of intermediaries in the market for New York

City's trade waste.

    Each lender faces an additional idiosyncratic prot shock to charging specic rates                                       j,k ,   which are i.i.d.     and

distributed according to a Type 1 Extreme Value (T1EV) distribution with scale factor  .
                                                                                        20 These                                              j,k   represent

idiosyncratic lender-rate specic shocks, such as random administrative costs, the preferences of bank managers, or

dierences in regulatory environments. Lender               k     thus oers rate            rk   to maximize its prots:


  19 The   prot function is specied in terms of percentage points of interest. In our empirical application, we residualize observed interest
rates against borrower characteristics, so that the interest rate        r   may take on positive or negative values. One may thus interpret             j   as
the excess return, in percentage points, that a lender may earn if it charges a rate              r   percentage points above the average realized rate for
an observably equivalent borrower in the market.
  20 These   assumptions come into play when computing counterfactuals, and do not play a role in the qualitative predictions of the
model.




                                                                                 18
                                                                 max           E[(rk |m)] + j,k
                                                            rk {r1 ,...,rK }

    Since    j,k   is i.i.d. Type 1 Extreme Value distributed with variance                        ,   the probability that rate     rk   maximizes the

lender's prot is:



                                                                                     exp (E[(rk |m)]/ )
                                              P r{j   choose   rk |m,  } =           K
                                                                                                                                                      (6)

                                                                                                 ~ |m)]/
                                                                                         exp E[(rk
                                                                                  ~ =1
                                                                                  k

    The rate setting decision outlined above will generate equilibrium price dispersion so long as                                           is non-zero:

the equilibrium exists despite adverse selection. Any dierence in rms' cost base or regulatory environment will

translate into a non-degenerate distribution of realized mortgage rates. This arises because consumer search frictions

prevent the lowest-priced bank from capturing the entire market, in essence giving market power to banks.

    In order to gain intuition for banks' decision, consider the impact that a unilateral small increase in the oered

rate   r   would have on expected prots, ignoring that the rate space is in fact discrete. The derivative of the expected

prot function is:


                          dE[(r|m)]                            q (r)                                     xk |r, sh ]
                                                                                                      E [~
                                                xk |r, sh ]) +
                                    = q (r) (E [~                         xk |r, sh ] - m) + q (r) r
                                                                     (rE [~
                             dr                                r                                          r
                                                  margin gain
                                                                                market share loss                 borrower pool
                                               marginal benef it
                                                                                                  marginal cost


    The marginal benet of raising the mortgage rate is a higher prot on loans to existing borrowers. The marginal
                                                                                                                   q (r )
cost of raising prices has two components. First, the lender loses some market share
                                                                                                                   r         0,   because the marginal

borrowers now choose to keep searching instead of accepting the mortgage. This downward-sloping residual demand

curve highlights banks' market power in this setting (see Appendix D.2).                                  The prots lost on each borrower are

     xk |r, sh ] - m)  0.
(rE [~                             The second cost of increasing mortgage rates is that a higher interest rate attracts a weakly
                                         xk |r,sh ]
                                      E [~
worse pool of borrowers,
                                          r            0.     The borrower pool for rms with high rates is worse because more

creditworthy borrowers have lower reservation rates, and are therefore less likely to accept a mortgage when the

price increases. This last component changes lenders' pricing incentives relative to a standard search model. In the

benchmark model the search behavior and reservation rates are independent of borrowers' creditworthiness, which
                      xk |r,sh ]
                   E [~
implies that
                       r           = 0.   Therefore, approvals change the lenders' pricing incentives on the margin by introducing

adverse selection, which decreases incentives to raise mortgage rates on the margin.




5.4 Equilibrium
We seek pure strategy Nash equilibria.                  Equilibrium is dened to be an oered rate distribution                          H (r)   and a set

                                                                                         
of reservation rate strategies for high and low types                          {rh (c), rl (c)}   such that, given a set of model parameters

{, ph , pl , xh , xl ,  , m},       and a distribution of search costs           G(c),



                                                                                19
   1.   H (r)   is the distribution of optimally oered rates, chosen to maximize lender prots as in equation 6.


   2. The reservation rate strategies satisfy equation 3.


   3. Market shares of high and low types,              qh (r)   and    ql (r),   are calculated according to equation 5 and integrate to

        one; i.e.

                                                                qz (r)dH (r) = 1          z  l, h


It is important to note at this stage that the market share functions will not be degenerate. The presence of search

frictions permits substantial price dispersion in equilibrium. A detailed description of our approach to computing

equilibria is provided in Appendix section E.2.




5.5 Model predictions
This section presents several new predictions of our model, which dierentiate it from a benchmark sequential search

model in which all mortgages are approved. We test these predictions in Section 6.



5.5.1      Benchmark: All mortgages are approved


As the probability of approval for both types goes to one, the model reverts to a standard search model without the

approval process.
                      21 We show that this benchmark model's predictions are inconsistent with the relationship between

search and rates documented in Section 4.3.                    In this model, dierences in creditworthiness are still present (i.e.

xh = xl ),   and remain private information. Nevertheless, creditworthiness does not aect borrowers' search behavior:

search is based solely on search costs. Substituting               pz = 1      into equation 3 reduces the optimal search strategy to:


                                                                       
                                                                      riz
                                                                              
                                                         ci =               (riz - r) dH (r)
                                                                  r


Since high and low type individuals draw their search costs from the same distribution                         G(c),   this condition implies

that both high and low type individuals have the same reservation rate distribution. As a result, there is no adverse

selection despite asymmetric information  the fraction of borrowers who are high type at any particular interest

rate is xed at      ,   the population share of high type borrowers.

   The optimal reservation rate policy immediately makes clear that the average rate borrowers pay declines with

search in equilibrium, which is the opposite of the fact we document in Section 4.3. Intuitively, the probability of an

                                                                                                                                      
additional search is given by the probability that the borrower draws a rate higher than her reservation rate                        riz ,   and

                                                                                                 
is thus only aected by her reservation rate:             P r (Search again) = 1 - H            (riz ) . Then the probability that a borrower
with a reservation rate       r   searches more than       s   times is:



                                                                                                  s
                                                    P r (Siz > s|riz = r ) = (1 - H (r ))


  21 In   fact, it is sucient that   pl = ph = p.


                                                                             20
Low search cost (nancially savvy) customers, have lower reservation rates,                   r ,   and are therefore more likely to

search. Because they have lower reservation rates, their average interest rate on accepted mortgages is lower. This

induces a negative relationship between search and average interest rates, as illustrated in Appendix Figure A3 for

a simulated sample of borrowers. Overall, the relationship between average rates and search in the data, as shown

in Section 4, rejects this prediction.



5.5.2      Informative Approval Process: Do borrowers who search more obtain cheaper mortgages?


Here we illustrate that the introduction of informative approvals can generate the non-monotonic relationship between

search and transacted prices that we document in Section 4.3. The possibility of application rejection creates two

reasons for a borrowers to continue to search. First, there exists the standard reason for continued search: a borrower

                                                                                        
might draw a mortgage with an interest rate above their reservation rate,          r > riz ,       and so choose not to apply for the

                                                                                   
mortgage. Alternatively, the borrower might discover a mortgage with           r  riz        for which they apply, only to have her

application declined. The total probability that a borrower searches again is thus:



                                                                                   
                               P r (Search again) = 1 - P r (r < riz ) + P r (r < riz )(1 - pz )
                                                          not apply              apply         rejected

                                                               
                                                   =1-H      (riz ) pz .


Therefore, the probability that a borrower with a reservation rate         r   searches more than         s   times is:



                                                                                         s
                                          P r (Siz > s|riz = r ) = (1 - pz H (r ))


The two forces work in opposite directions. Less creditworthy borrowers are more willing to accept higher rates 

    
H (riz )   is higher  which pushes them to search less. However, less creditworthy borrowers are also more likely have

their application rejected if they nd a mortgage with a low enough rate, urging more search. If the latter force is

strong enough, high type borrowers disappear from the population of searchers faster than low type borrowers. To

illustrate this, we simulate a search process with highly informative screening, and plot the results in Figure 5. Panel

C presents the share of high types left in the population at each level of search. With a strong screening technology,

only low type individuals remain searching at the highest levels of search, while high type individuals drop out of

the sample as they nd acceptable mortgages.

    As a result, borrowers' average reservation rate increases with the number of searches. Indeed, Figure 5D shows

a positive relationship between search and realized interest rates for this simulated sample, consistent with the

empirical fact documented in Section 4.3. A search model with informative applications can therefore explain the

seemingly puzzling fact that borrowers, who search more, pay higher rates on average. It is worth emphasizing that

rejections alone are not sucient to explain this fact. If all borrowers are accepted with equal probability,                ph = pl ,
the model's predictions equal that of a model without approvals, only with rescaled search costs.




                                                              21
5.5.3     Default and Approvals


Our model predicts a specic type of borrower sorting in equilibrium.                  As the number of searches increases, the

creditworthiness of the borrower pool declines, as shown in Figure 5C. Dening                  ~ (s)
                                                                                                        to be the share of high type

borrowers among loans realized after      s   inquiries, the model implies that the average default rate of borrowers with

s   inquiries should be   ~ (s)(1 - xh ) + 1 - ~ (s) (1 - xl ).   Since   ~ (s)   is declining in   s   and   xh > x l ,   borrowers with

a large number of inquiries should be less likely to repay the lender ex post. Figure 5E illustrates the relationship

between inquiries and repayment behavior for our simulated set of borrowers in our scenario with highly informative

screening.

     Similarly, the probability that a loan application is accepted for a borrower with       s searches as ~ (s)ph + 1 - ~ (s) pl .

Since the type of a borrower who applies for a mortgage after many searches is of lower average quality, those with

high inquiry counts are more likely to be rejected upon the in-depth review. As a result, lenders are more likely to

reject borrowers who search more, even if they cannot observe the number of searches. Figure 5F shows this decreas-

ing relationship between application approval probability and inquiry counts for our simulated data. Note that in

the baseline model, in which approvals are not informative, the default and approval probabilities are independent

of the number of inquiries.



5.5.4     Summary


The equilibrium of our augmented search model yields the following testable predictions:


    1. A non-degenerate distribution of borrower search


    2. Equilibrium price dispersion in realized interest rates


    3. A possibly non-monotone or non-decreasing relationship between realized interest rates and search


    4. A positive relationship between search and default probability


    5. A negative relationship between search and application approval probability


    6. Placebo: Groups that are highly unlikely to have their application rejected (as in the benchmark model) will

        have a monotonically decreasing relationship between search and realized interest rates


Predictions 1 and 2 are common to search models, and are consistent with the data, as shown in Section 4. Predictions

3-5 distinguish the model with informative screening from a benchmark model without approvals. As we show in

Section 4.3, the relationship between search and prices (prediction 3) is consistent with our model. We now test our

model by verifying that predictions 4 through 6 are also observed in the data.




                                                               22
6 Additional Empirical Evidence
6.1 Loan Performance and Search
Our model predicts that less creditworthy borrowers search more in equilibrium, leading to positive relationship

between search and ex-post default rates. Figure 6 plots the annualized default rate against the number of inquiries

on record for all borrowers in our sample.
                                                           22 Panel A shows the annualized rate at which borrowers default, while

Panel B shows the rate at which borrowers become at least 90 days delinquent on their mortgage. Both panels show

that more frequent searchers are ex-post less creditworthy.

    High-inquiry borrowers may simply be of lower credit quality on dimensions observable to the lender. Indeed,

Figure 2C and Table 3 show that low FICO borrowers do indeed search more. In the model, borrowers who search

more will be more likely to default even conditional on observables. To test this, we must take into account the fact

that we only observe default behavior as of January 2015. We assume that there is a constant proportional hazard

of default for all loans. Let      diT m       be the probability that loan          i    originated           T   years before January 2015 in market     m
will default in year    t   having survived through year               t - 1:     that is,     ditm       is the annualized hazard rate of loan       i.   We

assume that this hazard rate has logistic form, that is:



                                                 exp  +           s2   s 1{si = s} + µT + µm + Xi + itm
                                ditm () =                                                                                                                  (7)
                                               1 + exp  +           s2   s 1{si = s} + µT + µm + Xi + itm

    for    = (µm , µT , , s , ).     Given this assumption, the probability that we observe that the loan has defaulted as

of January 2015 is equal to one minus the probability of surviving through                                         T   years. From this we can write down

the following likelihood of observing a loan's default behavior:


                                                                              T
                                                     1 - (1 - diT m ())                       if   i   defaults by Jan 2015
                         l(DefaultiT m |) =                                                                                                                (8)
                                                                          T
                                                          (1 - diT m ())             if   i   does not default by Jan 2015


    We estimate the parameters                 through maximum likelihood, clustering standard errors at the origination quarter

level. We dene default to include both defaults and 90 day delinquency on their mortgage payments as of January

2015, scaled by 100 for legibility. The independent variable of interest is the amount of search the borrower undertook

before taking up a mortgage,         si .   The coecients of interest              s     measure the dierence in log odds ratio of default for

borrowers who search        s   times compared with those who search just once. As with our interest rate regressions, we

control for observable characteristics             Xi ,   and include a time xed eect                      µt      and location xed eect   µm .   As before,

these xed eects absorb any aggregate uctuations, such as changes in the regulatory environment.

    We plot the coecients of interest,                    s ,   in Panel C of Figure 6.                   Consistent with our predictions, borrowers

who search more are more likely to default or become delinquent on their loans, even conditional on observable



   22 Our   loan performance data is measured as of the rst quarter of 2015.                       To generate annualized rates, we deate the percent of
mortgages which are in a state of default in January 2015 by an appropriate factor assuming a constant hazard rate and that all loans
are originated at the average origination date. For instance, if        y%   of all loans default by January 2015 and the average loan is originated
   years before we observe loan performance, the annualized default rate             ~ would
                                                                                     d                 solve                ~) .
                                                                                                               1 - y = (1 - d


                                                                              23
characteristics.     The increase in log odds ratio for a borrower who searches 5 times relative to a borrower with

1 inquiry is 0.4.     This translates into a borrower with 5 inquiries being approximately                  e0.4 - 1 =49%     more likely

to default on their mortgage in a given year than is a borrower with 1 inquiry, conditional on observables.                           This

positive relationship between search and default probabilities is highly robust. We re-estimate the specication in

sub-populations of low, middle and high FICO borrowers, low, middle and highly educated populations, for black,

white, and Hispanic borrowers, as well as for low, middle, and high income borrowers (Panels D-F of Figure 6).

Across all sub-samples, the data supports our model's prediction that more frequent searchers are on average less

creditworthy than infrequent searchers, even conditional on observable characteristics.




6.2 Search and Approvals
Central to our model's predictions is the borrower approval process. The model predicts that the borrower pool of

frequent searchers contains more low creditworthy types, who are more likely to be rejected following an in-depth

credit check. Using our application-level dataset, we are uniquely able to test this implication of our model.
                                                                                                                                 23

    Figure 7A illustrates the strong negative correlation between search and the probability of mortgage approval.

This result persists in specic subsamples of our population: Figure 7A is replicated for three groups of borrower

FICO scores, and across three origination time periods in Figures 7B and 7C, respectively. To illustrate that the

pattern in 7 is robust, we estimate the following linear regression:




                                       aitm =  +          s 1{si = s} + µt + µm + X + itm                                              (9)
                                                     s2

in which   i   indexes the borrower who takes up a mortgage in market                m   at time   t.   The dependent variable     aitm   is

a dummy variable taking the value 100, if the application was accepted, and 0 otherwise. Again, the coecients of

interest   s   measure the dierence in acceptance probability for a borrower with             s searches, compared with a borrower
with just one inquiry on their credit report.           As above, we include extensive controls            Xi ,   as well as location and

time xed eects. The coecients of interest are presented in Figure 8. Even controlling for observable loan and

borrower characteristics, borrowers who search more are less likely to have their application accepted. This pattern

holds across our three borrower FICO score buckets, as shown in Figure 8. The data therefore support the model's

prediction that borrowers who search more more are less likely approved for mortgages, conditional on observables.

    In summary, borrowers who search more are of lower average quality in two separate datasets and along two

dimensions  default and application acceptance probability. The benchmark search model, in which borrowers dier

only in their search cost, would predict no relationship between search and average borrower creditworthiness. This

model can, therefore, neither generate the observed positive relationship between search and application rejection

probability, nor the robust positive relationship between search and delinquency. What's more, the benchmark model

implies that more frequent searchers pay lower interest rates on average, which is clearly rejected by the data. By

contrast, our tractable model is able to generate these observed patterns in the data, both in the sample of granted

  23 Because   we measure inquiries within 45 days of a mortgage application and inquiries reach a borrower's credit report with a lag, the
borrower's search history is unlikely to be observed by the lender.




                                                                      24
mortgage and among mortgage applications. We show that our model predictions hold robustly in the data, across

a score of measures and subsamples.




6.3 Placebo: Borrowers who are never rejected
Our model's predictions are consistent with the the data on mortgage pricing, default, and approvals. One potential

alternative explanation is that creditworthiness is observable to the lender but not the researcher, and that borrowers

who search a lot are of lower creditworthiness.           We think this is unlikely, since our dataset comes from lenders.

Moreover, this alternative explanation does not explain why rejection rates rise with search: if creditworthiness is

priced but observable, then there is no reason to reject borrowers. Nevertheless, to reject this alternative, we test

another prediction from our model.

   Absent the dierential possibility of application rejection, our model collapses to the standard sequential search

model: the borrowers who search more will, on average, borrow at lower rates. Therefore, for any subset of borrowers

who do not expect to be rejected, the relationship between average rates paid and search should be negative. If, on

the other hand, search is a proxy for creditworthiness observed by the lender, then we should still nd a non-negative

relationship, as we do for the whole sample. Intuitively, this subsample is a placebo for our proposed mechanism.

   We select borrowers whose mortgage applications are rejected very rarely. We use all borrower, mortgage, location,

and time characteristics to predict the probability that an application is accepted by estimating a logistic regression.

Borrowers are said to be rarely-rejected if their predicted approval probability is greater than 97.5%. The average

appoval rate of this sample is 98.5%. Notably, this rate is much higher than the average approval rate of 82.2% or

89.7% for high (about 720) FICO score borrowers.
                                                           24

   Panels A and B of Figure 9 show that, despite the absence of rejections, these borrowers search and face a large

variation in realized mortgage rates. Indeed the search distribution for rarely-rejected borrowers is similar to that of

the full population of borrowers. However the nature of this search behavior is radically dierent to that found in the

full sample of borrowers. We plot the average mortgage origination rate of rarely rejected borrowers across searches in

Figure 9C. Consistent with the model and rejecting the alternative, rarely-rejected borrowers who search more obtain

mortgages with lower origination rates. This result stands in stark contrast to the positive relationship between search

and mortgage rates we nd for the whole population of mortgage borrowers in Figure 3. To ensure that the negative

relation between search and origination rates for rarely rejected borrowers is robust, we next condition on observables

by estimating regression equation 1 on this subsample. As seen in Figure 9D, rarely-rejected borrowers continue to

behave as predicted by standard models of search after conditioning on observables, as our model replicates if              ph = pl .
These results suggest that the relationship between search, mortgage pricing, defaults, and approvals we observe is

indeed driven by the informative approval process rather than some other unobservable borrower characteristic.




  24 In   Appendix Figure A7 we show our results are robust to an alternative subsample of borrowers with FICO scores above 800, CLTV
ratio below 60%, and a backend DTI ratio below 40%, who also attain an average approval rate of   98.5%,


                                                                  25
7 Model Estimation and Counterfactual Analysis
Our model with search and informative approvals captures the qualitative relationship between search, mortgage

rates, defaults, and approvals, which are inconsistent with standard search models.                  The model is rich enough to

capture these patterns and is computationally tractable enough to be estimated. Estimating the model allows us

to quantify the size of search costs, the underlying asymmetric information, and the value of lenders' screening

technology.   The estimates show the extent to which screening alters the search incentives of dierent types of

borrowers, and the severity of the resulting adverse selection.          Last, we use our estimates to study several policy

relevant counterfactuals.




7.1 Estimation
The presence of multiple types presents a challenge for traditional methods of identication in search models. Because

the econometrician does not directly observe market shares for high and low types separately, one is unable to recover

the distribution of search costs, and approval probabilities directly from market shares and realized loan rates as in

e.g. Hortaçsu and Syverson (2004). However, all parameters of the model may be identied using data on both loans

and applications.

   Intuitively, the dierence between the distribution of search in the application and realized loan datasets identies

the application approval parameters       pz .   If, for instance, all applications were approved, there would be no dierence

between these two search distributions. The extent to which the search distribution amongst realized loan is a parallel

shift of the distribution in the application data informs the level of the approval parameters, while the dierential

variance and skewness of these distributions informs the gap between            ph   and   pl .   The relationship between default

and both search and interest rates helps pin down the share of high types            ,   and the default parameters           xz .   Finally,

the distribution of realized interest rates in the market, and the relationship between search and these interest rates

informs the oered rate distribution          r), as well as the reservation rate distributions Fz (r ), which may be inverted
                                          H (~
to recover the distribution of search costs        G(c).   Finally, the estimated equilibrium oered rate distribution                  H (~
                                                                                                                                          r)
may be inverted using banks' optimal rate setting behavior to recover the banks' cost of loan origination                      m     and the

variance of the idiosyncratic prot shocks          .
   We estimate the model using maximum likelihood using our two datasets. The rst dataset contains information

on mortgage applications and the distribution of inquiry counts conditional on application. The second dataset is at

the loan-level, and reports the origination interest rate, loan performance, and inquiry count at the time of application.

That is, we observe the joint distribution of search, rates, and default,      (Si , Ri , Di ),   as well as a number of observable

loan and borrower characteristics. To ensure comparability of realized loans in our estimation, we residualize observed

rates against observable characteristics following regression equation 2. The identication problem may be stated as

follows: given the distribution of   Si   conditional on application, and the joint distribution of         (Si , Ri , Di )   conditional

on application approval, we must uniquely recover the set of model primitives. On the consumer side, we have to

recover the search cost distribution   G(c), the share of creditworthy types in the population, , and the two repayment



                                                                 26
ability parameters,      {xh, xl }.   On the lender side, we're interested in the screening technology,              {ph , pl },   the costs of

making loans      m,   and the variance of the T1EV prot shocks,             .25
    We proceed in two steps. First, we estimate the consumer-side parameters, the screening technology parameters,

and the distribution of oered rates using a maximum likelihood approach. Second, we impose that the maximum

likelihood estimates of       H (~
                                 r)   must align with the rms' choice probabilities.             This suggests a robust approach to

estimating the supply side parameters by minimizing the distance between our maximum likelihood estimates of

H (~
   r)   and the choice probabilities as given by equation 6. We describe the construction of likelihood functions and

details of our estimation in Appendix D, and computational details of the estimation in Appendix E.1. In Appendix

B, we test the binary type assumption, and nd little evidence for the presence of a third type.




7.2 Results
Data Fit: Despite its simplicity, the estimated model matches observed price dispersion and distribution of searches

(Figure 10, Panels A and B). The model replicates an increasing relationship between interest rates and search, and

search and default documented in sections 4 and 6 (Figure 10, Panels C and D).
                                                                                                  26

    Screening Technology and Adverse Selection:                        Our maximum likelihood estimates are reported in Table

5. Our estimates suggest that most potential borrowers, 73%, are of low type. Assuming a constant default hazard

on a 30 year mortgage, the annualized default rate of low type borrowers is                    1 - 0.411/30 = 2.9%.         In expectation,

low type borrowers repay 66 cents of principal on a dollar. The remaining 27% are high types, who repay almost

certainly. Given that lending to a bad type is extremely costly, lenders have high incentives to screen the borrowers.

Our estimates suggest that lenders make few mistakes when screening high types:                     ph   is close to 1, so these borrowers

rarely generate a bad credit signal. That is intuitive, since a bad credit check generally requires the revelation of

bad information. However, the screening process is imperfect:                 pl   of 19% suggests that in 19% of cases lenders' do

not uncover the bad information on low types.

    The dierence between           ph   and   pl   of 0.807 suggest that the screening technology is very informative. In other

words, lenders on average do a good job of verifying borrowers' income and employment, house price assessments,

and other checks which are not a part of the standard measures of borrower creditworthiness such as FICO, LTV, and

DTI, and reported income. A simple back of the envelope suggests that the expected loss on a bad borrower applying

is lowered by approximately 81% from               34pp (one minus the expected repayment of a low type) to 19%  34pp = 6.5pp.
Therefore, given the powerful screening technology and the large benet from successful screening, lenders nd it

worthwhile to screen so long as its cost is not prohibitive. As we show in Section 8.4, we estimate that the presence

of this screening technology increases aggregate lender prots by $1.2 billion per year.

    The informative screening technology provides a large force towards adverse selection.                          Low creditworthiness


  25 Our   application data reveals whether each application passed the initial approval process.        This initial approval does not imply
that a loan will eventually be originated, as the lender will often impose additional screening criteria after the initial approval. Thus,
the approved applications in our application data do not represent the population of our loan-level data. Therefore, we do not use this
application approval ag to estimate the model, and instead rely solely on the dierences in the inquiry distribution in the application
and loan datasets.
  26 Recall   that our estimation sample consists of interest rates residualized against borrower and loan characteristics.




                                                                      27
                                                               1
borrowers behave as if their search costs are
                                                              19%     = 5.3   times higher than those of good borrowers (eq. 4), and are

therefore willing to accept higher rates. To quantify the extent of adverse selection, we plot the share of borrowers

at each interest rate who are expected to be high type in Figure 10E. Adverse selection is most serious for interest

rates between the mean and 50bp above the mean. At the mean origination interest rate, the annualized default

probability is 3.2%, and the derivative of this default rate with respect to the interest rate paid is 1.5%.                                 Small

increases in the realized interest rate lead to sizable increases in the default probability at the mean realized rate.
                                                                                                                                                 27

This result implies that the change in the approvals, either due to place based government policies in credit markets

or technological innovation in screening can induce substantial changes in the extent of adverse selection. This, in

turn, will aect the prices at which borrowers across the creditworthiness spectrum can borrow, as well as the search

eort they expend in equilibrium. We examine these changes in approvals policies and technology in their full extent

in Section 8.

      Search Costs:            The mean of the search cost distribution is estimated at 29.7 bp.
                                                                                                              28 Our estimates of average

costs are in line with 27.2bp in Allen et al. (2014), and $29 monthly in Allen et al. (2019) for the Canadian insured

mortgage market. The standard deviation of 11.8bp is smaller than 23bp in Allen et al. (2014). Furthermore, this

search cost is near those estimated in the mutual fund literature, ranging from 11bp-21bp in Hortacsu and Syverson

(2004) to the 39bp search cost for nding an active mutual fund in Roussanov et al. (2017).

      One can translate these search costs into dollar terms using a standard mortgage calculator. Specically, suppose

a loan has origination principal              Y,   a term of      T   months, and a monthly interest rate of      r   (i.e.   one-twelfth of the

annual interest rate). The standard monthly payment for this loan is given by                        y = Y r(1 + r)T / (1 + r)T - 1 .
This implies that the monthly payment on a 30-year xed rate mortgage with principal of $170,000 and interest rate

of 4% per year  the mean mortgage in the data  is $811.61. How much extra would a borrower be willing to pay in

order to avoid searching one more time? If the borrower searches one additional time, she would pay the equivalent

of   c   additional basis points of interest. Now her eective interest rate on the loan is                    400 + c    basis points. At the

mean search cost of 29.7bp, this estimate would translate into a monthly payment increase of $29.45. If a borrower

moves in 5 years and prepays the mortgage, this adds up to almost $1,800. The upper bound cost is $10,603 over

the term of the loan.
                               29

      Lending Cost and Margins:                    We estimate that the cost of making a loan,             m,   to be -1.59%.        Because we

residualize interest rates against observable characteristics before estimating the model, one should interpret                              m   to


     27 The    share of high types at each realized interest rate is analytically computed as

                                                                  P r{z = h  R = r}          qh (r)
                                          P r{z = h|R = r} =                        =
                                                                      P r{R = r}      qh (r) + (1 - )ql (r)
     Likewise, the default probability of borrowers at each rate may be expressed as

                                                                                                   (1 - xh )qh (r) + (1 - xl )(1 - )ql (r)
          P r{Ever   Default   |R = r} = (1 - xh )P r{z = h|R = r} + (1 - xl )P r{z = h|R = r} =
                                                                                                            qh (r) + (1 - )ql (r)

     28 As   search costs are assumed to be distributed log-normally, the mean search cost is calculated as
                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                                e(µc +c /2) ,   while the standard
                                          2               2
deviation may be expressed as            ec   -1   e(2µc +c ) .
     29 This   estimate is an upper bound in that it assumes the mortgage is never renanced or prepaid. In addition, we do not impose any
discounting in the calculation of this upper bound cost.




                                                                              28
be the cost of lending relative to the mean realized interest rate of a borrower with a given set of characteristics. In

other words, the average markup is estimated to be 1.59%. The estimate is of the same order of magnitude as 1.09%

for the insured Canadian mortgage market by Allen et al. (2014). To gauge whether these results are sensible, we can

approximate the lending cost of banks as the rate on 10-year treasury bills, and compare them to the average rate

on 30-year xed rate mortgages. This average monthly spread during our sample period was 1.77%, which is very

close to our estimated markup, despite the fact that we do not use any treasury rate information in our estimation.

   Estimates by subsample: Finally, we estimate our model on a variety of subsamples. The results are presented

in Appendix Figure A8. Estimating on observable subsamples suers from power issues, as some subsamples do not

constitute a large share of GSE loans. Nevertheless, we believe the estimates presented here to be a useful sanity

check for our results. Borrower quality tends to be increasing in FICO score and decreasing in LTV ratio, whether

quality is measured according to the share of high type borrowers         (Panel A), or the repayment rates of low type

borrowers   xl   (Panel C). The repayment rate for high type borrowers is always 1. Search costs tend to be higher and

more variables for low FICO borrowers and high LTV borrowers (Panels E and F), while screening power           ph - pl   is

higher for these low observable quality borrowers. Interestingly, the informativeness of the screening technology is

positively correlated with the cost of misclassication   xh - xl , suggesting that banks perhaps invest more in screening
borrowers with low observable quality.      Meanwhile, the crisis was characterized by lower repayment probabilities,

lower search costs, but also less informative screening. Although these subsample estimations should be considered

merely suggestive given the issues of power, we nd the intuitive nature of these results to be reassuring.




8 Counterfactual Analyses
We now pursue various counterfactual exercises.       We rst consider the impact of tightened lending standards of

the sort seen during the nancial crisis of 2008 and something that is emerging again as COVID-19 pandemic has

spread.   Next, we estimate the impact that informative screening has on the credit market by considering a case

where all mortgage applicants are accepted. We then study the practice of redlining - in which a subset of lenders

selectively reject a large portion of some discriminated population. Such policies are increasingly a cause for concern

by policymakers as they worry about AI and big data based algorithms generating such behavior by new ntech

lenders (Fuster et al.     2020).   We show that such practice is sustainable in a sequential search equilibrium, and

induces borrowers from the discriminated group to pay higher interest rates on average. Finally, we study the impact

of place based policies such as the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA), which direct lenders in particular locations

to increase their application acceptance probabilities for all borrowers by considering a case in which screening is

uninformative. The results of our counterfactual exercises are summarized in Table 6. Notably, in order to compute

robust counterfactual analyses, we must recompute the distribution of equilibrium oered rates in the market. A

detailed description of our approach is provided in Appendix E.2.




                                                            29
8.1 Tighter Lending Standards
Tightening of lending standards has been at the heart of policy debates for many years and has arisen again during the

recent Covid-19 pandemic.
                                 30 The debate has frequently centered around the trade o between providing consumers

access to credit while simultaneously mitigating systematic risks in the banking sector (Dell'Ariccia et al. 2012, Mian

and Su 2009, Bassett et al. 2014). Famously, Ben Bernanke was declined for a mortgage at the peak of the crisis

during his tenure as chairman of the Federal Reserve.
                                                               31 Traditionally, a tightening in credit standards is modeled as a

decline in the supply of lending because of increases in the cost of lending. Our model provides a unique opportunity

to understand the implications of this tighter lending standards along new and crucial dimensions: mortgage pricing

and borrowers' search response in the absence of changes in underlying costs. It allows us to speak to situations,

much like in the aftermath of nancial crisis of 2008 as well as the recent Covid pandemic, where mortgages are

cheap if you can get one. In other words, the costs of mortgages are low, for example, because of non-traditional

monetary policy, but the probability of any individual borrower of obtaining such mortgages declines. As we show,

tightening of lending standards results in higher mortgage rates even if the underlying costs of providing mortgages

do not change.

      In our model, a tightening of lending standards is reected in reductions in the           pz    application approval parameters.

We estimate the change in approval rates during and after the crisis using a logit discrete choice model in which the

dependent variable is an indicator for whether a borrower's application was approved, and controlling for observable

borrower and place characteristics. We do so to adjust for changes in the pool of prospective prime borrowers (Table

2).
   32 Our estimates imply a reduction of the odds ratio of application acceptance by 21.8%, suggesting that mortgage

credit in fact became more dicult to attain for borrowers following the crisis. In the counterfactual, we therefore

mimic the changes in mortgage approvals after the crisis by reducing the odds ratio of application approval for both

high and low types by 21.8%, holding all other parameters xed.

      Even absent changes in the cost of lending or industrial structure, tightening lending standards of the magnitude

seen during the crisis has quantitatively important consequences for the rates paid by borrowers. Figure 11A plots

the distribution of realized rates in our tighter lending standards counterfactual (after re-computing the oered rate

distribution) against the distribution implied by our baseline estimates. The mean rate paid in the market increases

by 25.4bp  on the order of a discrete increment in the Fed's policy rate  and results in $301 of higher payments per

year.
          33 Tightening lending standards also exacerbates the distributional consequences of search costs: the standard

deviation of realized interest rates increases by 9.0bp. Interestingly, tightening credit standards does not aect the

extent of adverse selection in this market. Figure 11F plots the share of high types purchasing a mortgage at each

rate charged in the market. The fraction of high types at each interest rate is not greatly changed, although high

types become a slightly larger share of relatively high rate borrowers.


   30 https://www.mpamag.com/news/fewer-people-qualify-for-mortgage-as-lenders-tighten-credit-in-march-220187.aspx        [Accessed   on
4/22/2020]
   31 https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2014-10-02/you-know-it-s-a-tough-market-when-ben-bernanke-can-t-renance
   32 Specically, we estimate a logit with state and period xed eects for one of three periods: pre-crisis, during the crisis,   and post
crisis.
   33 For   a 30-year xed rate mortgage with principal of $170,000 and interest rate of 4% per year




                                                                    30
   Tightening lending standards increases the level and dispersion of equilibrium rates paid in the market through

the behavior of both borrowers and lenders. The magnitudes of the results are driven by a strategic complementarity

between search and pricing behavior.      Broadly, the more willing borrower are to accept higher mortgage rates,

the more banks can aord to charge higher prices without large reductions in market share. The intuition is the

following. Borrowers will apply for a loan only if the oered rate is no higher than their reservation rate. If application

rejections increase because of tightening lending standards, borrowers will be willing to accept a higher rate; i.e. their

reservation rate will rise, as highlighted by equation (4). Intuitively, they fear that if they are repeatedly rejected

they will have to pay multiple search costs in the future . As a result, the tightened lending standard raises borrowers'

reservation rates, increasing realized rates paid by borrowers, even holding xed the oered distribution of rates.

   In response, banks react to borrowers' willingness to accept high-priced mortgages. When borrowers' reservation

rates increase, banks are able to charge higher prices without sacricing substantial market share. Intuitively, banks'

residual supply curves shift out.   Mathematically, as the reservation rate distribution is shifted to the right, the

market share equation (5) implies that market shares will rise for every given interest rate. This incentivizes a bank

to oer higher interest rates. What's more, there is a strategic complementarity  as the distribution of oered rates

shifts to the right, individual banks can aord to charge higher prices without large reductions in market share. The

equilibrium strategic complementarity between banks' rate setting and borrowers' reservation rates is an important

driver of the magnitude of eects we nd.

   Overall, our model illustrates that tighter lending standards result in increased mortgage rates on the order of a

discrete increment in the Fed's policy rate, as well as larger distributional consequences of search costs. A simple way

to think of this is that tighter lending standards act as though credit supply is more constrained. Policies aecting

credit standards must therefore take into account this direct eect on realized prices in credit markets, in addition

to the standard credit access considerations.




8.2 The Value of Screening Technology
In this counterfactual, we study the overall equilibrium eect of lenders' ability to screen and reject credit applicants.

This counterfactual informs us on three dimensions. First, it highlights the mechanism through which screening and

rejections aect the distribution of the interest rates borrowers eventually pay, the rates posted by lenders, and costly

search in equilibrium. Second, we can observe the winners and losers that emerge from lenders' improved ability to

reject bad credits. This is especially important given the growth of new screening technologies with the rise of big

data and AI in nancial technology. Third, it allows us to compute the value lenders derive from applying screening

and rejecting potential borrowers. To assess the importance of informative screening for realized rates in the market,

we simulate the model under the assumption that lenders cannot screen:       ph = pl = 1.   This assumption also reduces

our model to a benchmark model of search. We present the results in Table 6.

   We nd that reducing lenders' ability to screen mortgages results in a large transfer from lenders to borrowers.

Without the ability to screen and reject borrowers, mortgage rates decline substantially, lowering lender prots to

the benet of borrowers. Borrowers search less, and thus realize lower cost of search. There is also a substantial




                                                           31
redistribution between borrowers, because the distribution of oered and realized rates spreads out. Even though

in equilibrium, all parties adjust simultaneously, the intuition is perhaps best understood by rst focusing on low

creditworthy borrowers, who are most aected by rejection. If lenders do not screen, these borrowers do not fear

                                                                                                         1
rejection, and therefore behave as if their eective search cost declined by a factor of 5
                                                                                                        19% . They are much less

willing to accept a high priced mortgage. So for any distribution of oered rates, the rates that low creditworthy

borrowers pay in equilibrium decline. This change in borrower behavior decreases the protability of oering high

interest rate loans. Moreover, because now high and low creditworthy borrowers are pooled, the adverse selection

problem disappears. Lenders respond by lowering rates, which induces a response by high creditworthy borrowers.

As we discuss above, these two forces act as strategic complements, decreasing the mean                realized   rates in the market

by over 3pp. In other words, there is a large transfer from lenders to borrowers.

    Given the large decrease in rates, it is not surprising that removing lenders' ability to screen leads to a substantial

reduction in prots of 1.892 percentage points on every loan.               This is an enormous loss: given that $479 billion

of mortgages were originated in 2017Q3,
                                                34 the 1.892pp reduction in prots implies that the ability to rejection

applications is worth approximately $36.25 billion (4  0.01892  $479 billion) per year to lenders. This result implies

that lenders' ability to screen is very valuable.
                                                        35   However, the result does not simply arise from screening out

borrowers of low creditworthiness. As our model illustrates, with lender screening, such borrowers behave as though

they have a high cost of searching, leading to a rise in lender prots.

    While average rates decline, the standard deviation of realized rates in the counterfactual increases by approxi-

mately 30%. Alternatively put, screening by lenders compresses the distribution of rates in the market. Therefore,

screening also results in a redistribution between borrowers. As is standard in models with adverse selection and

pooling, low creditworthy types are subsidized by high creditworthy types. Moreover, because the distribution of

oered rates expands without screening, the wedge between low and high search cost types increases as well. Last,

removing screening decreases rejection rates, and thus reduces costly search. The average borrower searches 3.4 times

under our baseline parameters, which, given a mean search cost of 29.7bp, implies a total search expense equal to

approximately 101.2bp.       Imposing that no borrowers are rejected reduces the mean inquiry count to 2.88, a 15%

decrease in search.

    This counterfactual has broad implications. If big data and AI allow lenders to screen and reject borrowers with

more precision, our model implies that such innovation can lead to a large redistribution from borrowers to lenders,

and between borrowers.




8.3 Discrimination and Redlining
Redlining is a practice of discrimination that denies access to products to consumers due to their socioeconomic,

racial, or ethnic makeup. Such policies are increasingly a cause for concern by policymakers as they worry about



  34 https://www.newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/interactives/householdcredit/data/pdf/HHDC_2017Q3.pdf
  35 The large size of this eect, however, should be understood with the caveat that our model does not account   for the entry and exit
decisions of banks. Were there a xed cost of operation, one might expect this large decline in bank prots to be met with a fewer number
of banks operating, which in turn would impact both consumer credit access and the prots of operating banks.




                                                                  32
AI and big data based algorithms generating such behavior by new ntech lenders (Fuster et al.                                2020).   There

are several ways in which discrimination can occur.                  In Becker (1957) redlining occurs on the extensive margin:

some lenders do not lend to minorities. Alternatively, discrimination can take place in prices: minority borrowers are

charged higher rates. Our model is suited for the analysis of a realistic redlining policy, in which a portion of lenders in

the market discriminate by lowering approval rates for borrowers from the discriminated group. Such discrimination

is more subtle, and diers from explicitly denying credit to the discriminated group, or charging dierent prices.

Incorporating realistic institutional features of the market for mortgage nance permits us to study the eect of this

type of redlining on the discriminated group, as well as the consequences for the equilibrium distribution of interest

rates and adverse selection in this market.
                                                        36

    We begin our redlining counterfactual by dening the discriminated group of borrowers, redlining banks, and

the nature of redlining discrimination.             Potential borrowers belong either to the non-discriminated group                  W,   or

the discriminated group         B,   the latter comprising 20% of the pool.           For expositional clarity, these borrowers have

identical search and creditworthiness distributions.
                                                                37 A redlining bank approves the discriminated          B   borrowers with

50% of the probability that the non-discriminated               W   borrowers of the same creditworthiness are accepted: that is,

pB       W
 z = 0.5pz .        Half of lenders in the market redline. The non-redlining banks ignore the              B, W   distinction. Banks can

only discriminate based on acceptance probabilities, and have to oer the same interest rates to the discriminated

and non-discriminated groups. Preventing discrimination on prices focuses the mechanism on one type of redlining,

and is also mostly consistent with the types of redlining and discrimination which have been alleged in this market.
                                                                                                                                           38

Last, we assume that the borrowers are only aware of the proportion of banks redlining, but not                      which   banks redline.

This is consistent with the fact that discriminated borrowers keep applying for loans from banks, which are later

alleged to have discriminated. The results are presented in Figure 12, and summarized in Table 7.

    Despite the absence of discriminatory pricing, on average, discriminated borrowers,                    B,   pay 1.6bp higher rates in

equilibrium than the non-discriminated              W    borrowers with the same search cost and creditworthiness. The intuition

is straightforward. Discriminated borrowers understand that their chances of obtaining a loan approval in the future

are worse, so they are more willing to accept higher mortgage rates,                and thus    sort to banks which oer higher rates.

Interestingly, the rates charged by redlining and non-redlining banks are quite similar. This is because the principal

determinant of a rm's pricing decision is the distribution of reservation rates in the market; conditional on this

distribution, a uniform reduction in acceptance probability does not drastically aect the rm's pricing decision on

the margin.
               39



  36 Lang   et al. (2005) study the eect of discrimination on markets with search by considering a model of racial bias in the labor market.
In their model, black and white workers may apply to only one rm, based on a posted wage. Firms have a preference to hire white
workers, despite small perceived productivity dierences. As a result, black workers apply to rms where white workers are not expected
to apply, realizing lower equilibrium wage rates. The intuition from their paper applies in our setting as well, however the sequential
search nature of our model allows us to consider the eect of redlining on realized search costs, as well as adhere more closely to the
institutional details of the mortgage market.
  37 We therefore    rule out statistical discrimination, under which the discriminated characteristic would be indicative of underlying type.
  38 See,   for      example,    Ladd     (1998),    and     https://www.citylab.com/equity/2018/04/how-the-fair-housing-act-failed-black-
homeowners/557576/, accessed Jan 17, 2019.
  39 Note   that for the purposes of this counterfactual analysis, we account for the fact that redlining banks will have 50% of the market
share that a non-redlining bank will have of each type of borrower when constructing the equilibrium distribution of oered rates in the
market.




                                                                       33
       Becker (1957) argues that discriminating rms lose prots. In our setting, redlined lenders' prots are mostly

hurt though lower volumes than the prices they charge. In order to compensate for their lower market share from

disciminatory behavior, redlining banks oer slightly lower rates than do non-redlining banks on average. The mean

oered rate for redlining banks is 0.291pp, as compared with 0.308pp for non-redlining banks. Similar to the prior

counterfactual, because the redlined borrowers are willing to accept higher rates, banks which do not redline can

charge higher rates without compromising market share.                          Due to the strong strategic complementarities in rate

setting, redlining banks may also increase oered rates. This force leads all borrowers, not just the discriminated

group, to pay higher interest rates in equilibrium, with a mean realized rate that is 28.7bp higher than in the baseline

sample. However, this increase in oered rates does not oset the lost market share for the redlining banks, their

prots prots decline slightly, by 2.6bp, compared with an increase in prots of 23.1bp for the non-redlining banks,

relative to the baseline estimates.                 Put dierently, redlining banks lose 25.7bp in rate of return relative to their

competitors that do not engage in redlining behavior.

       This counterfactual illustrates that redlining on rejections can result in the minority paying higher rates than

non-minorities in equilibrium. This is despite the fact that there is no discrimination on interest rates. Discriminated

minorities appear less nancially sophisticated even though their underlying ability to search for mortgages equals

that of the majority, i.e.                they accept worse mortgages than non minorities.             Our model illustrates that this is

a rational response to higher expected rejection rates.                     Interpreting data on interest rates and rejections across

potentially discriminated groups is therefore only possible in the presence of a model, which accounts for search

behavior and rejections.




8.4 Place Based Policies and Pooling
Place based policies are common in mortgage and other lending markets in the U.S. These policies force or incentivize

lenders to pool borrowers across creditworthiness ranges within geographic areas.                          In other words, lenders can in

principle still reject borrowers, but cannot condition these rejections. One such policy is the Community Reinvestment

Act (CRA) of 1977 requires banks to improve credit access of low socioeconomic status neighborhoods. At the same

time banks are required to lend in a safe and sound manner, potentially conicting with the rst goal. An extensive

literature has investigated the extent to which the CRA has increased both credit access and the riskiness of lending

(Agarwal et al. 2012, Bhutta 2011, Bostic and Robinson 2003, Dahl et al. 2000). Such policies are also frequently in

place in crises, such as the GSE Declining Market Policy of 2008. We investigate the consequences of place based

policies such as by examining the consequences of extending credit to low creditworthiness borrowers. Our model

allows us to better understand the equilibrium consequences of this policy for banks and dierent types of borrowers.

We model an extreme version of place based polices, in which the probability of mortgage acceptance for both high

and low type individuals is equalized                ph = pl .   This does not remove the underlying asymmetric information, just the

banks' ability to act on it.
                            40 This stark benchmark allows us to illustrate the largest potential consequences CRA


      40 In   order to maintain the same overall application acceptance probability as is observed in our data, we set   ph = pl = ^p
                                                                                                                                    ^h + (1 - ^ )^
                                                                                                                                                 pl ,
for   ^ p
      , ^h ,    and   ^l
                      p    the estimated parameters reported in table 5.




                                                                           34
would have in our model. The results are summarized in Table 6 and Figure 13.

    One might conjecture that if banks were prevented from screening out less creditworthy borrowers, mortgage

rates would increase. Instead, we nd a 28.9bp decrease in average mortgage rates despite extending more credit to

less creditworthy borrowers. This result broadly arises from two competing forces: because of lower probability of

rejection, low-type borrowers eective search costs decrease, putting downward pressure on interest rates. High-type

borrowers, on the other hand, face increased probabilities of rejection, resulting in higher eective search cost, putting

upwards pressure on interest rates. The overall result is due to the large share of low-type borrowers in the market,

coupled with the large increase in acceptance probabilities of low types.

    Broadly, the introduction of the CRA results in a substantial redistribution between borrowers: while the average

low type borrower sees reductions in realized rates of 43bp, high type individuals see rate increases of 9.1bp on

average. The redistribution also occurs on non-interest rate dimensions: search, which is costly to borrowers, falls

from 4.1 to 2.8 searches for low type borrowers on average, and rises from to 2.1 to 2.8 inquiries for high type

borrowers.   The ability to charge more to high-type borrowers blunts the cost to lenders.                   Lenders' prots fall by

6.3bp at the mean realized interest rate.         Given a total market size of $479billion, this 6.3bp reduction in prots

implies that informative screening is worth approximately $1.2billion (4               0.00063  $479     billion) per year. This loss

is substantially smaller than the loss in the rst counterfactual of not rejecting borrowers at all. Intuitively, when all

lenders reject borrowers, they eectively impose higher search costs on the population of borrowers overall.

    The intuition is that removing banks' ability to conduct in-depth credit checks also removes the resulting adverse

selection, changing the pricing incentives of banks. Since low and high type individuals face the same acceptance

rates, their search behavior is the same. Therefore, despite the asymmetric information problem, the adverse selection

problem vanishes: at every interest rate, banks can expect a constant share of their customers to be high type.
                                                                                                                                41 The

removal of the adverse selection problem eect removes an incentive for banks to shade their interest rates in order

to cream skim high type borrowers. However, the large increase in acceptance probability for low type individuals

depresses their reservation rates, putting downward pressure on the high end of the oered rate distribution. Overall,

this counterfactual illustrates that accounting for the interaction between search and rejections is critical to analyzing

policies which alter lenders' ability to screen and reject borrowers.




9 Conclusion
We use a novel dataset in which we observe search behavior for a large sample of mortgage borrowers. The detailed

data on borrowers is matched with credit bureau data, as well as mortgage application and rejection decisions by the

lenders. Consistent with search models, we nd substantial dispersion in mortgage rates and search. The relationship

between search and pricing that is predicted by standard search models is strongly rejected in the data: borrowers,

who search a lot, obtain more expensive mortgages than borrowers, who search a moderate amount.                             We argue

that consumer credit markets dier from other search markets because lenders use an approval process to evaluate

  41 The intuition from a standard search model dominates,   so that the relationship between average prices and search becomes downward
sloping, and there are at relationships between rates, default, and search (Figure 13C).




                                                                   35
borrowers' creditworthiness. To study how such screening inuences consumer search, we develop a model of search

with asymmetric information. The model predicts that search behavior is not only related to consumer sophistication,

as predicted by standard search models, but also by the underlying distribution of types. The interaction between

screening and search can explain why borrowers who search a lot obtain expensive mortgages, as well as account for

other empirical features of the market, such as the relationship between mortgage approval and search, which standard

search models cannot explain. Accounting for the credit approval process is therefore critical in understanding search

behavior and equilibrium outcomes in markets for credit products, and more broadly, products in which the seller's

payo depends on buyer's characteristics, such as insurance or even labor markets.

   More broadly, our paper urges that future proposals for credit market reform consider the interaction of an

informative screening process with realized pricing outcomes.    Such considerations present new challenges for re-

searchers. As we show, the distribution of search costs are not identied in the presence of screening without strict

data requirements. We also provide an estimation procedure for such models.

   There is much scope for future research. Understanding the eect of nancial education programs on mortgage

market outcomes is a rst order concern. Our model suggests that such programs may have little eect on equilibrium

prices unless these programs also improved borrowers' creditworthiness. In addition, the fundamental economics of

our model appear appropriate for a variety of settings in both consumer and producer nance, as well as in labor

economics. Future research documenting whether its predictions hold in other credit markets, such as the market for

credit cards, where lenders have traditionally advertised more aggressively than in mortgage markets, or the market

for small business loans, where project screening may be less informative, would be very valuable.




References
[1] Agarwal, S., E. Benmelech, N. Bergman, and A. Seru (2012). Did the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) Lead

  to Risky Lending? NBER Working Paper Series 18609.


[2] Agarwal, S., S. Chomsisengphet, N. Mahoney, and J. Stroebel (2018). Do Banks Pass Through Credit Expansions

  to Consumers Who Want To Borrow? Quarterly Journal of Economics 133(1), 129190.


[3] Alexandrov, A. and S. Koulayev (2017). No Shopping in the U.S. Mortgage Market: Direct and Strategic Eects

  of Providing Information. Consumer Finance Protection Bureau Oce of Research Working Paper 01, 157.


[4] Allen, J., R. Clark, and J.-F. Houde (2014).    The Eect of Mergers in Search Markets:        Evidence from the

  Canadian Mortgage Industry. American Economic Review 104(10), 33653396.


[5] Allen, J., R. Clark, and J.-F. Houde (2019). Search Frictions and Market Power in Negotiated-Price Markets.

  Journal of Political Economy 127(4), 15501598.


[6] Ambokar, S. and K. Samaee (2019a). Inaction, Search Costs, and Market Power in the US Mortgage Market.

  University of Pennsylvania mimeo.




                                                         36
[7] Ambokar, S. and K. Samaee (2019b). Mortgage Search Heterogeneity, Statistical Discrimination and Monetary

  Policy Transmission to Consumption. University of Pennsylvania mimeo.


[8] Andersen, S., J. Y. Campbell, K. M. Nielsen, and T. Ramadorai (2015). Inattention and Inertia in Household

  Finance: Evidence from the Danish Mortgage Market. NBER Working Paper Series 21386.


[9] Argyle, B., T. Nadauld, and C. J. Palmer (2017). Real Eects of Search Frictions in Consumer Credit Markets.

  MIT Sloan Working Paper (5242-17).


[10] Ausubel,   L.   M.     (1991).      The    Failure        of   Competition   in   the   Credit   Card   Market.

  American Economic Review 81(1), 5081.


[11] Bassett, W. F., M. B. Chosak, J. C. Driscoll, and E. Zakrajsek (2014). Changes in bank lending standards and

  the macroeconomy. Journal of Monetary Economics 62, 2340.


[12] Becker, G. (1957). The Economics of Discrimination (2 ed.). The University of Chicago Press.


[13] Benneton, M. (2019).   Leverage Regulation and Market Structure: A Structural Model of the UK Mortgage

  Market. Working Paper.


[14] Bhutta, N. (2011). The Community Reinvestment Act and Mortgage Lending to Lower Income Borrowers and

  Neighborhoods. Journal of Law and Economics 54(4), 953983.


[15] Bostic, R. W. and B. L. Robinson (2003).   Do CRA Agreements Inuence Lending Patterns?              Real Estate

  Economics 31, 2351.


[16] Brunnermeier, M., R. Lamba, and C. Segura-Rodriguez (2020). Inverse selection. Working Paper.


[17] Buchak, G., G. Matvos, T. Piskorski, and A. Seru (2020).          Beyond the Balance Sheet Model of Banking:

  Implications for Bank Regulation and Monetary Policy. Working Paper.


[18] Buchak, G., T. Piskorski, and A. Seru (2018). Fintech, Regulatory Arbitrage, and the Rise of Shadow Banks.

  Journal of Financial Economics 130(3), 453483.


[19] Bureau, C. F. P. (2015). Consumers' mortgage shopping experience. Technical Report January.


[20] Calem, P. S. and L. J. Mester (1995). Consumer Behavior and the Stickiness of Credit-Card Interest Rates.

  American Economic Review 85(5), 13271336.


[21] Campbell, J. Y. (2016).   Restoring Rational Choice:       The Challenge of Consumer Financial Regulation.   In

  Richard T Ely Lecture, Number January.


[22] Carlson, J. A. and R. P. McAfee (1983).       Discrete Equilibrium Price Dispersion.        Journal of Political

  Economy 91(3), 480493.




                                                          37
[23] Dahl, D., D. D. Evano, and M. F. Spivey (2000). Does the Community Reinvestment Act Inuence Lending? An

  Analysis of Changes in Bank Low-Income Mortgage Activity. Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Working Paper.


[24] De Los Santos, B., A. Hortaçsu, and M. R. Wildenbeest (2012). Testing Models of Consumer Search Using Data

  on Web Browsing and Purchasing Behavior. American Economic Review 102(6), 29552980.


[25] Dell'Ariccia, G., D. Igan, and L. Laeven (2012).   Credit Booms and Lending Standards: Evidence from the

  Subprime Mortgage Market. Journal of Money Credit and Banking 44(2), 367384.


[26] Fuster, A., P. Goldsmith-Pinkham, T. Ramodorai, and A. Walther (2020). Predictably unequal? The eects of

  machine learning on credit markets. Working Paper.


[27] Gilbukh, S. and P. Goldsmith-Pinkham (2020).       Heterogeneous Real Estate Agents and the Housing Cycle.

  Working Paper.


[28] Guerrieri, V., R. Shimer, and R. Wright (2010).          Adverse Selection in Competitive Search Equilibrium.

  Econometrica 78(6), 18231862.


[29] Gurun, U. G., G. Matvos, and A. Seru (2016). Advertising Expensive Mortgages. Journal of Finance LXXI(5),

  23712416.


[30] Handel, B., I. Hendel, and M. D. Whinston (2015).         Equilibria in Health Exchanges.   Econometrica 83(4),

  12611313.


[31] Hortaçsu, A. and Syverson (2004). Product Dierentiation, Search Costs, and Competition in the Mutual Fund

  Industry: A Case Study of S&P 500 Index Funds. Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(2), 403456.


[32] Koijen, R. and M. Yogo (2016). Shadow Insurance. Econometrica 84(3), 12651287.


[33] Koijen, R. and M. Yogo (2020). The Fragility of Market Risk Insurance. Working Paper.


[34] Ladd, H. F. (1998). Evidence on Discrimination in Mortgage Lending. Journal of Economic Perspectives 12(2),

  4162.


[35] Lang, K., M. Manove, and W. T. Dickens (2005). Racial Discrimination in Labor Markets with Posted Wage

  Oers. American Economic Review 95(4), 13271340.


[36] Lester, B., A. Shourideh, V. Venkateswaran, and A. Zetlin-Jones (2016). Screening and Adverse Selection in

  Frictional Markets. Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Working Paper Series 16.


[37] McCall, J. J. (1970). Economics of Information and Job Search. Quarterly Journal of Economics 84(1), 113126.


[38] Mian, A. and A. Su (2009). The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion: Evidence from the U.S. Mortgage

  Default Crisis. Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(4), 14491496.




                                                         38
[39] Piazzesi,   M.,   M. Schneider,   and J. Stroebel (2020).     Segmented Housing Search.            American Economic

  Review 110(3).


[40] Roussanov, N., H. Ruan, and Y. Wei (2018). Marketing Mutual Funds. NBER Working Paper Series 25056.


[41] Salz, T. (2017). Intermediation and Competition in Search Markets: An Empirical Case Study. Working Paper.


[42] Scharfstein, D. and A. Sunderam (2017). Market Power in Mortgage Lending and the Transmission of Monetary

  Policy. Working Paper.


[43] Sorensen,    A.   T.   (2000).    Equilibrium   Price   Dispersion   in   Retail   Markets   for   Prescription   Drugs.

  Journal of Political Economy 108(4), 833850.


[44] Sorensen, A. T. (2001). Price Dispersion and Heterogeneous Consumer Search for Retail Prescription Drugs.

  NBER Working Paper Series 8548.


[45] Stango, V. and J. Zinman (2013). Borrowing High vs Borrowing Higher: Sources and Consequences of Dispersion

  in Individual Borrowing Costs. NBER Working Paper Series 19069.


[46] Stroebel, J. (2015). Asymmetric Information about Collateral Values. Journal of Finance 71(3), 10711111.


[47] Wong, A. (2019). Renancing and the Transmision of Monetary Policy to Consumption. Working Paper.


[48] Woodward, S. E. and R. E. Hall (2012). Diagnosing Consumer Confusion and Sub-Optimal Shopping Eort:

  Theory and Mortgage-Market Evidence. American Economic Review 102(7), 32493276.




                                                             39
Tables and Figures
                               Table 1: Summary Statistics for Mortgages and Applications


                                                                         Loan Data            Application Data
                                                                       Mean        SD          Mean          SD
               Search and Rates
               # Inquiries                                              2.61      2.00         12.28        11.41
               P r{Approval}    (%)                                                            82.19        38.26
               Origination Interest Rate (%)                            5.69      0.86                        


               Creditworthiness
               FICO                                                    725.80     62.52       707.41        71.60
               CLTV                                                     73.83     18.36        75.34        18.31
               Back-end DTI ratio                                       37.63     12.80        37.32        12.88
               P r{Default} (Annualized %)                              2.28      14.9                        
               P r{90+ Days Delinquent} (Annualized          %)         1.40      11.7                        
               P r{Prepay} (Annualized %)                               9.83      29.7                        


               Loan Characteristics
               FRM 30-year (%)                                          76.60     42.33        17.86        38.30
               FRM 15-year (%)                                          19.64     39.72        8.04         27.19
               ARM (%)                                                  3.76      19.02        74.10        43.81
               Loan Origination Amount ($ 000s)                        169.42    100.84                       
               Cash-out re (%)                                          31.05     46.27        0.33         5.72
               Rate-term re (%)                                         28.13     44.96        0.00         0.00


               Borrower Characteristics
               White (%)                                                79.16     40.61                       
               Black (%)                                                7.52      26.38                       
               Borrower Male (%)                                        42.95     49.50                       
               Borrower Age                                             44.44     12.52                       
               Less than High School (%)                                25.87     43.79                       
               High School and Some College (%)                         50.84     49.99                       
               College or more (%)                                      18.35     38.71                       
               Borrower Monthly Income                                 6104.11   6801.63                      
               Investor (%)                                             8.53      27.93        8.06         27.23


               Origination Date
               Pre-2006q4 (%)                                           43.58     49.59        48.69        49.98
               2006q42009q4 (%)                                         41.68     49.30        26.59        44.18
               Post-2009q4 (%)                                          14.74     35.45        24.72        43.14


               Observations                                               1,316,807                   5,359,060


Notes: The rst two columns report summary statistics from a sample of prime mortgages originated between January 2001 and April
2011. The latter two columns report statistics from a sample of prime mortgage applications between December 2001 and December 2013.
Data provided by a large Government-Sponsored Enterprise (GSE) and merged with consumer credit reports. Payment status variables
reported as of the rst quarter of 2015. CLTV corresponds to combined loan-to-value ratio, while DTI stands for debt-to-income ratio.




                                                                  40
                            Table 2: Average Borrower and Loan Characteristics by Time Period


             Origination Date                                      Loan Data                      Application Data
             relative to 2006q42009q4:                      Pre      During       Post           Pre      During       Post
             Search and Rates
             # Inquiries                                    1.87         3.16     3.29          14.77      11.81       7.94
             P r{Approval}     (%)                                                              80.23      82.27      85.95
             Origination Interest Rate (%)                  5.91         5.87     4.56                                   


             Creditworthiness
             FICO                                         713.00     726.33      762.13        689.97     701.87      747.70
             CLTV                                          74.05      75.46      68.58          75.76      76.69      73.02
             Back-end DTI ratio                            36.98      39.63      33.92          37.96      39.66      33.55
             P r{Default} (Annualized %)                    2.11         3.14     0.31                                   
             P r{90+ Days Delinquent} (%)                   1.31         1.91     0.25                                   
             P r{Prepay} (Annualized %)                     6.13      12.20      14.09                                   


             Loan Characteristics
             FRM 30-year (%)                               71.68      85.46      66.12          18.52       9.72      25.31
             FRM 15-year (%)                               23.53      12.72      27.67          10.87       5.57       5.13
             ARM (%)                                        4.78         1.83     6.20          70.61      84.71      69.56
             Origination Amount ($ 000s)                  138.37     187.32      210.63                                  
             Cash-out re (%)                               33.73      30.21      25.51          0.44        0.21       0.23
             Rate-term re (%)                              26.69      25.03      41.20          0.00        0.00       0.00


             Borrower Characteristics
             White (%)                                     80.42      77.44      80.19                                   
             Black (%)                                      8.53         8.09     2.97                                   
             Borrower Male (%)                             44.48      41.95      40.89                                   
             Borrower Age                                  43.55      44.33      47.43                                   
             Less than High School (%)                     26.36      27.94      18.57                                   
             High School and Some College (%)              46.49      53.82      55.27                                   
             College or more (%)                           16.13      17.94      26.05                                   
             Borrower Monthly Income ($)                   5087          6462     8095                                   
             Investor (%)                                   7.22         9.05    10.93          7.09        8.19       9.84


             Observations (000s)                            574          549       194          2,609      1,425      1,325


Notes: Table reports summary statistics from a sample of prime mortgages originated between January 2001 and April 2011. The rst
column reports statistics for loans originated before the house price peak in the fourth quarter of 2006, while column 2 reports statistics
for loans originated in the crisis period between the fourth quarter of 2006 and the end of 2009. Column 3 reports statistics for loans
originated in 2010 or later. Columns 4 through 6 report similar summary statistics from a sample of prime mortgage applications between
December 2001 and December 2013. Data provided by a large Government-Sponsored Enterprise (GSE) and merged with consumer credit
reports. Payment status variables reported as of the rst quarter of 2015. CLTV corresponds to combined loan-to-value ratio, while DTI
stands for debt-to-income ratio.




                                                                    41
                               Table 3: Predictors of inquiry counts among mortgage applicants



                                                                  st               nd                      rd               th
                                              # Inquiries        1     Quartile    2      Quartile       3      Quartile   4     Quartile
                                                   (1)                  (2)               (3)                    (4)              (5)
                                                 Panel A: Mortgage Applicants
                                                                                                                                        
          FICO score (std)                      -3.881               9.256             4.831                 -1.345        -12.743
                                                 (0.091)             (0.178)            (0.289)              (0.229)           (0.332)
                                                                                                                                    
          Combined LTV (std)                    0.838                -2.853            -0.742                0.909             2.686
                                                 (0.063)             (0.078)            (0.149)              (0.058)           (0.231)
                                                                                                                                    
          Back-end DTI Ratio (std)              0.555                -2.255            -0.474                0.914             1.815
                                                 (0.018)             (0.133)            (0.086)              (0.084)           (0.072)
                                                                                                                                    
          FRM 15-year                           1.404                -4.038            -1.608                0.932             4.714
                                                 (0.058)             (0.194)            (0.178)              (0.153)           (0.202)
                                                                                                                                        
          FRM 30-year                           -0.495               2.266              0.342                -1.008            -1.600
                                                 (0.035)             (0.252)            (0.187)              (0.158)           (0.128)
                                                                                                                                        
          Cash-out re                           -1.045                 1.099           2.043                    0.682          -3.825
                                                 (0.132)             (0.593)            (0.407)              (0.444)           (0.444)
                                                                                                                                    
          Investor                              3.048                -7.640            -3.796                1.516             9.920
                                                 (0.142)             (0.370)            (0.364)              (0.379)           (0.458)


          Observations                          5202721              5202721            5202721              5202721           5202721
              2
          R                                      0.2096                0.1106           0.0190                0.0089            0.1558


                                           Panel B: Realized Mortgage Borrowers
                                                                                                                                        
          FICO score (std)                      -0.389               6.570             0.012                 -0.007            -7.096
                                                 (0.030)             (0.271)            (0.004)              (0.002)           (0.604)
                                                                                                                                    
          Combined LTV (std)                    0.099                -2.261              0.000               0.004             1.874
                                                 (0.007)             (0.129)            (0.001)              (0.001)           (0.160)
                                                                                                                                    
          Back-end DTI Ratio (std)              0.120                -2.247             -0.003               0.002             2.328
                                                 (0.011)             (0.096)            (0.002)              (0.001)           (0.256)
                                                                                                                                        
          FRM 15-year                           -0.271               5.266               0.008               -0.009            -5.156
                                                 (0.024)             (0.390)            (0.006)              (0.002)           (0.552)
                                                                                                                                        
          FRM 30-year                           -0.157               3.863               -0.002              -0.009            -2.774
                                                 (0.015)             (0.576)            (0.004)              (0.002)           (0.288)
                                                                                                                                        
          Cash-out re                           -0.141                 1.261           0.016                  0.003            -3.149
                                                 (0.040)             (0.690)            (0.003)              (0.002)           (0.842)
                                                                                                                                    
          Black                                 0.270                -4.097            -0.007                   0.001          4.616
                                                 (0.019)             (0.385)            (0.002)              (0.002)           (0.330)
                                                                                                                                        
          College                               -0.109               1.838              0.003                -0.002            -1.934
                                                 (0.014)             (0.287)            (0.001)              (0.001)           (0.257)
                                                                                                                                        
          Monthly Income       <   $3,000       -0.173               3.534               0.003               -0.004            -3.368
                                                 (0.017)             (0.138)            (0.003)              (0.001)           (0.395)
                                                                                                                                    
          Investor                              0.456                -6.284            -0.017                   -0.002         8.133
                                                 (0.018)             (0.575)            (0.004)              (0.003)           (0.442)


          Observations                          1023931              1023931            1023931              1023931           1023931
              2
          R                                      0.2378                0.2232           0.0100                0.0260            0.1731




Notes: Estimated coecients from regression equation 1 reported. Panel A reports estimates for the sample of mortgage applications,
while Panel B reports estimates for the sample of realized mortgage borrowers. Column 1 reports coecients from a regression in which
the dependent variable is the number of inquiries on an applicant's credit report. Columns 2 through 5 report coecients from a regression
in which the dependent variable is an indicator variable, scaled by 100, for whether the applicant was in the rst, second, third, or fourth
quartile of inquiries, respectively.   Standard errors clustered at the origination quarter        ×   state level reported in parentheses beneath
coecient.     All regressions include origination quarter   ×   state xed eects.       Coecients marked with *, **, and *** are statistically
dierent from 0 at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.


                                                                         42
                 Table 4: Relationship between search and origination rates within demographic groups


                                             Years of Education:                                        Monthly Income:
                                          12          13 - 15              16+              $3,000       $3,001-$7,500     >   $7,500


                                                                                                                                   
                # Inquiries         -0.009            -0.012          -0.010               -0.004          -0.008          -0.009
                                        (0.003)       (0.003)          (0.003)          (0.003)             (0.003)         (0.003)
                                2                                                                                                
                # Inquiries          0.146            0.181           0.146            0.110               0.162           0.161
                                        (0.037)       (0.036)          (0.028)          (0.040)             (0.033)         (0.036)


                Observations            327583         652322          237401           252882              748080          279436
                     2
                R                       0.7755         0.8094             0.8317           0.7478           0.7970          0.8411


                                                            White           Black          Hispanic        Asian


                                                                                                                  
                                    # Inquiries          -0.011             -0.002         -0.010         -0.008
                                                            (0.003)         (0.004)         (0.004)        (0.003)
                                                  2                                                            
                                    # Inquiries             0.158           0.105          0.166          0.100
                                                            (0.031)         (0.041)         (0.042)        (0.030)


                                    Observations            847288          77009           79678          61313
                                     2
                                    R                       0.8078          0.7130          0.7550         0.8457




Notes: Estimated coecients from regression equation 2 reported. Standard errors clustered at the origination quarter level reported in
parentheses beneath coecient. Dependent variable is origination interest rate plus fees and points. All regressions include lender, state,
and origination quarter xed eects, as well as controls for borrower FICO, Backend DTI ratio, CLTV, investor status, a renance ag,
and product type. Coecients marked with *, **, and *** are statistically dierent from 0 at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.




                Table 5: Maximum Likelihood Estimates for our Full Sample of Loans and Applications


                ph         pl        ph - pl           xh            xl          xh - xl           µc         c           µH          H         m         
  0.268       1.000      0.193          0.807     1.000             0.410          0.590       -1.284        0.381       0.142      0.547     -1.585     0.410
 (0.002)     (0.004)     (0.000)     (0.003)      (0.003)       (0.001)          (0.004)      (0.005)       (0.004)    (0.002)      (0.001)      -         -



Notes: Table reports estimated model parameters obtained from maximum likelihood estimation described in section 7.1.                         Standard
errors in parentheses below point estimated parameters.         Parameter denitions:          =population high type share, ph = probability of
high type application accepted, pl = probability of low type application             accepted, xh =probability that high type repays loan in full,
xl =probability that low type repays loan in full, µc =mean of underlying normal distribution for log-normally distributed search costs,
c =standard deviation of underlying normal distribution for log-normally distributed search costs, µH =mean of normal distribution of
equilibrium oered rates, H =standard deviation of normal distribution of equilibrium oered rates, m =total bank cost of making a
loan,  =standard deviation of type-1 extreme value distributed prot shocks. The parameters governing the supply side m and  are
estimated according to the procedure outlined in Appendix Section D.3.




                                                                            43
                                                      Table 6: Counterfactual Summary


                                                                 All Borrowers                 High Type                 Low Type


                                                              Average         S.D.        Average      S.D.            Average    S.D.


        Realized Interest Rates
           Baseline MLE Estimates                               0.027         0.515         -0.228     0.371            0.121     0.529
           Baseline Equilibrium                                 -0.002        0.664         -0.384     0.459            0.140     0.673
           No Rejection                                         -0.227        0.370         -0.228     0.371           -0.227     0.370
           No Rejection (Eqm.)                                  -2.101        0.710         -2.103     0.709           -2.100     0.711
           Tighter Lending Standards                            0.035         0.523         -0.228     0.371            0.132     0.537
           Tighter Lending Standards (Eqm.)                     0.252         0.754         -0.217     0.497            0.427     0.759
           Redlining                                            0.040         0.517         -0.189     0.392            0.125     0.532
           Redlining (Eqm.)                                     0.285         0.724         0.243      0.703            0.301     0.732
           Place Based Policies - CRA                           0.007         0.463         0.005      0.462            0.008     0.463
           Place Based Policies - CRA (Eqm.)                    -0.291        0.471         -0.293     0.471           -0.290     0.471


        Search Distribution
           Baseline Model Estimates                              3.40         2.66           1.79       1.29            4.06      2.79
           Baseline Equilibrium                                  3.53         2.67           2.10       1.60            4.11      2.80
           No Rejection                                          1.79         1.29           1.79       1.29            1.79      1.29
           No Rejection (w/ Supply)                              2.88         2.21           2.88       2.22            2.88      2.21
           Tighter Lending Standards                             3.60         2.79           1.79       1.29            4.39      2.90
           Tighter Lending Standards (Eqm.)                      3.77         2.80           2.25       1.74            4.43      2.92
           Redlining                                             3.45         2.70           1.77       1.26            4.14      2.82
           Redlining (Eqm.)                                      3.24         2.74           1.12       0.46            4.12      2.81
           Place Based Policies - CRA                            2.76         2.08           2.76       2.08            2.76      2.07
           Place Based Policies - CRA (Eqm.)                     2.78         2.09           2.78       2.09            2.77      2.09


        Supply Eects                                          Oered Rate Dist.              Bank
                                                              Average         S.D.         Prots


           Baseline MLE Estimates                               0.142         0.547         1.873
           Baseline Equilibrium                                 0.206         0.723         1.893
           No Rejection (Eqm.)                                  -0.732        1.259         0.001
           Tighter Lending Standards                            0.142         0.547         1.860
           Tighter Lending Standards (Eqm.)                     0.483         0.805         2.130
           Redlining                                            0.142         0.547         1.860
           Redlining (Eqm.)                                     0.300         0.733         1.995
           Place Based Policies - CRA                           0.142         1.873         1.867
           Place Based Policies - CRA (Eqm.)                    -0.147        0.561         1.830


Notes: Table reports mean and standard deviation of search and realized interest rates across our counterfactual model simulations. The
rst two columns report mean and standard deviations for the full simulated sample of borrowers. The third and fourth columns report
the mean and standard deviation for high type borrowers, while the fth and sixth columns report the mean and standard deviation
for low type borrowers. Rows with (Eqm) indicate counterfactual simulations in which we allow the distribution of oered rates to
adjust, otherwise the oered rate distribution is xed at those estimated in our maximum likelihood routine. Interest rates and prot
margins are expressed in percentage points above the mean realized rate in the market for an observably comparable borrower and loan
type.   Prots reect the prots for a bank posting the average realized rate in the market, net of any T1EV prot shocks                    jk .   No
Rejection corresponds to a model in which borrowers' applications are never rejected:          ph = pl = 1.   Tighter Lending Standards refers
to a counterfactual in which the odds of application approval drop as they did following the recession, by reducing the odds of application
approval by 21.8%. Redlining supposes that half of the lenders in the market engage in redlining behavior. For this counterfactual,
borrowers belong to two groups,     B   or   W,   which are identical in all respects, except redlining banks accept applications both high and
low types in the   B   group at half of the rate that they accept applications from the    W   group. We let the   B   group comprise 20% of the
pool of borrowers. Place Based Policies - CRA supposes that low and high type borrowers are accepted at the same rate, maintaining
the same overall acceptance probability at the estimated        ph + (1 - )pl .


                                                                         44
                                           Table 7: Redlining Counterfactual Summary


                             Borrower Information               Realized Rates                Search
                                                               Average      S.D.         Average       S.D.
                                  Redlined Group                 0.298      0.723          3.54        2.89
                                  Non-Redlined Group             0.282      0.725          3.17        2.70


                             Bank Information                    Oered Rates            Expected
                                                               Average      S.D.          Prots
                                  Redlining Banks                0.291      0.753          1.867
                                  Non-Redlining Banks            0.308      0.713          2.124


Notes:   Table reports mean and standard deviation of search and realized interest rates for the group of redlined borrowers       B   and
borrowers not subject to redlining,   W.   To construct this counterfactual, we suppose that redlined borrowers   B   comprise 20% of the
borrower pool and are accepted at half the rate of   W   borrowers if they meet a redlining bank. Half of all banks redline. The rst panel
reports the eect of redlining on borrowers, while the second panel reports the eect of redlining on banks. The rst two columns of the
rst panel report the mean and standard deviation of realized mortgage interest rates for a simulated set of borrowers, while the third
and fourth columns report the mean and standard deviation of total search for these borrowers. Meanwhile, the rst two columns of the
second panel reports the mean and standard deviation of the oered rate distribution for redlining and non-redlining banks, estimated
according to the routine outlined in Appendix E.2. The third column represents the prots of a bank charging the mean realized rate
in the economy. Interest rates and prot margins are expressed in percentage points above the mean realized rate in the market for an
observably comparable borrower and loan type. Prots reect the prots for a bank posting the average realized rate in the market, net
of any T1EV prot shocks    jk .




                                                                     45
      .8                                     Figure 1: Distribution of Mortgage Rates in the U.S.




                                                                                                        .5
                                                                                                        .4
      .6
   Density




                                                                                                     Density
                                                                                                          .3
     .4




                                                                                                        .2
      .2




                                                                                                        .1
      0




                                                                                                        0
             0            2                  4                        6                     8                  0             2                    4                6      8
                                      Origination Rate                                                                                     Origination Rate

                              Pre 2006q4                       2006q4-2009q4.                                                      Low FICO                   Mid FICO.
                              Post 2009q4.                                                                                         High FICO.


                 Panel A: Raw Rates by Origination Date                                                        Panel B: Raw Rates by Borrower FICO Score
                                                         1.5
                                                         1
                                               Density
                                                         .5
                                                         0




                                                               -4.0               -2.0             0.0                2.0                4.0
                                                                                     Residualized Origination Rates

                                                                          Characteristics           Characteristics + Lender x Time FE


                                                           Panel C: Rates Residualized Against Observables


Notes: Figure plots the kernel-density estimated distribution of mortgage rates in the U.S. Panel A plots the raw observed rates across
three time periods: before the house price peak of September 2006, between the house price peak and end of the crisis in 2009, and the
post crisis period from the rst quarter of 2010 on. Panel B plots the distribution of observed mortgage rates for three borrower FICO
buckets: low FICO (       620),   middle FICO (620-719) and high FICO (720+). Finally, Panel C plots the distribution of residuals from a
regression of realized interest rates on borrower and loan characteristics. The black line residualizes against only borrower characteristics,
which include the borrower's FICO score, combined loan-to-value (LTV) ratio, backend debt-to-income (DTI) ratio, renance and product
type indicators, state xed eects, and origination quarter characteristics. The light blue line plots residuals from a regression of rates
on these borrower characteristics as well as lender                   ×   origination quarter xed eects.




                                                                                            46
                   1                                           Figure 2: Inquiry distribution among mortgage applicants




                                                                                                                            1
   Empirical Distribution Function




                                                                                                            Empirical Distribution Function
                              .8




                                                                                                                                       .8
                       .6




                                                                                                                                .6
             .4




                                                                                                                      .4
    .2




                                                                                                             .2
                   0




                                                                                                                            0
                                     0                         5                             10                                               0               20                 40              60                80
                                                               Inquiries                                                                                                      Inquiries

                                                    Pre 2006q4              2006q4-2009q4.                                                                         Pre 2006q4             2006q4-2009q4.
                                                    Post 2009q4.                                                                                                   Post 2009q4.


                                            Panel A: Loan-Level Dataset                                                                                   Panel B: Applicant Dataset
                   1




                                                                                                                            1
   Empirical Distribution Function




                                                                                                            Empirical Distribution Function
                              .8




                                                                                                                                       .8
                       .6




                                                                                                                                .6
             .4




                                                                                                                      .4
    .2




                                                                                                             .2
                   0




                                                                                                                            0




                                     0         20                 40              60              80                                          0                               5                             10
                                                               Inquiries                                                                                                      Inquiries

                                                       Low FICO              Mid FICO.                                                                     High School or Less            At least Some College.
                                                       High FICO.                                                                                          More than College.


                                         Panel C: Applicants by FICO Score                                                                          Panel D: Applicants by Education


Notes: Figure plots distribution of inquiries across successful mortgage applicants (i.e. those in our loan-level dataset) across three time
periods: before the house price peak of September 2006, between the house price peak and end of the crisis in 2009, and the post crisis
period from the rst quarter of 2010 on.                                    Dashed lines plot bootstrapped 95% condence intervals, in which bootstraps are clustered
at the origination quarter level. Panel A plots the inquiry distribution for all borrowers in our application-level dataset, while Panel B
plots the inquiry distribution for our loan-level dataset containing borrowers with successful application. Panel C plots the distribution
of inquiries across mortgage applicants for three FICO buckets: low FICO (                                                                        620),   middle FICO (620-719) and high FICO (720+).
Panel D plots the distribution of inquiries across successful mortgage applicants (i.e. those in our loan-level dataset) for three borrower
education groups.




                                                                                                       47
                  6.2                                             Figure 3: Rates and search by FICO bucket




                                                                                                        6.8
                            6.0




                                                                                                                  6.7
     Mean Origination Rate (%)




                                                                                           Mean Origination Rate (%)
                5.8




                                                                                                      6.6
    5.6




                                                                                          6.5
                  5.4




                                                                                                        6.4
                                  0                   5                       10                                        0           5                 10
                                                      Inquiries                                                                     Inquiries


                                        Panel A: All Borrowers                                                              Panel B: FICO       620
                  6.3




                                                                                                        5.8
                            6.2
    Mean Origination Rate (%)




                                                                                          Mean Origination Rate (%)
                                                                                                             5.6
               6.1




                                                                                            5.4
    6.0           5.9




                                                                                                        5.2




                                  0                   5                       10                                        0           5                 10
                                                      Inquiries                                                                     Inquiries


                                      Panel C: 620 < FICO           720                                                     Panel D: FICO > 720


Notes: Figure plots average realized interest rates against inquiry counts for realized loans for all borrowers and across three FICO
buckets: low FICO (                       620),   middle FICO (620-719) and high FICO (720+).




                                                                                     48
                         Figure 4: Relationship Between Search and Mortgage Origination Rates, Conditional on Observables




                                                                                                 .15
                  .1




                                                                                                 .1
                  .05
    Coefficient




                                                                                          Coefficient
                                                                                             .05
                  0




                                                                                                 0
                  -.05




                                                                                                 -.05
                          2    3      4   5      6        7       8   9   10   11+                         2         3        4      5      6        7       8   9   10   11+
                                              Number of Inquiries                                                                        Number of Inquiries


                                     Panel A: All Borrowers                                                                   Panel B: FICO            620
                  .1




                                                                                                 .08
                                                                                                 .06
    Coefficient




                                                                                            Coefficient
                                                                                                   .04
          .05




                                                                                          .02    0
                  0




                                                                                                 -.02




                          2    3      4   5      6        7       8   9   10   11+                         2         3        4      5      6        7       8   9   10   11+
                                              Number of Inquiries                                                                        Number of Inquiries


                                   Panel C: 620 < FICO            720                                                        Panel D: FICO > 720


Notes: Figure plots regression coecients estimated from equation 2 using OLS across three FICO sub-samples. The dependent variable
in each regression is the origination interest rate plus points and fees on a loan. The independent variables are a set of dummy variables
equal to one if the inquiry count at mortgage origination were equal to                               s   for   s   in   {2, 3, 4, . . . , 11+}.   The omitted category is   s = 1.
Controls are included for the borrower's FICO score, combined loan-to-value (LTV) ratio, backend debt-to-income (DTI) ratio, renance
and product type indicators, state xed eects, and origination quarter characteristics. Standard errors are clustered at the origination
quarter level. Gray bands indicate 95% condence intervals. Panel A plots coecients estimated from the full sample of borrowers, while
Panels B, C, and D plot the coecients estimated on the subsample of borrowers with FICO scores less than 620, between 620 and 720,
and above 720, respectively.




                                                                                     49
                     1                      Figure 5: Characteristics of a Sequential Search Model with Informative Screening




                                                                                                                                   60
                     .8




                                                                                                                    Percent High Type
   kdensity rbar




                                                                                                                                  40
    .4       .6




                                                                                                                   20
                     .2
                     0




                                                                                                                                   0
                                        0        2              4                   6                8
                                                     Reservation Interest Rate                                                                       0                    1               2              3            4
                                                                                                                                                                                Realized Interest Rate
                                                     High Type                Low Type
                                                                                                                                                     Smoother bandwidth = 0.1



                Panel A: Reservation rates of high and low types                                               Panel B: Share of high types as function of origination rate




                                                                                                                                   3.6
                     60
   Percent of Borrowers High Type (%)




                                                                                                                                             3.4
                                                                                                                   Origination Interest Rate
                           40




                                                                                                                         3          3.2
          20




                                                                                                                                   2.8
                                                                                                                                   2.6
                     0




                                        0   10          20               30             40           50                                              0               10           20               30        40       50
                                                             Inquiries                                                                                                                 Inquiries


                         Panel C: Borrower type distribution and search                                                          Panel D: Relationship between search and prices
                     50




                                                                                                                                   70           60
                                                                                                                    Application Approval Rate (%)
                     40
   Default Rate (%)




                                                                                                                                      50
          30




                                                                                                                             40
                     20




                                                                                                                   30
                     10




                                                                                                                                   20




                                        0   10          20               30             40           50                                              0               10           20               30        40       50
                                                             Inquiries                                                                                                                 Inquiries


 Panel E: Relationship between search and default rate                                                     Panel F: Relationship between search and application approval


Notes: Figure plots key aspects of the mortgage market under the baseline model with informative screening. Data are simulated from
a model in which application approval parameters are set to                                         ph = 0.95 and pl = 0.05, the share of high types is  = 0.7,                                          the probability
of full repayment for high and low types are                                     xh = 0.8,   and   xl = 0.4, respectively, and the search costs and oered rates                                          are distributed
according to truncated normal distributions.                                      Panel A plots the distribution of reservation rates for high type (in blue) and low type
(in red) borrowers.                          Panel B plots the percent of borrowers that are high type at each realized interest rate, highlighting the pattern
of adverse selection when screening is present. Panel C shows the percentage of successful borrowers who are high type as a function
of search. Panel D, E, and F display the relationship between search and realized interest rates, eventual mortgage default rate, and
application approval probability, respectively.
                                                                                                          50
                                                                                          Figure 6: Search and Annualized Default Rate

                                8




                                                                                                                                                       5
                                                                                                                               90+ Days Delinquent Rate (%)
                                                                                                                                                        4
                         6
         Default Rate (%)




                                                                                                                                            3
         4




                                                                                                                                2
                                2




                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                       0                           5                           10                                                               0                                     5                               10
                                                                                   Inquiries                                                                                                                          Inquiries


                                                                       Panel A: Default                                                                                                 Panel B: 90+ Days Delinquent




                                                                                                                                                                           .6
         Change in Annualized Default Log Odds Ratio




                                                                                                                               Change in Annualized Default Log Odds Ratio
                                       .6        .8




                                                                                                                                                           .4
                           .4




                                                                                                                                           .2
                .2              0




                                                                                                                                                       0




                                                           2   3   4      5      6        7       8   9   10        11+                                                             2    3         4         5      6        7       8      9    10        11+
                                                                              Number of Inquiries                                                                                                                Number of Inquiries


               Panel C: All Borrowers, conditional on controls                                                                                         Panel D: FICO                                        620,       conditional on controls
                                                                                                                                                                        1.2
         Change in Annualized Default Log Odds Ratio




                                                                                                                               Change in Annualized Default Log Odds Ratio
                                                .8




                                                                                                                                                                 1
                                       .6




                                                                                                                                                        .8
                           .4




                                                                                                                                       .4       .6
               .2




                                                                                                                               .2
                                0




                                                           2   3   4      5      6        7       8   9   10        11+                                                             2    3         4         5      6        7       8      9    10        11+
                                                                              Number of Inquiries                                                                                                                Number of Inquiries


     Panel E: 620 < FICO                                                       720,       conditional on controls                                 Panel F: FICO > 720, conditional on controls


Notes: Figure plots average default rates against search. Panel A denes default to be serious (90+ days) delinquency, or foreclosure,
while Panel B limits attention to seriously delinquent loans. Panels C through F plot regression coecients estimated from equation 8
using MLE. The coecients reect changes in the log odds ratio of the annual default hazard relative to borrowers with one inquiry.
Default is dened by the loan being at least 90 days delinquent, or entering foreclosure. The independent variables are a set of dummy
variables equal to one if the inquiry count at mortgage origination were equal to                                                                                                       s    for   s   in   {2, 3, 4, . . . , 11+}.      The omitted category is
s = 1.   Controls are included for the borrower's FICO score, combined loan-to-value (LTV) ratio, backend debt-to-income (DTI) ratio,
renance and product type indicators, state xed eects, and origination quarter. Standard errors are clustered at the origination quarter
level. Gray bands indicate 95% condence intervals. Panel C plots coecients estimated from the full sample of borrowers, while Panels
D, E, and F plot the coecients estimated on the subsample of borrowers with FICO scores less than 620, between 620 and 720, and
above 720, respectively.


                                                                                                                          51
             90             Figure 7: Relationship Between Search and Mortgage Application Approval Rates




                                                                                                                90      80
             80




                                                                                                      Approval Rate (%)
    Approval Rate (%)




                                                                                                                70
           70




                                                                                                        60      50
             60




                                                                                                                40
                                                                                                                             0         20             40                    60            80
                                                                                                                                                   Inquiries
             50




                                                                                                                                            Low FICO           Mid FICO.
                        0     20          40                            60               80
                                       Inquiries                                                                                            High FICO.


                            Panel A: All Applicants                                                                              Panel B: By Borrower FICO Score
                                                       90      80
                                             Approval Rate (%)
                                                60      70
                                                       50
                                                       40




                                                                    0          20                  40                             60         80
                                                                                                Inquiries

                                                                                    Pre 2006q4           2006q4-2009q4.
                                                                                    Post 2009q4.


                                                                         Panel C: By Origination Date


Notes: Figure plots the relationship between application approval rate and the number of inquiries on an applicant's credit report. A line
of best t, weighted by the number of applicants with                         s inquiries,     is drawn as a visual aid. Panel A plots the relationship for all applicants
in our application dataset. Panel B displays the relationship for three applicant FICO score buckets separately. The Low FICO group
(in red) contains those with FICO score below 620, Mid FICO (in blue) corresponds to those with a FICO score between 620 and 720,
while the High FICO group (in green) shows the patterns for those with a FICO score above 720. Panel C shows the patterns across
three time periods: before the house price peak of September 2006, between the house price peak and end of the crisis in 2009, and the
post crisis period from the rst quarter of 2010 on. Lines of best t, weighted by the number of applicants with                                                        s    inquiries, drawn as a
visual aid.




                                                                                               52
Figure 8: Relationship between search and mortgage application approval rates, conditional on observables by FICO
bucket




                                                                                                 0
          1




                                                                                                 -2
          0




                                                                                                     -4
    Coefficient




                                                                                            Coefficient
      -1




                                                                                           -6
          -2




                                                                                                 -8
                                                                                                 -10
          -3




                   2   3      4   5      6        7       8   9   10   11+                                2      3      4        5      6        7       8   9    10      11+
                                      Number of Inquiries                                                                            Number of Inquiries


                            Panel A: All Applicants                                                                     Panel B: FICO              620
          0




                                                                                                 0
          -1




                                                                                                 -.5
              -2
     Coefficient




                                                                                           Coefficient
                                                                                             -1
    -3




                                                                                                 -1.5
          -4




                                                                                                 -2
          -5




                   2   3      4   5      6        7       8   9   10   11+                                2      3      4        5      6        7       8   9    10      11+
                                      Number of Inquiries                                                                            Number of Inquiries


                           Panel C: 620 < FICO            720                                                          Panel D: FICO > 720


Notes: Figure plots regression coecients estimated from equation 9 using OLS. The dependent variable in each regression is an indicator
for whether a mortgage application is approved, scaled by 100 for legibility. The independent variables are a set of dummy variables equal
to one if the inquiry count at mortgage origination were equal to            s   for   s   in        {2, 3, 4, . . . , 11+}.   The omitted category is       s = 1.   Controls are
included for the borrower's FICO score, combined loan-to-value (LTV) ratio, backend debt-to-income (DTI) ratio, renance and product
type indicators, state xed eects, and origination quarter characteristics. Standard errors are clustered at the origination quarter level.
Gray bands indicate 95% condence intervals. Panel A plots coecients estimated from the full sample of applicants, while Panels B, C,
and D plot the coecients estimated on the subsample of applicants with FICO scores less than 620, between 620 and 720, and above
720, respectively.




                                                                                 53
                  .8                                                       Figure 9: Search Behavior of Rarely Rejected Borrowers




                                                                                                                                       1             .8
                                                                                                                       Empirical Distribution Function
                  .6




                                                                                                                                            .6
    Density
      .4




                                                                                                                                .4
                  .2




                                                                                                                      .2
                  0




                                                                                                                                       0
                                        3                   4           5              6       7            8                                             0                           5                        10
                                                                      Origination Rate                                                                                                Inquiries


                                             Panel A: Realized rate distribution                                                                                    Panel B: Search distribution
                  5.5




                                                                                                                                       5.5
                            5.4




                                                                                                                                       5.4
     Mean Origination Rate (%)




                                                                                                                      Coefficient
                5.3




                                                                                                                         5.3
    5.2




                                                                                                                                       5.2
                  5.1




                                                                                                                                       5.1




                                   1                    2            3              4          5            6                                                  1         2         3           4       5        6+
                                                                    Number of Inquiries                                                                                          Number of Inquiries


                 Panel C: Relationship between search and prices                                                                     Panel D: Relationship between search and prices
                                                                                                                                                                controlling for borrower observables


Notes:                            Figure plots key aspects of search behavior for a pool of borrowers whose applications are rarely rejected.                                                              Rarely-rejected
borrowers are dened as those whose estimated propensity score from a logit regression on application approval status is above 0.975.
All gures are produced using the dataset of realized loans. Panel A plots the estimated kernel density of realized interest rates for these
borrowers. Panel B plots the distribution of inquiries for these borrowers. Dashed lines plot bootstrapped 95% condence intervals, in
which bootstraps are clustered at the origination quarter level.                                                Panel C plots the mean origination interest rate as a function of the
number of inquiries for this population of borrowers. The size of the marker for                                                                              s inquiries is proportional to the number of rarely-rejected
borrowers with                                   s    inquiries in the data. Panel D plots regression coecients estimated from equation 2 using OLS, for a subsample of
borrowers whose loan applications are rarely rejected. The dependent variable in theregression is the origination interest rate plus points
and feeson a loan. The independent variables are a set of dummy variables equal to one if the inquiry count at mortgage origination were
equal to                          s    for   s   in   {2, 3, 4, . . . , 11+}.   The omitted category is   s = 1.   White heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are clustered at the
origination quarter level. Gray bands indicate 95% condence intervals.




                                                                                                                54
  Figure 10: Model Performance: Search Behavior in Data Versus Model Simulation with Estimated Parameters


                                                                                                                                                      1
                   .8




                                                                                                                                                      .8




                                                                                                                             Cumulative Probability
                   .6




                                                                                                                                                      .6
       density
        .4




                                                                                                                                                      .4
                   .2




                                                                                                                                                      .2



                                                                                                                                                      0
                   0




                                        -4        -2                   0                                   2                                               0                        5                           10
                                                 Origination Interest Rate                                                                                                         Inquiries

                                                 Data                       Baseline Estimates                                                                              Data           Baseline Estimates



                                   Panel A: Realized Residual Rate Densities                                                                                       Panel B: Search Distribution




                                                                                                                                                 5
                   .15
       Origination Interest Rate




                                                                                                                                                 4
                            .1




                                                                                                                             Default Rate
                 .05




                                                                                                                                  3              2
        0          -.05




                                                                                                                                                 1




                                    0                     5                                               10                                               0                        5                           10
                                                         Inquiries                                                                                                                 Inquiries

                                                 Data                       Baseline Estimates                                                                              Data           Baseline Estimates



                                    Panel C: Search and Origination Rates                                                                                  Panel D: Search and Default Probability
                                                                               40
                                                               Percent of Borrowers High Type
                                                                10         20  0       30




                                                                                                -3   -2          -1               0                                1        2
                                                                                                                Origination Interest Rate


                                                        Panel E: Share of high types as function of origination rate


Notes: Figure plots the performance of our model under our benchmark estimated parameters from Table 5. Black lines plot quantities
in our estimation sample, while light blue lines plot those implied by a large model simulation using parameters estimated by maximum
likelihood following the approach laid out in section 7.1.                                                     Origination rates in data residualized against the borrower's FICO score,
combined loan-to-value (LTV) ratio, backend debt-to-income (DTI) ratio, renance and product type indicators, state xed eects, and
origination year xed eects. Panel A plots the density of realized interest rates in the market. Panel B plots the CDF of search for
realized loans. Panel C and D show the relationship between search and origination interest rates and default probability, respectively,
where default probability is measured as of January 2015. To compute these default probabilities in the simulation, we randomly draw a
mortgage's origination date from the distribution of origination dates in the data. Panel E shows the degree of adverse selection in the
market by plotting the share of all borrowers originating a mortgage at rate                                                                               r   who are of high type.




                                                                                                                       55
                                                                     Figure 11: Tighter Lending Standards Counterfactual


                         .6                                                                                                                    1



                                                                                                                                             .8




                                                                                                                    Cumulative Probability
                         .4




                                                                                                                                             .6
          density




                                                                                                                                             .4
                         .2




                                                                                                                                             .2



                                                                                                                                               0
                         0




                                             -4           -2               0               2              4                                             0               10                        20                      30
                                                               Origination Interest Rate                                                                                          Inquiries

                                                         Baseline Estimates           Tighter Standards                                                           Baseline Estimates                  Tighter Standards



                                                  Panel A: Realized Rate Distribution                                                                        Panel B: Distribution of Search




                                                                                                                                        3
                         .4




                                                                                                                                        2.8
                                  .3
          Origination Interest Rate




                                                                                                                    Default Rate (%)
                                                                                                                              2.6
                          .2




                                                                                                                      2.4
                 .1




                                                                                                                                        2.2
          0              -.1




                                                                                                                                        2



                                             0                          5                           10                                                  0                          5                               10
                                                                       Inquiries                                                                                                  Inquiries

                                                         Baseline Estimates           Tighter Standards                                                           Baseline Estimates              Tighter Standards



               Panel C: Relationship between search and price                                                      Panel D: Relationship between search and default
                                                                                                                                             50
                                        60
          Application Approval Rate (%)




                                                                                                                       Percent of Borrowers High Type
                                                                                                                                                  40
                                55




                                                                                                                                         30
                       50




                                                                                                                                 20
              45




                                                                                                                        10
                         40




                                                                                                                                             0




                                             0                          5                           10                                                  -4         -2                 0                   2               4
                                                                       Inquiries                                                                                          Origination Interest Rate

                                                         Baseline Estimates           Tighter Standards                                                           Baseline Estimates              Tighter Standards



 Panel E: Relationship between search and application approval                                                 Panel F: Share of high types as function of origination rate


Notes: Figure plots the key aspects of search behavior under our baseline parameter estimates (black line) and a model in which the
odds of application approval drop as they did following the recession (light blue line), allowing the equilibrium oered rate distribution
to adjust. Odds of application acceptance presumed to decline by 21.8% for both high and low type borrowers.Panel A plots the density
of realized interest rates in the market. Panel B plots the CDF of search for realized loans. Panel C, D, and E show the relationship
between search and origination interest rates, the probability of ever defaulting, and the application approval rate. Panel F shows the
degree of adverse selection in the market by plotting the share of all borrowers originating a mortgage at rate                                                               r   who are of high type.




                                                                                                          56
                                                                                        Figure 12: Redlining Counterfactual


                        .6                                                                                                                                    1



                                                                                                                                                          .8




                                                                                                                                 Cumulative Probability
                        .4




                                                                                                                                                          .6
          density




                                                                                                                                                          .4
                        .2




                                                                                                                                                          .2



                                                                                                                                                              0
                        0




                                          -4             -2                 0                 2               4                                                         0                 10                        20                    30
                                                                Origination Interest Rate                                                                                                          Inquiries

                                                              Baseline Estimates             Redlining                                                                                  Baseline Estimates               Redlining



                                               Panel A: Realized Rate Distribution                                                                                           Panel B: Distribution of Search




                                                                                                                                                     3
                        .3
          Origination Interest Rate
                               .2




                                                                                                                                 Default Rate (%)
                                                                                                                                              2.5
                     .1




                                                                                                                                  2
           0




                                                                                                                                                     1.5
                        -.1




                                          0                              5                               10                                                             0                           5                                10
                                                                        Inquiries                                                                                                                  Inquiries

                                                              Baseline Estimates             Redlining                                                                                  Baseline Estimates               Redlining



               Panel C: Relationship between search and price                                                                    Panel D: Relationship between search and default
                        70




                                                                                                                                                                   40
          Application Approval Rate (%)




                                                                                                                                    Percent of Borrowers High Type
                                                                                                                                                          30
                              60




                                                                                                                                                 20
                 50




                                                                                                                                      10
                        40




                                                                                                                                                          0




                                          0                              5                               10                                                             -4         -2                   0                 2               4
                                                                        Inquiries                                                                                                           Origination Interest Rate

                                                              Baseline Estimates             Redlining                                                                                  Baseline Estimates               Redlining



 Panel E: Relationship between search and application approval                                                             Panel F: Share of high types as function of origination rate


Notes: Figure plots the key aspects of search behavior under our baseline parameter estimates (black line) and the counterfactualmodel
of redlining described in the text. We suppose that half of the lenders in the market engage in redlining behavior. Borrowers belong to
two groups,                    B          or   W,   which are identical in all respects, except redlining banks accept applications both high and low types in the                                                                   B
group at half of the rate that they accept applications from the                                              W   group. We let the                       B             group comprise 20% of the pool of borrowers.
Equilibrium oered rates are allowed to adjust. Panel A plots the density of realized interest rates in the market. Panel B plots the CDF
of search for realized loans. Panel C, D, and E show the relationship between search and origination interest rates, the probability of
ever defaulting, and the application approval rate. Panel F shows the degree of adverse selection in the market by plotting the share of
all borrowers originating a mortgage at rate                                        r   who are of high type.




                                                                                                              57
                                                                       Figure 13: Place Based Policies Counterfactual


                                                                                                                                            1
                       .8




                                                                                                                                        .8




                                                                                                               Cumulative Probability
                       .6




                                                                                                                                        .6
         density
           .4




                                                                                                                                        .4
                       .2




                                                                                                                                        .2



                                                                                                                                            0
                       0




                                         -4          -2               0               2                 4                                             0                     10                       20                     30
                                                          Origination Interest Rate                                                                                                   Inquiries

                                                  Baseline Estimates          Uninformative Screening                                                            Baseline Estimates                Uninformative Screening


                                              Panel A: Realized Rate Distribution                                                                              Panel B: Distribution of Search




                                                                                                                                   3
                       .1




                                                                                                                                   2.8
           Origination Interest Rate
                                 0




                                                                                                               Default Rate (%)
                                                                                                                         2.6
                         -.1




                                                                                                                 2.4
                 -.2




                                                                                                                                   2.2
         -.3           -.4




                                                                                                                                   2




                                         0                         5                           10                                                     0                                5                             10
                                                                  Inquiries                                                                                                           Inquiries

                                                  Baseline Estimates          Uninformative Screening                                                            Baseline Estimates               Uninformative Screening


                            Panel C: Relationship between search and price                                                  Panel D: Relationship between search and default
                       70




                                                                                                                                                 40
         Application Approval Rate (%)




                                                                                                                  Percent of Borrowers High Type
                                 65




                                                                                                                                        30
                         60




                                                                                                                               20
                  55




                                                                                                                    10
          50           45




                                                                                                                                        0




                                         0                         5                           10                                                     -4             -2                  0                 2                4
                                                                  Inquiries                                                                                                  Origination Interest Rate

                                                  Baseline Estimates          Uninformative Screening                                                            Baseline Estimates               Uninformative Screening


 Panel E: Relationship between search and application approval                                              Panel F: Share of high types as function of origination rate


Notes:   Figure plots the key aspects of search behavior under our baseline parameter estimates (black line) and a model in which
applications from high and low type borrowers are rejected at the same rate, allowing the distribution of oered rates to adjust. This
constant rate is given by the average approval probability under our baseline estimates:                                                                  ph + (1 - )pl .    Panel A plots the density of
realized interest rates in the market. Panel B plots the CDF of search for realized loans. Panel C, D, and E show the relationship between
search and origination interest rates, the probability of ever defaulting, and the application approval rate. Panel F shows the degree of
adverse selection in the market by plotting the share of all borrowers originating a mortgage at rate                                                              r   who are of high type.



                                                                                                    58
A Additional Robustness Tables and Figures
                              Table A1:    k -means    Clustering Test for Multiple Borrower Types




                                                 OLS Residuals                       Logit Residuals
                                               (1)              (2)                  (3)             (4)
                                             2 types         3 types             2 types           3 types
                             Default
                             Type 1           0.000            0.000                0.000           0.000
                                           (1,106,792)      (474,524)          (1,106,792)        (406,650)
                             Type 2           1.000            0.000                1.000           0.000
                                            (210,015)       (632,268)           (210,015)         (700,142)
                             Type 3              -             1.000                  -             1.000
                                                 -          (210,015)                 -           (406,650)
                             Approval
                             Type 1           0.000            0.000                0.000           0.000
                                            (954,432)       (954,429)           (954,338)         (954,302)
                             Type 2           1.000            1.000                1.000           1.000
                                           (4,404,541)     (3,677,074)         (4,404,534)       (3,872,321)
                             Type 3              -             1.000                  -             1.000
                                                 -          (727,470)                 -           (532,249)




Notes: Table shows the default and application approval probabilities within each   k-means   clustered group. Columns (1) and (3) impose
that there are two latent types, while columns (2) and (4) assume three latent types.       Columns (1) and (2) cluster individuals based
on residuals from an OLS regression of an indicator for application approval or default on borrower observables, namely the borrower's
FICO score, LTV ratio, back-end DTI ratio, product type, state and origination quarter xed eects, renance ags, and, for the default
regressions, education, income and race. Columns (3) and (4) cluster individuals in a similar manner, only using a logit regression rather
than OLS to estimate the probability of default or application approval. The size of each group is reported in parentheses beneath the
default/approval rates.




                                                                   59
                 6.5                                Figure A1: Mean Rates and Search by Borrower Observables




                                                                                                             6.5
    Mean Origination Rate (%)




                                                                                                Mean Origination Rate (%)
                      6.0




                                                                                                                  6.0
       5.5




                                                                                                   5.5
                 5.0




                                                                                                             5.0
                                0                     5                             10                                      0                     5                           10
                                                      Inquiries                                                                                   Inquiries

                                    High School or Less           At Least Some College.                                                <3,000                 3,000-7,500.
                                    More Than College.                                                                                  7,500+.


                                     Panel A: By Education                                                                      Panel B: By Monthly Income




                                                                                                             6.5
                 6.5
    Mean Origination Rate (%)




                                                                                                Mean Origination Rate (%)
                                                                                                                     6.0
                    6.0




                                                                                                           5.5
       5.5




                                                                                                 5.0
                 5.0




                                                                                                             4.5




                                0                     5                             10                                      0                     5                           10
                                                      Inquiries                                                                                   Inquiries

                                                 Asian               Black.                                                                             ARM
                                                 Hispanic.           White.                                                                             FRM.


                                         Panel C: By Race                                                                       Panel D: By Product Type


Notes: Figure plots average realized interest rates against inquiry counts for realized loans across various borrower observables.




                                                                                           60
Figure A2:                Relationship between Search and Realized Mortgage Interest Rates, Conditional on Observables, by
Ex-Post Delinquency Status and Brokerage Status
           .08




                                                                                                                  .1
           .06




                                                                                                                  .05
              .04
     Coefficient




                                                                                                    Coefficient
    .02




                                                                                                                  0
           0
           -.02




                                                                                                                  -.05
                      2    3     4    5      6        7       8   9       10        11+                                  2      3    4    5      6        7       8      9    10   11+
                                          Number of Inquiries                                                                                 Number of Inquiries


                    Panel A: Loans which do not default ex post                                                              Panel B: Loans which default ex post
           .15




                                                                                                                  .08
                                                                                                                  .06
           .1




                                                                                                              .04
    Coefficient




                                                                                                    Coefficient
       .05




                                                                                                    .02
           0




                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                  -.02
           -.05




                      2    3     4    5      6        7       8   9       10        11+                                  2      3    4    5      6        7       8      9    10   11+
                                          Number of Inquiries                                                                                 Number of Inquiries


                               Panel C: Unbrokered loans                                                                            Panel D: Brokered loans


Notes: Figure plots regression coecients estimated from equation 2 using OLS for the separate subsamples of loans which do not default
ex post (Panel A), which do default ex post (Panel B), which are mortgages found without a broker (Panel C), and which are brokered
mortgages (Panel D). The dependent variable in each regression is the origination interest rate on a loan. Default dened as a loan being
in foreclosure or at least 90 days delinquent by Jan 1, 2015. The independent variables are a set of dummy variables equal to one if the
inquiry count at mortgage origination were equal to                   s   for   s   in    {2, 3, 4, . . . , 11+}.             The omitted category is      s = 1.     Controls are included
for the borrower's FICO score, combined loan-to-value (LTV) ratio, backend debt-to-income (DTI) ratio, renance and product type
indicators, state xed eects, and origination quarter characteristics. Standard errors are clustered at the origination quarter level. Gray
bands indicate 95% condence intervals.




                                                                                              61
           Figure A3: Relationship between search and prices in standard search model without screening




                                                    2.45        2.4
                                      Origination Interest Rate
                                   2.25       2.3   2.22.35




                                                                      0   10   20               30   40   50
                                                                                    Inquiries



Notes: Figure plots the relationship between origination interest rates and search in the absence of screening: where   ph = pl = 1 ,   and
the search costs and oered rates are distributed according to truncated normal distributions.




                                                                                    62
            10                        Figure A4: Default rate and search: by education and income level




                                                                                   8
            8




                                                                                           6
    Default Rate (%)




                                                                          Default Rate (%)
            6




                                                                          4
            4




                                                                                   2
            2




                       0                  5                     10                             0                  5                   10
                                          Inquiries                                                               Inquiries


                             Panel A: High School or Less                                               Panel B: Some College




                                                                                   10
            5




                                                                                   8
            4
    Default Rate (%)




                                                                          Default Rate (%)
            3




                                                                                  6
            2




                                                                                   4
            1




                                                                                   2




                       0                  5                     10                             0                  5                   10
                                          Inquiries                                                               Inquiries


                              Panel C: College Graduate                                            Panel D: Monthly Income$3,000
            8




                                                                                   6
                                                                                   5
                   6
    Default Rate (%)




                                                                          Default Rate (%)
                                                                            3         4
    4




                                                                                   2
            2




                                                                                   1




                       0                  5                     10                             0                  5                   10
                                          Inquiries                                                               Inquiries


                           Panel E: $3,000 < Income   $7, 500                                      Panel F: Monthly Income > $7,500


Notes: Figures plots average annualized default rates against search, subsetting borrowers according to their education and monthly
income levels.




                                                                     63
                                     Figure A5: Default rate and search: by borrower race




                                                                                 14
            6




                                                                                 12
            5
    Default Rate (%)




                                                                        Default Rate (%)
                                                                                    10
             4




                                                                          8
            3




                                                                                 6
            2




                                                                                 4
                       0         5                        10                                0          5              10
                                 Inquiries                                                             Inquiries


                           Panel A: White                                                        Panel B: Black




                                                                                 10
            4




                                                                                        8
                   3
    Default Rate (%)




                                                                        Default Rate (%)
    2




                                                                        6
            1




                                                                                 4




                       0         5                        10                                0          5              10
                                 Inquiries                                                             Inquiries


                           Panel C: Asian                                                       Panel D: Hispanic


Notes: Figures plots average annualized default rates against search, subsetting borrowers according to their race.




                                                                   64
Figure A6: Relationship Between Search and Realized Interest or Default Rates, Controlling for LLPA Categories




                                                                                                                                               .15
                           .2




                                                                                                                                               .1
                           0
    Coefficient




                                                                                                                       Coefficient
       -.2




                                                                                                                          .05
                           -.4




                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                               -.05
                           -.6




                                                   2   3    4    5      6        7       8    9     10    11+                                                          2   3      4    5      6        7       8   9   10   11+
                                                                     Number of Inquiries                                                                                                   Number of Inquiries


                                                           Panel A: Interest Rates                                                                                               Panel B: Interest Rates
                                                           LLPA Categories Only                                                                                                   LLPA Categories +
                                                                                                                                                                               State, Year, and Lender FE



                                                                                                                                                                   1
                                               1
    Change in Annualized Default Log Odds Ratio




                                                                                                                       Change in Annualized Default Log Odds Ratio
                                                                                                                                                          .8
                                      .8




                                                                                                                                                .6
                            .6




                                                                                                                                      .4
                  .4




                                                                                                                            .2
         .2                0




                                                                                                                                               0




                                                   2   3    4    5      6        7       8    9     10    11+                                                          2   3      4    5      6        7       8   9   10   11+
                                                                     Number of Inquiries                                                                                                   Number of Inquiries


                                                           Panel C: Default Rates                                                                                                Panel D: Default Rates
                                                           LLPA Categories Only                                                                                                   LLPA Categories +
                                                                                                                                                                               State, Year, and Lender FE


Notes: Panel A and B plots regression coecients estimated from equation 2 using OLS. The dependent variable in Panels A and B is
the origination interest rate on a loan. Panels C and D plot regression coecients estimated from equation 8 using MLE. The coecients
reect changes in the log odds ratio of the annual default hazard relative to borrowers with one inquiry. Default is dened by the loan being
at least 90 days delinquent, or entering foreclosure. The independent variables are a set of dummy variables equal to one if the inquiry
count at mortgage origination were equal to                                            s for s in {2, 3, 4, . . . , 11+}. The omitted category is s = 1.                                         Controls are included for every bin
for loan-level price adjustment as urged by Fannie Mae, available at                                                  https://www.fanniemae.com/content/pricing/llpa-matrix.pdf.
Panels B and D additionally include state xed eects, lender xed eects, and origination quarter xed eects. Standard errors are
clustered at the origination quarter level. Gray bands indicate 95% condence intervals.




                                                                                                                 65
                  .6              Figure A7: Search Behavior of Rarely Rejected Borrowers - Alternative Rarely Rejected Denition




                                                                                                                                   1             .8
                                                                                                                   Empirical Distribution Function
                  .4




                                                                                                                                        .6
    Density




                                                                                                                            .4
                  .2




                                                                                                                  .2
                  0




                                                                                                                                   0
                                      4                    5                6               7            8                                            0                      5                              10
                                                                 Origination Rate                                                                                            Inquiries


                                      Panel A: Realized rate distribution                                                                                     Panel B: Search distribution
                  6.0




                                                                                                                                   6
                                                                                                                                   5.8
                            5.8
     Mean Origination Rate (%)




                                                                                                                  Coefficient
                                                                                                                       5.6
                5.6




                                                                                                                                   5.4
    5.4




                                                                                                                                   5.2
                  5.2




                                  1             2                3              4               5        6                                                1      2        3           4             5        6+
                                                                Number of Inquiries                                                                                     Number of Inquiries


                 Panel C: Relationship between search and prices                                                                 Panel D: Relationship between search and prices
                                                                                                                                                          controlling for borrower observables


Notes: Figure plots key aspects of search behavior for a pool of borrowers whose applications are rarely rejected. Rarely-rejected borrowers
are dened as thoseapplying for 30-year xed rate mortgages with combined origination loan-to-value ratio below 60, DTI ratio below
40, FICO score above 800. All gures are produced using the dataset of realized loans. Panel A plots the estimated kernel density of
realized interest rates for these borrowers. Dashed lines plot bootstrapped 95% condence intervals, in which bootstraps are clustered at
the origination quarter level. Panel C plots the mean origination interest rate as a function of the number of inquiries for this population
of borrowers. The size of the marker for                                     s     inquiries is proportional to the number of rarely-rejected borrowers with                                  s   inquiries in the data.
Panel B plots the distribution of inquiries for these borrowers. Panel D plots regression coecients estimated from equation 2 using OLS,
for a subsample of borrowers whose loan applications are rarely rejected. The dependent variable in each regression is the origination
interest rate on a loan. The independent variables are a set of dummy variables equal to one if the inquiry count at mortgage origination
were equal to                         s   for   s   in   {2, 3, 4, . . . , 11+}.   The omitted category is   s = 1.                            White heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are clustered
at the origination quarter level. Gray bands indicate 95% condence intervals.




                                                                                                             66
                               .4                                                                                        Figure A8: Estimates by subsample




                                                                                                                                                                                          .83
                                                                                                                                                                 Screening Technology (ph-pl)
                          .35
   Proportion High Types ()




                                                                                                                                                                                     .82
                .3




                                                                                                                                                                           .81
     .25




                                                                                                                                                                 .8
                               .2




                                                                                                                                                                                          .79
                                                           ll          +         20             0        80         0+          isis              isis                                                                 ll           0+           20           0          80            0+             isis            is
                                                        Fu           20         7             62      V<           8          Cr                Cr                                                                   Fu           72          -7            62      V<            :8             Cr                ris
                                                                :7           0-             O<      LT          V:          e-                                                                                               O:              0           O<       LT             V            e-                 gC
                                                               O          62          FIC                     LT         Pr                ng                                                                                             62          FIC                     LT            Pr               n
                                                           FIC        CO:                                                          D   uri                                                                                FIC          O:                                                              D uri
                                                                   FI                                                                                                                                                             FIC


                                                            Panel A: Proportion of high types                                                                                                                      Panel B: Screening technology power                                                 ph - pl
                               .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                             1
                                                                                                                                                                 Cost of Incorrect Approval Decision (xh-xl)
      Low Type Repayment Probability (xl)
                              .6




                                                                                                                                                                                               .8
                   .4




                                                                                                                                                                                    .6
         .2




                                                                                                                                                                        .4                .2
                               0




                                                           ll          +         20             0        80         0+          isis              isis                                                                 ll           0+           20           0          80            0+             isis            is
                                                        Fu           20         7             62      V<           8          Cr                Cr                                                                   Fu           72          -7            62      V<            :8             Cr                ris
                                                                :7           0-             O<      LT          V:          e-                                                                                               O:              0           O<       LT             V            e-                 gC
                                                               O          62          FIC                     LT         Pr                ng                                                                                             62          FIC                     LT            Pr               n
                                                           FIC        CO:                                                          D   uri                                                                                FIC          O:                                                              D uri
                                                                   FI                                                                                                                                                             FIC


                                  Panel C: Repayment probability of low types                                                                        xl                                                             Panel D: Cost of misclassication                                             xh - xl
                                                   60
      Mean of Search Cost Distribution (basis points)




                                                                                                                                                                 S.D. of Search Cost Distribution (basis points)
                                                                                                                                                                                                           25
                                      50




                                                                                                                                                                                                20
                         40




                                                                                                                                                                                   15
              30




                                                                                                                                                                         10
                               20




                                                                                                                                                                                          5




                                                           ll          +         20             0        80         0+          isis              isis                                                                 ll           0+           20           0          80            0+             isis            is
                                                        Fu           20     -7                62      V<           8          Cr                Cr                                                                   Fu           72          -7            62      V<            :8             Cr                ris
                                                                :7        20                O<      LT          V:          e-                                                                                               O:              0           O<       LT             V             e-                gC
                                                               O        :6            FIC                     LT         Pr                ng                                                                                             62          FIC                     LT            Pr               n
                                                           FIC        O                                                            D   uri                                                                                FIC          O:                                                              D uri
                                                                   FIC                                                                                                                                                            FIC


                                                                                                                                   2                                                                                                                                                                         2             2
                                                           Panel E: Mean search cost                               e(µc +c /2)                             Panel F: Standard deviation of search cost                                                                                               ec - 1 e(2µc +c )

Notes: Figure shows estimated parameter values from our maximum likelihood routine across 8 subsamples. The sample of borrowers
originating their mortgage in 2010 or later is omitted due to small sample size. The acceptance probability for high types                                                                                                                                                                       ph      is 1 for all
subsamples.




                                                                                                                                                          67
B Testing Binary Type Assumption
Throughout our analysis, we have assumed that borrowers belong to one of two types: high types who repay their

mortgage with high probability, and low types who are less likely to repay their loan. There is no a priori reason

to suppose that borrowers can be classied in this simple binary manner. To test this assumption, we use insights

developed in the machine learning literature. First, we regress an individual's probability of default and application

approval on a vector of borrower, loan, and application characteristics, as well as state and time xed eects, following

equation 7.     The residuals from these regressions may be interpreted as the unobservable (to the econometrician)

determinants of default and application approval, analogous to the           pz   and   xz   of our model. With these residuals in

hand, we employ a      k -means   clustering algorithm to group borrowers into two and three groups, respectively.

   The results are presented in Table A1. The table presents, for each clustered group, the probability of default

(panel A) and application approval (panel B) in the data. Columns 1 and 3 present the results for a binary grouping,

while columns 2 and 4 allow for a trinary type space. We nd no evidence for a trinary type space. In both trinary

and binary groupings, we observe one group which always defaults and one which always pays o its loan. Similarly,

there exists one group which is always approved for a loan, while another group is never approved.

   One might be concerned that this is driven by our linear functional form assumption. Therefore, columns 3 and 4

present analogous results when we estimate an individual's probability of default or application approval using a logit

regression. The similarity between trinary and binary groupings is robust to alternative function form assumptions.




C Robustness of Positive Relationship Between Search and Rates
Figures A1-A2 and A4-A6 present robustness of the key empirical fact of the paper, namely that realized interest and

default rates increase in borrower search. Figure A1 plots the mean realized interest rate against against search for

a host of borrower subsets - by race, education, income, and product type. Figure A2 plots the estimated regression

coecients from equation 2 for the subset of loans that do/do not eventually default, and for the set of borrowers

who do/do not obtain their mortgage from a broker. In all cases, we nd the positive relationship between search

and interest rates. Figures A4 through A5 plot the mean default rates as a function of search by borrower race, and

monthly income. Again, we consistently nd a positive relationship between search and default. Finally, Figure A6

plots coecients estimated from Equations 2 (Panels A and B) and 7 (Panels C and D), after increasing our set of

controls to include every bucket for loan-level price adjustments provided by Fannie Mae.
                                                                                                         42 Panels A and C show

the results when we omit state, origination date, and lender xed eects, while Panels B and D include our full suite

of xed eects. Without controlling for aggregate trends, the relationship between search and interest rates becomes

noisier. However, controlling for borrower state and origination quarter recovers the positive relationship between

interest rates, default, and search.      This is unsurprising - the unobserved quality of borrowers is thought to have

changed substantially over our sample period, and varies substantially across states. Overall, the central fact of the

paper appear robust to all manner of control variables and across nearly all subsets of borrowers.

  42 These   adjustment factors may be obtained from   https://www.fanniemae.com/content/pricing/llpa-matrix.pdf.


                                                                  68
D Likelihood Construction
D.1 Demand
In our model, an inquiry is a draw from the oered rate distribution. Let                                      Si   denote a random variable equal to the

number of inquiries on loan application                     i,   and let      Ais   be an indicator for whether an application sent on the                         sth
                                                                                                              
search was accepted. Dene                 Ri   to be the realized rate on mortgage i, and                    Ri    to be the borrower i's reservation rate.

Let   Di    be an indicator for whether borrower                       i   defaults on the mortgage. Finally, we let the random variable                          Ois
denote the mortgage rate oered to (not necessarily applied for or realized by) borrower                                              i   on inquiry     s,   which has

CDF     H (o).
      We proceed using a maximum likelihood approach.                                   First consider the probability that a realized loan with                     s
                                                                                                                                                   th
inquiries, and origination interest rate                r    is observed.           For the loan to have been realized on the                      s    inquiry, the

borrower must have failed to originate a mortgage on her rst                                  s - 1 inquiries, and then observed a loan oered at rate
r,   applied for it, and had her application approved. To build the likelihood for such a borrower, suppose rst that

one could observe both the borrower's underlying type                               z   and reservation rate       r .   The probability that the borrower

                                                                 th
originates a loan at a rate below               r   on her   s        inquiry is (suppressing the loan index                i   for legibility):




P r {R  r, S = s|z, r } = P r{(Applied                           and accepted for            sth   draw with rate       r)       (Did not originate previously)|z, r
                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                   }

                                      = P r{(Oered           rate less than             r   and   r   and accepted)         (Did not originate previously)|z, r
                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                            }

                                      = P r {(Os  r  r  As = 1)  [¬(O1  r  A1 = 1)  . . .  ¬(Os-1  r  As-1 = 1)] |z, r }
                                                                                                                                           s-1
                                      = P r {(Os  r  r  As = 1) |z, r } (P r {¬(O  r  A = 1)|z, r })
                                                                                                  s-1
                                      = 1 {r  r } · pz H (r) (1 - pz H (r ))


      where   ¬    represents logical negation. The third equality acknowledges that the borrower may not originate a loan

in a given inquiry either because the oered rate was too high or because her application were rejected. The fourth

equality follows by the i.i.d. nature of both borrower quality signals and oered rate draws, which stems from the

assumption of undirected search. The nal equality relies on the independence of borrower signals and oered rate

draws. One may take the derivative of the above expression with respect to                                         r   to derive a likelihood of realizing a

loan at rate       r   after   s   inquiries, conditional on a borrower's type and reservation rate:



                                                                                                                            s-1
                                         l (R = r, S = s|z, r ) = 1 {r  r } · pz h(r) (1 - pz H (r ))

      for   h(r)   the probability density function (pdf ) of the oered rate distribution evaluated at                                      r.   In reality, we do

not observe the borrower's reservation interest rate                         r   or type      z.   Thus to form a feasible likelihood, it is necessary to

integrate over the borrowers' possible reservation rates and type. Letting                                    is    be an indicator for whether borrower

i   applied for the loan oered to her on her                     sth   search, this yields the likelihood function for the joint distribution of




                                                                                        69
origination rates and search:




                                                                                           
                                                                                                                    s-1
                         l (Ri = r, Si = s|Ais = 1, is = 1)         = ph h(r)                 (1 - ph H (r ))             dFh (r )
                                                                                       r
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                              s-1
                                                                    +    (1 - )pl h(r)                 (1 - pl H (r ))              dFl (r )
                                                                                                r


       for   Fz (r )   the equilibrium distribution of reservation rates for a borrower of type                        z.
       Observe at this stage that our likelihood function does not incorporate the observed information on borrower

default.       In the model, the probability that a type            z   borrower does not default throughout the life of the loan is

xz .    In the data, however, we do not observe whether the borrower will default at any point; instead, we observe

the borrower's payment status as of January 1, 2015. We therefore must convert the default probability observed in

the data,       Di ,   to match the default concept employed in our model. To do so, we assume that defaults occur with a

constant hazard. Specically, we let the term of the loan be given by                          T,    and the number of months since origination

be given by       t.   For instance, a 30-year xed rate mortgage originated in January 2014 would have                                    T = 30 × 12 = 360
and     t = 12   in January 2015. We may then dene the survival function of the loan to be




                                                                 (t|z, T ) = xt/T
                                                                              z


       Observe that       (0|z, T ) = 1,   and   (T |z, T ) = xz        as desired.        Since the default indicator                 Di    is assumed to be

independent from search and acceptance decisions, conditional on borrower type, including this information into our

likelihood function is straightforward.             Let    d  {0, 1}    be a realization of the random variable                          Di .   A borrower of
                                                                                                                                                            t/T
type    z,    who has seen a share     t/T   of his loan term elapsed by January 2015, realizes                        Di = 0         with probability    xz      ,
                                              t/T
and     Di = 1     with probability   1-     xz . Thus we may write the likelihood of the joint distribution of our loan data
(Si , Ri , Di |Ais = 1, is = 1; t, T )     as follows:




                                                                                                                              
                                                                             t/T                     t/T                                          s-1
l(Ri = r, Si = s, Di = d|Ais = 1, is = 1, t, T ) =  d(1 - xh ) + (1 - d)xh                                   ph h(r)             (1 - ph H (r ))        dFh (r )
                                                                                                                          r
                                                                                                                
                                                                 t/T                  t/T                                              s-1
                                         + (1 - ) d(1 -         xl )    + (1 -     d)xl        pl h(r)             (1 - pl H (r ))           dFl (r )      (10)
                                                                                                            r
                                             P r {z =l}
                                                               P r {Di =d|z =l;t,T }               P r {Rs =r,As =1,s-1 Failed Searchs|z =l}


       In our application-level dataset, we may not incorporate information on oered rates or default into our likelihood

function. Instead, we simply match the probability of a borrower having                                s   inquiries given that she applied for the

loan:    P r{Si = s|s = 1}.         Again, we can write this as the probability of having                          s-1        failed inquiries, conditional

on applying for the oered rate on the              sth    inquiry. The conditional probability formula implies that this probability

may be expressed as




                                                                          70
                                                                           P r{s - 1     failed inquiries      is = 1}
                           P r{s - 1     failed inquiries|is    = 1} =
                                                                                             P r{is = 1}

      It is straightforward to show, following a similar argument to that above,that the numerator may be written as




                                                                                                             s-1
                      P r{s - 1   failed inquiries    is = 1} =                  H (r ) (1 - ph H (r ))            dFh (r )

                                                                                                                    s-1
                                                                      +    (1 - )         H (r ) (1 - pl H (r ))          dFl (r )         (11)



That is, the probability of applying for the           sth    inquiry is the probability that the            sth   inquiry yields an oered rate

that is less than the borrower's reservation rate, multiplied by the probability that the borrower did not both apply

for a loan and have her application accepted on any of the previous                     s - 1 draws from the rate distribution.      Integrating

over the borrower's reservation rate and possible type yields the above expression.

      It remains to derive   P r{is = 1}, which is the probability that the sth                  inquiry enters our application data through

a borrower application. First, suppose that one could observe a maximum of                           ~ inquiries for any individual borrower,
                                                                                                     S
and that each inquiry is, ex ante, equally likely to be observed. Since we only observe applicants who have are yet

to originate a mortgage, the probability that we observe inquiry                    s    is then




                    1                                                      1                        s -1
                      P r{s - 1   failed inquiries    is = 1} =               H (r ) (1 - ph H (r ))     dFh (r )
                    ~
                    S                                                      ~
                                                                           S
                                                                           1                              s -1
                                                                      +      (1 - ) H (r ) (1 - pl H (r ))     dFl (r )
                                                                           ~
                                                                           S

      We could have observed any of the borrower's inquiries up to                      ~.
                                                                                        S    The probability that we observe exactly the

sth   inquiry in an application is thus the probability of observing the                   sth   inquiry, divided by the total probability of

observing any inquiry up to         ~:
                                    S

                                                                           P r{s - 1     failed inquiries      is = 1}
                       P r{s - 1   failed inquiries|is    = 1} =                                                                           (12)
                                                                                P r{s - 1     failed inquiries      is = 1}
                                                                         ~
                                                                      1s S

      Using the linearity of the integral operator, the denominator may be written as




                                                                                         s -1
                                                     H (r )           (1 - ph H (r ))            dFh (r )
                                                                ~
                                                             1s S

                                                                                                 s -1
                                          +   (1 - )         H (r )            (1 - pl H (r ))          dFl (r )
                                                                         ~
                                                                      1s S


      Letting   ~
                S   go to innity and substituting back into 12 yields the likelihood contribution of an application with                      s


                                                                          71
inquiries:



                                                                      P r{s - 1 failed inquiries  is = 1}
                                           l(Si = s|is = 1) =                                                                                         (13)
                                                                               /ph + (1 - )/pl

    where the numerator is dened as in equation 11. Combining this with the likelihood of each realized loan from

equation 10 yields the likelihood for our full data.
                                                                      43

    Although well-dened, maximizing the likelihood dened by the above equations remains dicult. Given two joint

distributions, we must estimate ve parameters associated with the type distribution, and default and acceptance

probabilities, as well as three distributions: the oered rate distribution                              H (o),    and the reservation rate distributions

                                                       
for high and low types,          Fh (r )     and   Fl (r ),   respectively. To ease the estimation burden, we make two simplifying

assumptions. First, we assume that high and low type borrowers draw their search costs from the same distribution

G(c).    This assumption guarantees that the reservation rate distribution for each type is entirely determined by the

distribution of search costs and oered rates. To see this, recall that a type                                z   borrower has the following relationship

                                                                      
between their search cost           c   and reservation rate      r



                                                                 r
                                                     c = pz      -
                                                                         (r - r) dH (r)  z (r )


    That is, we may express a borrower's of type                      z 's   search costs as a monotone function of their reservation rate

z (r ).    Since   z (r )   is strictly increasing over its domain, its inverse
                                                                                                       -1
                                                                                                       z  (c)     exists and is strictly increasing. This

implies that the distribution of reservation rates for type                        z   individuals may be expressed as




                                                                 Fz (r ) = G (z (r ))

    In addition, letting        g (c)    be the pdf of the search cost distribution, and                         fz (r )   the pdf of the reservation rate

distribution for type       z   individuals, we may write



                                                                                               d (r )
                                                              fz (r ) = g (z (r ))
                                                                                                dr

    If   z (r ) is easily calculable, then estimating the distribution of borrower search costs and oered rates is sucient
to estimate the distribution of reservation rates for each type of worker.                                       This greatly simplies the estimation

problem:     rather than estimate three distributions, we now only require two.                                     To feasibly calculate the mapping

                                                                                   
between search costs and reservation interest rates                          z (r ),      we impose our second assumption:               that the oered

rate distribution is well-approximated by a mixture of                         N       normally distributed random variables parameterized by
                                N
            (n) (n) (n)
H          µH , H , H                   , while the search cost distribution is well-approximated by a mixture of                         N   log-normally
                                n=1
                                                                                                       N
                                                                               (n)       (n)     (n)
distributed random variables parameterized by                    G  µG , G , G                               . That is, we assume that we may write
                                                                                                       n=1

  43 We   do not observe the universe of realized loans. We therefore assume that the probability of observing any given loan is independent
of all other events, and thus is additively separable in the log-likelihood function.




                                                                                72
                                                                              2                                                                              2
                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                    (n)                                                                                (n)
                                        1                  r - µH                                                     1                 log c - µG
                                (n)                                                                         (n)
         h(r)               H         (n) 
                                               exp -                                         g (c)         G       (n) 
                                                                                                                            exp -
                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                          2                                                                             2        
                                      H 2                      (n)                                                cG 2                         (n)
                        n                                 2    H                                      n                                  2     G


   for    (n)         the mixing weight on the           nth   normal distribution,          µ(n) ,  (n)   the mean and standard deviation parameters

             th
of the   n        underlying normal distribution. This assumption permits the analytical construction of the reservation rate

distribution for high and low type individuals, and is motivated by the roughly normal distribution of residualized

realized rates observed in Figure 1. A detailed description of this construction is provided in Appendix E.1.

   To estimate our parameters, we maximize the log likelihood for our sample of loans and applications. We assume

that an approved loan application is reported in our loan-level dataset with i.i.d. probability                                         q.    We consider           q   to

be a nuisance parameter whose estimation is not of interest. Let the set of observations in the realized loan dataset

be given by           L,    while the set of observations in the application dataset be given by                           A.   We therefore maximize the

following log-likelihood with respect to a choice of                                {ph , pl , xh , xl , , H , C }




         L (; q )           =          [log q + log l(Ri , Di , Si |Ais = 1, is = 1, , t, T )] +                   [log(1 - q ) + log l(Si |is = 1; )]
                                 iL                                                                          iA


   where          l(Ri , Di , Si |Ais = 1, is = 1, , t, T )           is given by equation 10, and                l(Si = s|is = 1, )    is given by equation

13. Since         q   is additively separable from             ,   its value will not aect our optimal choice of                ^.
                                                                                                                                     To uniquely identify the

parameters, we impose that                    ph  pl ,   but impose nothing about the relationship between                       xh   and   xl .
   To prepare the data for estimation, we residualize all observed interest rates to reect information that the

lender can observe about the borrower without an in-depth screening. Following equation 2, we regress origination

interest rates on the borrower's sex, race, age group, education, income group, and debt-to-income group, as well as

origination year and property state xed eects. As a result, our estimates should be interpreted as allowing lenders

to discriminate along easily observable characteristics based on price.                                     Second, we winsorize all applications with

more than 11 inquiries, in order to match the maximum number of inquiries observed in the realized loan dataset.




D.2 Calculating Market Shares
To construct the market share of type                     z    individuals as a function of a bank'soered interest rate                      qz (r),   consider the

probability that a type                z    borrower with reservation rate               r   borrows at rate       R  r.   If   r  r,    this probability will

be 1, as the borrower will never apply for a mortgage at a rate above                                       r.    Suppose now that      r < r .        Since search

is undirected and the application approval process is independent of the search process conditional on a borrower's

type, this probability is equal to the probability that the borrower is oered a rate less than or equal to                                             r,   given that

she was oered a rate less than                   r .   Thus,




                                                                                        73
                                                                                                         H (r)
                                                                   P r{R  r|r < r } =                           .
                                                                                                         H (r )

       Let    Fz (r ) and fz (r ) be the distribution and density, respectively, of type z                                    reservation rates. Integrating out the

condition on the borrower's reservation rate yields the share of the type                                           z   market accounted for by lenders charging

a rate less than        r

                                                                                     
                                                                                          H (r)
                                                     P r{R  r|Z = z } =                          fz (r )dr + Fz (r).
                                                                                 r        H (r )

       Taking the derivative of the above equation with respect to                                   r    yields the market share of lenders charging a rate

r:

                                                                                                  
                                                           dP r{R  r|Z = z }                         h(r)
                                                                             =                              fz (r )dr
                                                                  dr                          r      H (r )

       Finally, since a mass            h(r)   of lenders charge interest rate                 r,    and the borrower samples each of these lenders with

equal probability, the residual demand curve for a lender charging rate                                          r   is the above quantity divided by           h(r):

                                                                                         
                                                                                              fz (r ) 
                                                                      qz (r) =                       dr
                                                                                     r        H (r )

       as in equation 5. Taking the derivative of the above expression yields the downward slope of the residual demand

curve from type          z      individuals, reecting the market power that the search process gives banks:



                                                                       dqz (r)    fz (r)
                                                                               =-        < 0.                                                                           (14)
                                                                         dr       H (r)

D.3 Estimating The Cost of Making a Loan
In order to construct robust counterfactual analyses, one must impose structure on the determination of equilibrium

oered rates in the market. We thus estimate the cost of making loans in the market. Recall that, as in section 5.3,

lenders choose oered rates                 r in order to maximize expected prots.                          All lenders share a common cost of making a loan

m.     Let borrower creditworthiness                  xz   reect the probability that the borrower never defaults on her loan. We assume

that a borrower defaults at a constant hazard, so that the probability that a type                                                 z   borrower with loan of term         T
                                            t/T
survives through            t   periods is xz . This implies that a bank will expect to reclaim a fraction                                     ~z = (xz - 1)/ log(xz )
                                                                                                                                               x
of every dollar loaned to a type                 z    borrower.
                                                                44 As a result, letting                    S   be the size of the market, the expected prots

from making a loan at rate                 r   are

      44 To   see this, suppose a borrower originates a mortgage whose term is                       T,   requiring     N   discrete payments of equal size. Letting    (t)
be the survival function after a fraction             t   of the loan's life, we have that the expected repayment is                         (nT /N )/N .   Substituting in
                                                                                                                                       1nN
for   (t)     using the proportional hazard assumption implies that the expected repayment can be expressed as

                                                                                 1
                                                                               N
                                                                            1 xz  (1 - xz )
                                                                                      1     .
                                                                            N         N
                                                                                1 - xz
     Taking the limit as        N   tends to innity yields the result.




                                                                                         74
                                                            xh - 1                                   xl - 1
                      E[(r|m)] = S qh (r) r ·                         - m + (1 - )ql (r) r ·                   -m
                                                           log(xh )                                 log(xl )

   where     qz (r)   is given by equation 5. The adverse selection problem presents a challenge for standard rst order

approaches to maximization and implies that certain observed rates are dicult to rationalize. To match the data,

we thus exploit the fact that most mortgage rates are oered according to increments of 1/8 of a percent. Following

the logic of section 5.3, we transform the interest rate setting problem into a discrete choice problem, in which lenders

choose from a menu of       K   discrete potential rates to oer. This approach leads to the oered rate choice probabilities

expressed in equation 6:



                                                                            exp (E[(rk |m)]/ )
                                          P r{j   choose   rk |m,  } =      K
                                                                                        ~ |m)]/
                                                                                exp E[(rk
                                                                         ~ =1
                                                                         k

   In equilibrium, this oered rate distribution must be consistent with the oered rate distribution                       H (o)   used to

calculate the market shares expected from choosing rate               r, as determined by 5.    Furthermore, the maximum likelihood

estimates of    H (o)    must align with these choice probabilities.             This suggests a robust approach to estimating the

supply side parameters by minimizing the distance between our maximum likelihood estimates of                            H (o)    and the

choice probabilities as given by equation 6. Specically, we choose the cost of making a loan                   m   in order to minimize

the distance between the mean and variance of the maximum-likelihood implied oered rate distribution, and the

logit-choice probability distribution.




E Computational Details
E.1 Constructing Reservation Rate Distributions from Search Cost Distributions
Since high and low type borrowers draw their search costs from the same distribution                       G(c),   recall that one may

express a borrower of type       z 's   search costs as a monotone function of their reservation rate:




                                                               r
                                                  c = pz       -
                                                                   (r - r) dH (r)  z (r )


   In this section, we derive analytical expressions for              z (r )    under the assumption that the distribution of oered

rates and search costs are well approximated by a mixture of normal and log-normal distributions, respectively. That

is, we assume that we may write


                                                                                            2
                                                               H     1      r - µH
                                                                                 n
                                              h(r)             n      exp -        2
                                                                   H 2
                                                                   n            H
                                                           n                2 (n )
         H
   for   n   the mixing weight on the        nth   normal distribution,     µH   H
                                                                             n , n   the mean and standard deviation parameters of




                                                                       75
the   nth   underlying normal distribution. Similarly, we assume that the search cost distribution is well approximated
                                                                                                       N
by a mixture of log-normal distributions parameterized by                 G  µG   G   G
                                                                              n , n , n                n=1
                                                                                                           .

      Suppressing the superscript    H   on the parameters of the normal mixture for presentation, and letting                               pdfN (µ, ) (x)
and   cdfN (µ, ) (x)    be the pdf and cdf of a normal distribution with mean                µ   and standard deviation                    evaluated at   x,
we have:




                                           r
                             
                           (r )   = pz         (r - r) dH (r)
                                          -
                                                                     r                                         2
                                                                           r      (r - µn )
                                  = pz r H (r ) - pz           n            exp -      2
                                                                                                                    dr
                                                           n         -    n 2        2n

                                  = pz r H (r ) - pz           n µn cdfN (µn ,n ) (r ) - n
                                                                                         2
                                                                                           pdfN (µn, n ) (r )
                                                           n


      where the third equality follows by integration by parts. The above expression may be numerically inverted in a

computationally-ecient way. Also observe that we may calculate the derivative of                                   z (r )   to be


                                                                 r
                                         d (r )   d
                                                =  pz                (r - r)dH (r) = pz H (r )
                                          dr     dr             -

      which is easy to compute given our approximation to            H (o).   Thus we may construct the distribution of reservation

rates for a type    z   individual given our approximation of        G(c)     and   H (o).


E.2 Computing Counterfactual Oered Rate Distributions using Lenders' Prot Max-
    imization
Changing any of our parameters will change the equilibrium distribution of rates oered in the market. Adjusting

the search cost distribution or probability that an application is accepted changes the reservation rate distributions

which enter into the market share equations (5) and (14). Meanwhile, changes to                           , xh , m,         or   xl   directly impact the

relationship between lender loan costs and their optimally-oered rate. Counterfactual analysis therefore necessitates

a method of computing counterfactual oered rate distributions that constitute Nash equilibria.

      Since both the market share equations (5) and (14) and reservation rate distributions depend on the distribution

of oered rates in the market, a lender's optimal oered rate choice                     r
                                                                                       ^   will depend on the choices of all other rms

in the market     H (r).    In equilibrium, the distribution of oered rates implied by the lenders' prot maximization

problem     ^ (^
            H  r) must be the same as the distribution of rates H (r) used to calculate a lender's market share functions.
Thus we need to solve a functional xed point problem for                  H (r).
      Our approach proceeds in three steps. First, we guess a normally-distributed equilibrium oered rate distribution

H (r; H ).    Next, we use equation 6 to calculate an implied distribution of optimally-oered rates                                   ^ (r; H ).
                                                                                                                                      H            Finally,

we minimize the distance between         H (r; H )   and   ^ (r; H )
                                                           H             with respect to         H .   The problem may then be written as




                                                                     76
                                                    min                   ^ (r; H )||
                                                            ||H (r; H ) - H                                                        (15)
                                                        H

   for some appropriately chosen norm             ||.   We solve this problem using numerical gradient-descent optimization

algorithms implemented with KNITRO, and match the mean and variance of the implied distributions to that of

the guessed distribution.
                               45 Once the equilibrium distribution of oered rates is calculated, it is straightforward to

produce counterfactual simulations of the demand side of the model.

   This approach faces two potential problems. First, multiple equilibria may arise, as changes in the oered rate

distribution endogenously determine borrowers' reservation rate strategies, which in turn aect the optimal oered

rate distribution. To address this issue, we experiment with multiple starting values when searching for equilibria with

the approach laid out above. Across all of our starting values, we nd the same equilibrium oered rate distributions.

   A second concern arises from numerical approximations. We approximate the equilibrium oered rate distribu-

tions with normal distributions, which are then fed into the market share equations in order to calculate logit choice

probabilities for every feasible rate. The objective function in the minimization problem 15 therefore compares a

normal distribution with logit-implied choice probabilities, which will naturally involve some error. To evaluate the

severity of this concern, we search for an equilibrium using the set of parameters estimated using our maximum

likelihood routine.       The mean and standard deviation of the MLE oered rate distribution are 0.142 and 0.547,

respectively. By comparison, the equilibrium distribution, obtained by running these parameters through the equi-

librium search routine described above has a mean and standard deviation of 0.206 and 0.723, respectively. Although

imperfect, we consider this error to be relatively small. After simulating the demand side of the model, this leads to

a gap in average rates paid of 2.9bp, and an increase in search of 0.13 inquiries per borrower. For all counterfactuals

in which we allow the oered rate distribution to adjust, we compare the counterfactual output against equilibrium

simulations, which are based on a normally-distributed oered rate distribution with mean and standard deviation

of 0.206 and 0.723, respectively.




  45 It   is unnatural to assume that oered rates will be well-approximated by a single normal distribution under the redlining counter-
factual. In this counterfactual, we therefore approximate the oered rate distribution with a mixture of two normal distributions - one
for redlining lenders and another for non-redlining lenders - and nd an associated logit-implied distribution for each.   Our objective
function then minimizes the weighted sum of the distance between each normal and logit-implied distributions.




                                                                    77
