                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 UNIVERSAL BASIC INCOME:
                                  A DYNAMIC ASSESSMENT

                                         Diego Daruich
                                        Raquel Fernández

                                       Working Paper 27351
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27351


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2020




We wish to thank seminar audiences at the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Fordham
Macroeconomics Conference, California Macroeconomics Conference and University of
Houston. Fernandez wishes to thank the CV Starr Center for financial support. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Diego Daruich and Raquel Fernández. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Universal Basic Income: A Dynamic Assessment
Diego Daruich and Raquel Fernández
NBER Working Paper No. 27351
June 2020
JEL No. H24,H31,I38,J24

                                          ABSTRACT

The idea of universal basic income (UBI)--a set income that is given to all without any
conditions--is making an important comeback but there is no real evidence regarding its long-
term consequences. This paper provides a very inexpensive evaluation of such a policy by
studying its dynamic consequences in a general equilibrium model with imperfect capital markets
and labor market shocks, in which households make decisions about education, savings, labor
supply, and with intergenerational linkages via skill formation. The steady state of the model is
estimated to match US household data. We find that a UBI policy that gives all households a
yearly income equivalent to the poverty line level has very different welfare implications for
those alive when the policy is introduced relative to future generations. While a majority of adults
(primarily older non-college workers) would vote in favor of introducing UBI, all future
generations (operating behind the veil of ignorance) would prefer to live in an economy without
UBI. The expense of the latter leads to lower skill formation and education, requiring even higher
tax rates over time. Modeling automation as an increased probability of being hit by an "out-of-
work" shock, the model is also used to provide insights on how the benefits of UBI change as the
environment becomes riskier. The results suggest that UBI may be a useful transitional policy to
help current individuals whose skills are more likely to become obsolete and are unprepared for
the increased risk, while, simultaneously, education policies may be implemented to increase the
likelihood that future cohorts remain productive and employed.


Diego Daruich
University of Southern California
3670 Trousdale Pkwy
Los Angeles, CA 90089
daruich@marshall.usc.edu

Raquel Fernández
Department of Economics
New York University
19 West 4th Street, 6th Floor
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
raquel.fernandez@nyu.edu
1     Introduction

   e idea of universal basic income (UBI)--a set income that is given to all without any conditions--
is making an important comeback in many countries. is is most likely the result of anxieties about
automation and robotization, the depth of the last recession both in the US and in Europe, the stagnation
of median wages over several decades in an era of rising inequality and, very recently, the large-scale
increase in unemployment in response to the coronavirus epidemic.1 What do we know about UBIs?
What set of issues would an UBI solve and what new set of problems may it create or aggravate? ese
are important questions whose answers depend on the features of the economy under consideration
and the generosity of the UBI grant.

   ere is no real experience in advanced economies with a UBI policy although studies have made use
of variation in income arising from changes in oil revenue or EITC generosity to study possible con-
sequences.2 Although much of the a ention has been on the e ects of programs on labor supply, it
may very well be that the more important consequences of a UBI are intergenerational.3           ere have
not been, however, long-run large-scale experiments that allow one to evaluate the longer-term inter-
generational consequences of these programs nor their implications at an economy-wide level, i.e., in
general equilibrium. As stated by Hoynes and Rothstein (2019) in their excellent review article on UBI in
advanced economies, "we have a good deal of evidence from a range of se ings that substitution e ects
on short-run labor supply are moderate and income e ects are small. ere is also clear evidence that
additional family resources improve children's outcomes, including health and school achievement. e
major open questions about UBIs, in our view, relate to longer-run e ects, which are much harder to
study using randomized and natural experiments."

In this paper we hope to provide a very inexpensive evaluation of such a program by studying its
consequences in a computational model laboratory. We develop a model that captures several of the
basic costs and bene ts associated with a UBI policy.         e model features an economy with imperfect
capital markets and overlapping generations. An individual's rst decision is an education choice
(college) based on their assets, skills, and their taste for education. Skills themselves are endogenous:
the result of investments of time and money made by parents during an individual's early childhood.
College can be nanced with a combination of parental transfers (which are endogenous), working
while in college, and borrowing. A er education, an individual works, has children, makes time, money,
     1 A UBI policy has been advocated by people ranging from Pope Francis, to Elon Musk, or to former US presidential

candidate Andrew Yang as well as by senior o cials in organizations such as the United Nations or the World Economic
Forum (see Wignaraja, 2020).
     2    e Alaska Permanent Fund and the Eastern Cherokee Native American tribe are programs which provide demogrants
to adults. e rst makes payments which may vary from year to year, ranging from $1000-2000 per person per year and
  nanced by Alaska's oil revenues. e second provides payments of around $4000 per person per year nanced out of tribal
casino revenues. See Jones and Marinescu (2018) and Akee et al. (2010, 2018).
     3 For example, policies that increased maternal employment and family income (Morris et al., 2009) were found to in-

crease child achievement. Programs such as SNAP and the EITC improve health at birth (e.g., Almond et al., 2011) and
increased generosity in the EITC is also associated with higher children's achievement (Dahl and Lochner, 2012; Che y
et al., 2011) and educational a ainment (Bastian and Michelmore, 2018; Manoli and Turner, 2018).


                                                           1
and transfer decisions towards their child, and eventually retires and dies.   ese investments and
intergenerational linkages are embedded in a fairly standard general equilibrium life-cycle Aiyagari
framework with wage uncertainty, including a more novel "out-of-work" shock, and with a tax function
calibrated to the US economy.     is framework allows aggregate education and skills to a ect prices
and includes endogenous skill formation, education, savings, and labor supply which is important for
the nancing of policies to have distortionary e ects.

   e steady state of the model is parameterized and estimated to match household-level data using a va-
riety of data sources such as the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID), the Child Development Sup-
plement (CDS) to the PSID, and the 1979 cohort of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY79).
We validate the model in a variety of ways, must notably by conducting the appropriate partial equi-
librium exercises in the model to compare its predictions with those on child development and cash
transfers (Dahl and Lochner, 2012) as well as estimates of the elasticity of labor supply.

We introduce the UBI policy as a lump-sum transfer made annually to all individuals once they reach
adulthood. What are the bene ts of a UBI policy? In an economy in which individuals are subject
to both wage and employment shocks and in which credit and insurance markets are imperfect, UBI
allows for greater smoothing of consumption and the guarantee of a minimum standard of living. It can
also allow agents to undertake relatively expensive investments--in our model, a end college--which
might have large consumption costs associated with them given the inability to borrow against future
income. Furthermore, it can have bene cial intergenerational consequences from allowing parents to
increase their investments in their child's skill formation.4

We nd that a UBI policy that unconditionally gives all households a yearly income equivalent to the
poverty line level ($11,000 per household per year as measured in year 2000 dollars) has very di erent
welfare implications for generations that are alive when the policy is introduced relative to future gen-
erations.5    e policy is welcomed by poorer households--those hit by out-of-work shocks as well as
those with low skills or without a college education. Average welfare for adults alive when the policy
is introduced increases by 1.2 percent measured in consumption equivalence units and, indeed, if this
policy were voted upon it would win against the status quo. It is, however, a very expensive policy to
implement. e higher tax rate required to nance this policy reduces investment in skills, leading to a
less skilled work force and requiring even higher taxes over time. All future generations, operating be-
hind the veil of ignorance, would prefer to live in a world without UBI and would be willing to sacri ce
over 9% of consumption to do so. To evaluate a reasonable alternative scenario in which UBI replaces
some current spending on poorer individuals, we also consider the welfare consequences of allowing it
to replace the current progressive tax rate with a linear one. We nd similar results regarding winners
and losers as with the original UBI policy.
    4   e literature on UBI has also pointed to other, mainly psychological and mental health bene ts, which we do not
assess here but are important to consider as well in a fuller evaluation of this policy. ere are also important ethical and
philosophical arguments made on its behalf (Van Parijs and Vanderborght, 2017). See also Ghatak and Maniquet (2019) for
a theoretical assessment of the desirability of a UBI.
    5   e poverty threshold for a 2-adult household, as de ned by the U.S. Census, was $11,235 in the year 2000.


                                                            2
   e model is also able to provide insights on how robotization and automation might a ect the desir-
ability of UBI. We model the increased risk of obsolescence of skills and jobs as a higher probability of
being hit by an "out-of-work" shock (in accordance with estimates provided by various organizations),
and modify the aggregate technology such that the production function re ects the increased impor-
tance of college labor. We nd that greater automation increases the polarization of preferences for UBI
between current adults vs. future cohorts. Individuals who have already made their education decisions
and are working are the most likely to su er the consequences of a riskier world, especially if they have
not accumulated enough wealth. Future cohorts, on the other hand, face the consequences of an even
more expensive UBI as higher taxes make college less a ractive and increased automation reduces the
tax base further. Lastly, we contrast the e ects of UBI with an alternative universal policy ­ early child-
hood development (ECD) ­ and examine how the relative a ractiveness of these policies depends on
the riskiness of the environment. Our results suggest that UBI may be a useful transitional policy to
help current individuals whose skills are more likely to become obsolete and may have not prepared
for the increased risk, while, simultaneously, ECD may be implemented to increase the likelihood that
future cohorts remain productive and employed.


1.1    Related Literature

Although notable economists such as Tony Atkinson used public nance tools to evaluate UBI polices
already several decades ago (see, e.g. Atkinson (1991)), there are few studies of actual UBI policies.
   is is undoubtedly a consequence of the absence of programs that ful ll the criteria of being universal
and signi cant in size. In a developed country context, the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC), the 1970s
Income Maintenance Experiments, cash welfare programs, and programs such as the Alaska Permanent
Fund and the Indian tribe payments can be used to study some of the potential behavioral responses to a
UBI. For excellent reviews of the literature see Hoynes and Rothstein (2019) for high-income countries
and Banerjee et al. (2019) and Hanna and Olken (2018) for developing countries.

Our paper is the rst, to our knowledge, to study the welfare consequences of a UBI policy in a dynamic,
general equilibrium, quantitative framework. It is related to a growing literature on the dynamic conse-
quences of tax and education policy. Benabou (2002) is a seminal paper in this literature that provided
closed form solutions along with a welfare analysis for a calibrated model with human, but not physi-
cal, capital accumulation.6 More recently, Krueger and Ludwig (2016) study the optimal labor tax and
college subsidy policy in a heterogeneous agent economy with capital accumulation. In their model,
agents' borrowing is restricted to college loans.      ey nd that the optimal college subsidy is large, and
even larger in a general equilibrium as subsidizing college decreases the skill premium, redistributing
income across education groups.        e labor tax rate, however, needs to be smaller in order not to impose
large costs in the transition to the steady state. Our paper does not characterize the optimal policy but
instead examines the welfare implications of a popular policy proposal. In the model, we allow agents
   6 See   also Bovenberg and Jacobs (2005).


                                                     3
a greater degree of ability to self-insure and smooth consumption by permi ing them access to limited
borrowing. Furthermore, as in Daruich (2019), we endogenize the link between parental and child skills
by allowing the former to invest in early human capital formation of their young children. is allows
policies that redistribute income such as a UBI to play an additional role by permi ing parents to in-
crease their investments in their child's education, if they wish. Furthermore, it renders transfer policies
that take place in early adulthood--when life-cycle earning are lower--potentially more e ective.

Heathcote et al. (2017) is another related paper as they study the optimal degree of progressivity of
the tax and transfer system in a perpetual youth economy.          eir simplifying assumptions (e.g., no
capital, fully reversible skill investment choices) allow them to elegantly characterize the economy
using closed form solutions. Our more complex economy, on the other hand, requires a computational
approach but allows us to study a richer household structure, more complex transition paths, and capital
accumulation. In addition, the popular tax and transfer function they study (`      a la Feldstein (1969),
Persson (1983) and Benabou (2000)) rules out policies such as UBI as the functional form imposes strictly
zero transfers for those who have no earnings. We extend this tax function, keeping the progressivity
estimates from Heathcote et al. (2017) for those with positive labor income, but also allowing for UBI
transfers.

Lastly, agents in the model can be hit by very negative shocks that absents them from the labor force
for a substantial amount of time. is allows us to contribute to the literature on the potential e ects
of increased automation in very simple fashion, which we see as complementing the richer task-based
approach in recent quantitative models (see, e.g. Humlum (2020) and Martinez (2019) for recent contri-
butions and a review of this literature). By appropriately increasing the probability of extended unem-
ployment from greater risk of skill/occupation obsolescence, we are able to use our estimated model to
evaluate a UBI policy in the context of increased automation.

Our paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the model, and Section 3 explains its estimation
and conducts the validation exercises. Section 4 presents the model's results regarding UBI along with
some robustness checks. Section 5 evaluates the UBI policy under di erent levels of automation. is
section also contrasts the e ects of UBI and ECD. Finally, Section 6 concludes. e Appendices contain
additional details.



2        e Model

   is section describes the model in detail. We model the economy with an OLG structure in which
agents are endowed with a unit of labor, make consumption/savings decisions, and acquire education.
   ey endogenously develop their child's skills and can provide a transfer when the child makes their
education (college) decision. e government taxes and provides transfers. Prior to estimating the sta-
tionary equilibrium of this economy in the next section, we conclude with a discussion of the potential


                                                     4
role of a UBI policy.


2.1        Preliminaries

   e life cycle Agents live through 20 periods which belong to four main stages: childhood, college,
work/parenthood, and retirement. Figure 1 shows the life cycle of an agent, in which each period refers
to four years. Let denote the period of their life (e.g., = 1 refers to ages 0­3, = 2 to ages 4­7, etc.).
From = 1 through = 4 (ages 0­15) the child lives with her parents and makes no decisions. In period
  = 5, the child has nished high school with an (endogenous) level of skills and has received (at the
beginning of that period) a non-negative transfer from their parent which becomes their initial assets,
 . e agent also learns their school taste (described in greater detail later) and is now considered an
adult. e agent now makes their rst decision: whether to a end college or to instead enter the work
stage of life as a high-school graduate. If the agent a ends college, they enter the work stage of life
one period later, = 6. In the work stage, agents decide in each period how much to work, save, and
consume. ey can borrow up to a limit, and save through a risk-free, non-state-contingent asset. While
in their work stage, in period = 8 (age 28), the individual becomes a parent (one child), whereupon
new decisions--how much time and money to invest in her child--must also be made. An individual
retires in period = 18 (age 68) and lives until period = 20 (ages 76-79). Agents die before starting
period = 21. ere is no population growth.

                                                Figure 1: Life Cycle

         =1              =5         =6         =8               = 12                     = 18              = 21
      (age = 0)      (age = 16) (age = 20) (age = 28)        (age = 44)               (age = 68)        (age = 80)

       Birth       Independence             Child       Child is independent        Retirement            Death
                                            born         Transfer to child
                  Live w/ College                                                            Retirement
                                                         Working stage
                  parents stage                                                                 stage




   e credit market We assume that agents can only trade risk-free bonds, but allow the interest rate
to di er according to whether they are saving or borrowing and whether the loan is used to pay for
college.7 Agents with positive savings receive an interest rate , whereas those who borrow pay an
interest rate   = + , where  0.          e wedge between the two interest rates captures the cost of
            8
borrowing. In addition, agents face borrowing limits that vary over the life-cycle and by education. To

    7 Studentloans are explained in detail below.
    8 Asis standard in the literature (e.g., Abbo et al., Forthcoming), these costs are interpreted as the bank's cost of
overseeing the loan per unit of consumption intermediated.


                                                            5
anticipate, we will use estimates of these from the Survey of Consumer Finances based on self-reported
limits on unsecured credit.


Progressive taxation and Universal Basic Income To evaluate the bene ts of a UBI policy, it is
important to understand how it modi es the progressivity of the existing tax system. We assume that
the relationship between a er-tax labor income ~ and pre-tax labor income is given by:

                                                           1-
                                                    ~=          +                                                    (1)

where the tax function used by, e.g., Feldstein (1969), Benabou (2000), and Heathcote et al. (2017), has
been augmented to include lump sum transfers as well. e parameter determines the progressivity
of the marginal tax rate.9 As highlighted by the analysis of Heathcote et al. (2017), the same tax function
(but which assumes = 0) ts the relationship between a er-tax and pre-tax income very well for all
income quantiles except those at the very bo om of the income distribution. Lump-sum transfers in
this sense serve two purposes: rst, they will help match the a er-tax income of the poorest individuals
and thus enrich the welfare analysis. Second, and more importantly for our purposes, the UBI policy
can be modeled as an increase in .10 Finally, moves the tax function for all income groups, so we will
estimate it to match the average tax rate. See Section 3 for details on the estimation. We also assume
that consumption and capital income are taxed by constant tax rates and , so the tax function
is:
                                 ( , , ) = - 1- +            1 0 +     -                                 (2)


Wage process Individual wages depend on an individual's education                        and on their (endogenous)
endowment of e ciency units in the following fashion:

                                                            ( , )                                                    (3)

where      is the unit wage of education group , and ( , ) includes the age pro le for their education
group, the returns to skills , and an idiosyncratic labor productivity shock given by .        e la er
evolves stochastically following  , ( ) which can depend on education and age. e parametrization
and estimation details are presented in Section 3. We highlight now, however, that the process allows
for shocks such that the wage of the individual (and hence their labor income) is zero, which we
interpret as unemployment or disability shocks (and later automation redundancy shocks). is feature
is important when studying UBI since one of its potential bene ts is that it helps smooth consumption.




    9 As discussed in the section on estimation, we use the estimate of    from Heathcote et al. (2017), which takes into
account deductions and public cash transfers.
   10 Retirement bene ts will also increase by the same amount as the UBI.



                                                           6
  e production function We assume there is a representative rm with production technology:

                                                                     1-
                                                          =                                              (4)

where is aggregate physical capital and is a CES aggregator of the labor supply of the two education
groups (high school 0 and college 1 ), i.e,

                                                                               1/ 
                                                =         0   + (1 - )        1                          (5)

where 0 integrates over all the e ciency units times hours of labor supplied by high-school workers of
age and then sums over all the working ages and 1 performs the same calculation for college-graduate
workers.11

We assume that rms are perfectly competitive thus making zero pro ts and paying unit wages equal
to the marginal product of labor, by education:
                                                                              1- 
                                         0   = (1 - )                                                    (6)
                                                                          0
                                                                                        1- 
                                         1   = (1 - ) (1 - )                                             (7)
                                                                                    1

Capital is assumed to depreciate at a xed rate per period, thus:
                                                                    1-
                                                      =                   -                              (8)


Preferences          e agent is risk averse and her period utility over consumption and labor  are given
by
                                                               1-              1+ 
                                               ( , ) =               -                                   (9)
                                                              1-              1+ 
Furthermore, the future is discounted by and the parent is altruistic as in Barro and Becker (1989),
caring about the utility of the child (i.e, rather than obtaining a "warm glow") as detailed in the next
section.


2.2        e Individual's Maximization Problem and Equilibrium

   e Education Stage At = 5 (16 years old), the agent faces their rst decision: whether to a end
college. College lasts one period (i.e., it is over at the end of period 5--so it lasts 4 years). e agent's
state variables at the decision point are: initial assets consisting of the (non-negative) parental transfer

  11   e exact expression is provided in Section A.


                                                                7
(which would have been made at the start of that period), skills (a vector consisting of a cognitive
and non-cognitive skill component), and a taste for college (also revealed at the beginning of that
period). e la er, as is common in the literature (e.g., Heckman et al., 2006; Abbo et al., Forthcoming),
a ects the desire for a college education in the form of a psychic cost that enters in a linearly separable
fashion.12 A er college, no longer a ects outcomes.           e alternative to college ( = 1) is to enter
the work phase of life as of that period as a high-school graduate ( = 0).         e education decision is
irreversible and college entails a monetary cost .

Agents can nance their college education using a variety of methods: they can use their assets, take
out loans, and work. We allow college students to access subsidized loans at rate = + where < .
   ese loans are subject to a borrowing limit . Both the interest rate wedge and the borrowing limit
are based on the rules for federal college loans, explained in detail in Section 3. To simplify computa-
tion, we follow Abbo et al. (Forthcoming) and assume that college student debt is re nanced into a
single bond that carries interest rate , where ~ ( ) is the function performing this transformation.
   e transformation assumes that xed payments would have been made for 5 periods (i.e., 20 years)
following graduation.13

While in college, students can work--providing high-school level labor--but their total available hours
are reduced by a xed amount of study time  .14 us, the value function of an agent who decides to
a end college and has assets and skills is given by:

                  ( , , = 1) = max             , +  + E            | =1      +1      ( ~ ( ), , = 1, )                  (10)
                                   , ,

                               +     +        - +        ( , , ) = (1 + )
                                =        0    =5, =1   ( , = 0) ,                      ,   0    1 - ,      =6,   =1


As indicated in the maximization problem, the agent can borrow up to the limit (repaying at interest
rate > ) or save at rate . Note that we have assumed that the initial draw of --the productivity
shock--occurs a er the college decision. Given the functional form assumption we make in Section 3,
this implies that we can evaluate at the mean value of (i.e., = 0). Furthermore, we have assumed

   12 Includinga taste for schooling is important to match the observed cross-sectional variation in education (e.g., its in-
tergenerational persistence) as variation in income and in the returns to education can only partially account for it.
    13 us, we can transform college loans into regular bonds using the following formula:
                                                                                              -5
                                                                                     1- 1+
                                             ~ ( )=      ×                       ×
                                                             1 - (1 +     ) -5
Sta ord college loans, the ones on which our estimation is based, have various repayment plans during which the borrower
pays a xed amount each month. Even though repayment plans typically last 10 years, they can be extended to up to 25
years. As in Abbo et al. (Forthcoming), we choose 20 years for our xed payment plan.
    14  is feature is useful in the quantitative analysis since otherwise too many students would work full time while in
college, reducing the importance of parental transfers or of borrowing to nance education. According to the National
Center for Education Statistics, less than 50% of full-time students work while in college and approximately only one-fourth
of these working students work more than 35 hours a week.


                                                                    8
that work hours and college study hours incur the same disutility.

Once agents have nished their education (be it high school or college), we use ( , , , ) to denote the
value of work for an agent of age with assets , skills , education , and stochastic labor productivity
shock . It is de ned by

                       ( , , , ) = max ( ,  ) + E           +1   ( , , , ),                                         (11)
                                        , ,

                                                                    (1 + )      if   0
                                    +     - +         ( , , )=
                                                                     1+         if   <0
                                    =         ,   ( , ),            ,   ,   0    1,        , ( )

As indicated, the agent can borrow up to , , repaying at                    > , and the return on positive savings
is 1 + .    e return to work is the unit wage       scaled by               , ( , ) , a function of the worker's age,
education, skills, and idiosyncratic labor productivity.

To sum up, at the beginning of period = 5,      is the value of an agent who chooses between working
(as a high-school graduate) versus a college education, i.e.,

                          ( , , ) = max E         |    ( , , = 0, ) ,       ( , , = 1) - ( , )                      (12)

where the disutility from college is given by a scalar that depends both on a taste parameter (whose
distribution depends potentially on parental education) and on the agent's own skills .


Working Stage and Children A er education is completed (i.e., either a er high school--so, at the
beginning of period 5--or the end of college--so, at the beginning of period 6)--until retirement in period
18, the agent works and their individual problem is equivalent to (11) except for those special periods
in which (i) the agent decides investment in the child's skills and (ii) a monetary transfer to the child
right before the child begins college. We now describe the maximization problems associated with these
decisions in detail.

      Investment in child's skills: Agents are assumed to have one child in period = 8 (age 28). In that
period and the subsequent one, the agent has to choose the number of hours and resources ("money")
   to invest in the child's development of skills which have a cognitive and non-cognitive component,
i.e.,     =    , , ,   .15    e child's initial draw of skills is stochastic and potentially a function of the
parent's skill level.      e skill development function below consists of two nested CES functions (for




   15 Although this is a potentially more complex view of skill formation than what would otherwise be optimal given our
purposes, it has the advantage of allowing us to use the estimates of Cunha et al. (2010) for the parameters of the skill
production function.


                                                            9
cognitive and non-cognitive skills):

                                                                                                                               1/
                      ,   =    1           ,
                                                +         2            ,
                                                                           +   3               +       4         +   5               exp                  (13)

for     { ,    }, where parental investments are

                                                                   = ¯[                + (1 -               ) ] 1/                                        (14)

   e outer CES, equation (13), is based on Cunha et al. (2010).    e child's skill level next period, ,
depends upon the child's current (cognitive and non-cognitive) skill level , parental (cognitive and
non-cognitive) skills , and parental investments , as well as an idiosyncratic shock . As in Daruich
(2019), however, parental investments are modeled explicitly to incorporate and in the inner CES.
Note that the formulation above implies that parental investment cannot be targeted to a particular
type of skill.

We assume that child skills can be a ected only in the rst two periods of their lives (i.e, in periods
  = 8 and 9 of the parent's life).16  us, in addition to standard choices of consumption, savings and
labor supply, the agent in those two periods also chooses how much time and money to invest in
the child's skill development as shown in the value function below:17



              ( , , , ,       ) = max                     ( , ) - ( ) + E                              +1    , , , ,       ,                              (15)
                                       , ,, ,

                                                                                                       (1 + )        if   0
                               +           +          - +                  ( , , )=
                                                                                                        1+           if   <0
                                =                     ,   ( , ),                           ,   ,       0   +  1,                     , ( )
                                       {       1,         2, ... } ,            { 1, 2, ... }
                                                                                                                                        1/
                                   ,   =         1             ,
                                                                       +   2       ,
                                                                                       +           3         +   4        +    5             exp
                                               ( 0,        ,       )           { ,                 }
                               = ¯[                            + (1 -          ) ] 1/


A er these two periods, the child's skills are assumed to be constant and the agent's maximization
problem returns to that given in (11) but with an additional state variable .

      Transfer to child: At the beginning of period = 12 but prior to knowing their child's                                                        realization
   16   is assumption simpli es the solution but is also in line with the evidence on early childhood development literature
which nds that skills are considerably less malleable for older children (e.g., Cunha et al., 2010).
   17   e choice of time and money is made within a discrete set of possible alternatives for computational reasons. We
assume that the disutility from time is separable because, examination of the PSID CDS cross-sectional data suggests that
individuals who spend more time with their children reduce leisure time instead of hours worked.


                                                                                       10
(i.e., ), the parent decides the size of the monetary transfer ^ to their child.18 We denote the value
function at in this sub-period by transfer . Importantly, the transfer is restricted to being non-negative--
i.e., parents can neither bequeath debt to their child nor borrow against their child's future income.
When making this choice, the parent is assumed to know their own income shock realization.

                      transfer   ( , , , ,   ) = max           =12   ( - ^, , , ) + E   =5   ( ^,   , ),            (16)
                                                         ^
                                                 ^  0,                (¯ ,    )

Notice that, unlike in equation (15), the value function in this stage now includes the continuation
value of the child =5 where denotes the child's period-age. Note that measures the degree of
parental altruism towards their child.     is is the last period in which the parent's choices a ects their
child. Lastly, note that since the value function is wri en recursively, this implies that at every period
in which parental choices a ect her child's outcomes--i.e., all preceding periods--the utility of all her
descendants have been taken into account. is formulation embeds the parental altruism motive. A er
the agent's child becomes independent, the individual problem reverts to (11).


  e Retirement Stage At = 18, the agent retires with two sources of income: savings and retire-
ment bene ts. To simplify the problem, we assume that retirement bene ts depend only on the agent's
education and skill level, a proxy for average lifetime income. Agents no longer work ( = 0) nor
borrow. Formally, the problem at the age of retirement is

                                  ( , , ) = max ( , 0) +                +1   ( , , )                                (17)
                                                 ,

                                             +       +       ( ( , ), , ) = ( , ) + ( 1 + )
                                             0

where     indicates the retirement bene t.


De nition of Stationary Equilibrium          e model has 20 overlapping generations alive at any time
period and is solved numerically to characterize the stationary equilibrium allocation. Stationarity
implies that we study an equilibrium in which the cross-sectional distribution for any given cohort of
period-age is invariant over time periods. Particularly important is that the distribution of initial states
is determined by the choices of the older generations. In equilibrium, households choose education,
consumption, labor supply, parental investment in child skills in the form of time and resources, and
parental transfers such that they maximize their expected utility taken prices as given; rms maximize
pro ts; and prices (wages of each education group and the interest rate) clear markets.


   18   e assumption that the child's taste is not perfectly known to the parent helps make the problem smoother which is
useful for computational reasons.


                                                                 11
We do not demand that the government budget be balanced as the government may have other un-
modeled expenses, . When a new policy such as UBI is introduced, however, we require that any
net additional expenses be matched by additional revenue.19 us, will be de ned in the stationary
equilibrium as a residual (see section A for the expression). Note that the tax function will be calibrated
to match the relationship between pre-tax and a er-tax income.


2.3   Role for UBI

In the next section, we estimate that lump-sum transfers to all households, , is approximately $2, 400
per year (in year 2000 dollars). Providing UBI, therefore, is an increase in above this initial level. It
is useful to think beforehand why this policy may improve upon the status quo or may be detrimental.
In addition, given the existence of both cross-sectional and cross-cohort heterogeneity, who might one
expect to be helped/hurt?

   ere are several sources of ine ciency in the environment. First, an agent's inability to borrow fully
against their own future income or to insure against future outcomes leads to imperfectly smooth con-
sumption. is consequence of capital market imperfections is well understood, and a UBI policy can
facilitate self-insurance and provide a lower variance of consumption. Poorer agents, furthermore,
would in addition value the increase in redistribution implied by this policy. Second, in addition to con-
sumption smoothing, a UBI policy makes college easier to nance, especially for poorer agents, rather
than relying solely on the parental transfer, borrowing, or working at a relatively low wage. Lastly, a
UBI policy helps parents increase their investment in their child's skill formation by providing them
with funds at a time in life in which they are relatively poorer and face more binding credit constraints.
Overall, one might expect that the agents who would primarily bene t would be those who are poorer
and younger.

Of course, any positive e ects of UBI must be weighed against the cost of increased distortionary tax-
ation. A higher labor income tax will, ceteris paribus, make a college education less a ractive than
before. If this depresses the proportion of agents who acquire a college education, this will tend to
lower high-skill wages as well. Overall, how the bene ts stack up against these additional costs is a
quantitative question which requires the model to provide an evaluation.      e next section estimates
the stationary equilibrium of the model which we will then use to provide a quantitative evaluation of
policies.




  19 We   leave the exact way in which this is done to the policy evaluation in section 4.


                                                              12
3     Estimation

In this section we describe how we parameterize and estimate the model. e model is estimated using
simulated method of moments to match standard moments as well as more novel ones for the US in the
2000s. Some of the parameters can be estimated "externally," while others must be estimated "internally"
from the simulation of the model. For these, we numerically solve for the stationary distribution of the
economy and calculate the moments of interest. Table 2 summarizes the parameters and moments used.
A er estimating the model, we validate the model using non-targeted moments as well as experimental
evidence of two programs, one that involved a cash transfer to parents of young children and another
that involved direct government investments towards an early childhood program.


3.1     Preliminaries

Data and sample selection We use three primary data sources: (i) the Panel Study of Income Dy-
namics (PSID), surveys between 1968 and 2016; (ii) the Child Development Supplement (CDS) to PSID,
surveys of 1997, 2002 and 2007; and (iii) the 1979 cohort of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth
(NLSY79), surveys between 1979 and 2012.

We select a population for which the model can be taken as a reasonable approximation to household
behavior. e model is estimated to match household-level data, taking an agent in the model as cor-
responding to a household with two adults in the data. In this way, every household in the model has
one household as o spring. e model has several outcomes that are the result of an agent's decisions.
To map these to household observations in the data we do the following. An agent's labor income is
the sum of the two adults' labor income in the data.20 Similarly, hours worked are the sum of hours
worked by the two adults. Education and age, on the other hand, are the education level and age of the
head of household. Furthermore, as there is no household formation decision (marriage, cohabitation,
or divorce) in the model, we restrict the sample to households with two adults.21    is avoids as well
di erences in income and time availability that arise from comparing couples to single parents. Lastly,
we simplify ma ers by dropping from the sample individuals that did not complete high-school.        is
reduces the sample by only 12% and decreases the computational complexity as in this way we can more
easily restrict education levels to only two.22

    20 Following standard practice, we drop those household observations in which hourly wages are less than half the min-

imum wage.
    21 We do not follow marital transitions nor insist that the household head have the same partner every period. As shown

in Fern´ andez and Wong (2017), incorporating endogenous marriage and divorce decisions, while important, vastly increases
computational complexity.
    22 An alternative approach that also keeps the computational requirements unchanged (but keeps high-school dropouts

in the sample) would be to divide the education groups in non-college vs. college. For the purposes of the results, the main
di erences would stem from the wage processes. Following this alternative, we nd similar estimates for the wage process:
the returns to skill, wage shocks processes, and the out-of-work shocks (discussed later) are almost identical. e age pro le
is less steep, however, by approximately 10%.


                                                            13
Life cycle Recapitulating, a period in the model is four years. Individuals reach independence at
period-age = 5 (equivalent to age 16) with a high-school education. ey can decide to go to college
(one period), and so the education stage nishes no later than = 6 ( 20) . Parental time and money
investment decisions are made at the time of (average rst) birth = 8 ( 28) and the period a er. At age
  = 12 ( 44) , the agent chooses the assets to transfer to the child and the la er takes the college decision.
Retirement occurs at = 18 ( 68) . Agents live through period-age = 20, which means that death is
assumed to occur for all agents at the beginning of period-age = 21 ( 80) .


Prices All prices are in 2000 dollars.    ese are normalized such that the average hourly wage of a
high school graduate in period 13 (age 48) is equal to one in the model. is represents $18.12 in the
data. e yearly price of college is estimated using the Delta Cost Project to be $6, 588.23


Borrowing constraints Based on self-reported limits on unsecured credit by family from the Survey
of Consumer Finances, Daruich (2019) estimates the borrowing limits for working-age households to
be {-20, 000, -34, 000} for high-school and college graduates, respectively. We use these as estimates
for , .     e (annualized) wedge for borrowing is set to 10%, which is the average among the values
for credit card borrowing interest rates (net of and average in ation) reported by Gross and Souleles
(2002).


Taxes and Pension Bene ts              e tax function is assumed to be ( , , ) = - 1- +             1 0 +
     - . Based on McDaniel (2007), we set            = 0.27 and     = 0.07. Parameter     determines the
progressivity of the marginal tax rate and we use the preferred estimation of = 0.18 from Heathcote
et al. (2017)--their second estimation, based on Congressional Budget O ce data, suggests = 0.20.
    e main advantage of using their estimate is that they use PSID data to take into account deductions
(e.g., medical expenses and mortgage interest) and public cash transfers (e.g., AFDC/TANF, SSI, and
unemployment bene ts) which we too would like to include. e main disadvantage, for our purposes,
is that they they do not restrict the sample to two-adult households and that they include capital income
(as they do not have capital in their model) which we allowed to be taxed at a di erent rate as suggested
by the literature. We can check whether we would obtain a signi cantly di erent estimate by using the
NBER's TAXSIM (Feenberg and Cou s, 1993) to estimate a er-tax income for two-adults households
with di erent levels of (only) labor income, by US state in the year 2000. Using this data, we follow the
steps of Heathcote et al. (2017) and estimate = 0.20, consistent with their estimates. More importantly,
this suggests that abstracting from capital income and focusing on two-adults households does not
signi cantly change the progressivity estimates. Hence we use Heathcote et al. (2017) preferred estimate
of = 0.18. Having de ned the progressivity , is estimated using simulated method of moments to

   23   e Delta Cost Project Database is a longitudinal database that studies colleges revenue and expenditures. Our estimate
is based on 4-year private not-for-pro t and public colleges, taking into account grants and scholarships, such that only
privately borne tuition costs are considered.


                                                             14
match the proportion of labor income that, on average, is paid in taxes (i.e., the average labor-income
tax rate) of 22% (McDaniel, 2007).

As shown by Figure 1 of Heathcote et al. (2017), low-income households tend to have higher a er-tax
income than what their estimates of the tax function without a lump-sum component suggests. Incor-
porating a lump-sum transfer to households and estimating to match a measure of income income
redistribution ­ the ratio of the variance of pre-tax total (i.e., labor plus savings) income to a er-tax
total income ­ is one way to indirectly obtain . We do this and obtain equivalent to $2,400 per year.
Alternatively, we can use the PSID to calculate the di erence between a er-tax-and-transfers annual
income and pre-tax annual income for low-income households with two adults and two children. For
households in the bo om 1%, we nd that this di erence is on average $2,475; for households in the
bo om 5%, the di erence is on average $2,272. ese values suggest that the estimate of = $2, 400 is
in line with the observed transfers received by low-income parents.

  e pension replacement rate is based on the Old Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance federal pro-
gram. We use education and skill level to estimate the average lifetime income on which the replacement
bene t is based.24


Government Spending            e government spends on transfers to agents, including retirement trans-
fers. Any amount raised in taxes over that required in the steady state of the model. . is ignored (i.e.,
not valued or valued in a linearly independent fashion) and is held constant in all policy experiments.


Intergenerational Skill Transmission We assume that the child development function takes a
nested CES form (see equations (13) and (14)). e outer CES is based on Cunha et al. and we adopt
their parameter values which vary with the age of the child and were estimated using a representative
sample.25      ese values indicate that skills are more malleable when children are young, i.e., the elas-
ticity of substitution determined by        is larger the younger the child. Furthermore, in order to use
these parameter values we follow the authors in assuming that skills are a vector with two components:
cognitive skill and non-cognitive skill. Cunha et al. highlight that abstracting from the two types of
skills leads to estimates that suggest that investments on low-skilled children are much less productive
(i.e., a more negative     ). us, and are vectors with a separate entry for each skill.26 e initial
draw of skills is assumed to depend on parent's skills as an AR(1) process, independent for cognitive
and non-cognitive skills. For example, the draw of cognitive skills follows

                                           log     ,   = ^ log ( ) +      ,




  24 SeeAppendix B.1 for details.
  25 Appendix  Table B1 reports the parameter values and standard deviations.
  26 Similarly, is also a vector.



                                                          15
where       ,
                is a shock, independent across skills.            e persistence component ^ is, by de nition, equal
           Var ( log ( , )) 0.5
to ×        Var ( log ( ))      ,
                          where is the correlation between log , and log ( ) . e functional form
is equivalent for the initial draw of non-cognitive skills , . We obtain Var ( log ( )) ,Var ( log ( )) ,
Var log , , and Var log ,             directly from Cunha et al. (2010), and internally estimate (as-
suming it is common across skills) to match the intergenerational persistence of gross income, as
measured by income rank persistence, of 0.26 as estimated by Che y et al. (2014).27 Given the func-
tional form, the variance of the cognitive skills shock , , for example, is obtained as Var         ,
                                                                                                      =
Var log         ,   - ^ 2 Var ( log ( )) .

Parental investment in child skills (equation 14) in terms of time and money is made within a discrete set
of possible alternatives for computational purposes.28 We estimate and so as to match the following
moments on parental investments reported in Daruich (2019), which are based on CDS and Consumer
Expenditure Survey (CEX) data. In particular,          is estimated to match the average ratio of annual
expenditures on children (as measured by child-care expenditures including those on early childhood
centers and nannies) to weekly "quality" hours spent by parents with their children (as measured by
time reading and playing), whereas is estimated to match the correlation between the two variables
across parents. Finally, ¯ is estimated such that the average level of log cognitive skills in the estimated
economy is equal to zero.29


Wage Process and Return to Skills We estimate the wage process and return to skills using NLSY
and PSID data for households, assuming that the wage process of household with education at age
 is given by      . e e ciency units are de ned by:

                                                              =                                                          (18)

where     is the age pro le for the education group                     and      is the idiosyncratic labor productivity,
which is speci ed as:

                                                 =        (       )+                                                     (19)

                                                 =       -1   +     ,               0,

where    is the agent's level of cognitive skills (one of the elements of ) and is the idiosyncratic
shock. An agent's initial productivity 0 is drawn from a normal distribution with mean zero and
variance 0 . Allowing the impact of skills on wages to depend on education via       is important to

   27 We  use the authors' estimate for children of married parents as this is the closest correspondence to the agents of the
model. Che y et al. (2014) measure household gross income (mainly) based on the 1040 tax return, thus including both labor
and capital income. Consequently, to match this moment we also use agents' gross income which includes labor and asset
(savings) income.
    28 We limit the number of options for time and money to 7 each, i.e. 49 total alternatives.
    29 We use the same normalization as Cunha et al. (2010) to be consistent.



                                                              16
determining the choice of education for agents with di erent skill levels.

We de ne wages , for household in period as the total labor income from the two adults in the
household divided by the total number of hours worked by the two adults. Since the model has 4-year-
long periods, we estimate this wage process by averaging observations over 4 years.30 Using information
on the highest degree completed by the head-of-household, we split households into those with at least
a college degree and those with at least high-school but less than college. For each education group
we use PSID data to obtain the age pro le       using a quadratic polynomial on the age of the head-
of-household, controlling for year (de ned as the initial year of the 4-year period) xed e ects and
selection into work,
                                                       2
                               , = 0 + 1 Age , + 2 Age , + 3 , +      + ,

where , is the control for selection into work based on a Heckman-selection estimator.31 Appendix
Table B2 shows the results. Armed with the age pro le, we can then use (18) to recover       as a residual
in the NLSY data by regressing the log of wages on age.32 Next, an estimate of         is recovered by
regressing our estimate of     against cognitive skills as measured by the AFQT score (i.e., we estimate
equation (19)). Lastly, the AR(1) process for the residual (i.e., the shock to the e ciency units in
equation (19)), is estimated using the standard Minimum Distance Estimator developed by Rothenberg
et al. (1971).

Table 1 shows the estimates obtained by the process just described. As can be seen, the returns to skill are
twice as large for college workers than high-school ones. Note that agents with college education draw
their initial productivity from a distribution with a slightly lower variance than high-school agents, as
indicated by the last row of Table 1, but shocks received later in life have a larger variance for college
workers than high-school workers.


Out-of-Work Shock A distinctive feature of the model is that agents may be hit by a very bad shock
that essentially forces them to exit the labor force for an entire period. Using PSID data, we estimate the
transition probabilities between the out-of-work and working states for di erent education-age groups




    30 An alternative, as in Krueger and Ludwig (2016), is to estimate the wage process using yearly data and then transform

the estimates to 4-year periods. Appendix Table B4 shows that the estimates obtained this way are very similar. Both
methods, however, essentially assume complete markets within a period and, by doing so, may not give su cient weight to
a UBI policy that would diminish the variance of consumption. To evaluate the importance of this limitation, in Section 4.3
we double the variance of the wage shocks, and examine how this a ects the main results.
    31 To control for selection into work we use a Heckman-selection estimator. In particular, we construct Inverse Mills

ratios by estimating the participating equation separately for each education group using number of children as well as
year-region xed e ects.
    32 We need to use NLSY for this step since the PSID in general does not have information that is pertinent for measures

of skills such as an AFQT score. e PSID, instead, is preferred for estimating the age pro les since the age of the sample
does not covary perfectly with the year of the survey (as is the case of NLSY).


                                                            17
                         Table 1: Returns to skill and wage process by education group

                                               (1)                              (2)
                                           High School                        College

                                               0.471                            1.008
                                             (0.0335)                         (0.0768)
                                               0.914                            0.967
                                             (0.0008)                         (0.0009)
                                               0.032                            0.046
                                             (0.0002)                         (0.0002)
                                   0
                                               0.051                            0.047
                                             (0.0003)                         (0.0003)
                                Source: PSID (1968­2016) and NLSY (1979­2012). A period is
                                4 years long. Cognitive skills (from NLSY) are measured using
                                log(AFQT), i.e., the natural logarithm of the AFQT raw score. e
                                regressions include year xed e ects. Standard errors in paren-
                                theses.



using yearly household labor-income data.33 We estimate the following Probit model:

                   Pr Working ,        =      +   1 Working , -1     × age , +      2 Working , -1   × age2,
                                                                                   2
                                       +   3 Working , -1   +   4 age ,   +   5 age ,   +   + gender +     ,   ,

where age , and gender are the age and gender of the household head, respectively, and is a year
 xed e ect. A household is coded as not working if both adult members are not working that year.
Figure 2 shows the estimated transition probabilities by age and education.34

We then use these to calculate the transition probabilities for the model periods (e.g., the probability of
being out of work in period corresponding to ages 44-47 given that the household worked in period
                                            =47
  - 1 is calculated as (       =44 | =43 )  =45 (   |     -1 ) , where indicates age). We conservatively
assume that this out-of-work state corresponds to household not earning labor income during an entire
period (i.e., for 4 years in the data). Figure 3 shows the implied transition probabilities by age and
education. Note that individuals with di erent education levels have similar probabilities of entering
the "out-of-work" state and of remaining in that state in the following period. Both probabilities are
monotonically increasing with age.




  33 We    do not use PSID years a er 1996 since the surveys are biennial a er that year.
  34 See   Appendix Table B3 for the estimated coe cients.


                                                                18
                        Figure 2: Data: Yearly Out-of-Work Transition Probabilities
               High School Graduates                                        College Graduates




Source: PSID, 1968-1996.


   e out-of-work shock is included in     with a value of    = - inf, which makes the hourly wage zero.
   e probability of entering this state next period depends on the age and education of individual (as
shown by the le panel of gure 3), but is otherwise assumed to be independent of the current value of
    > - inf. e probability of exiting the out-of-work state is likewise given by the right panel of gure
3, which also depends on age and education. Furthermore, we assume that individuals that exit the out-
of-work state start with the lowest value of     > - inf since the data shows that these individuals tend
to have low earnings relative to their education/age groups upon re-employment.35

Our estimates imply that the share of individuals in the out-of-work state is 0.1% when they are 36 years
old and increases to 10.5% by the time households are 60 years old. One may be concerned that our
estimates are capturing retirement rather than involuntary non-employment. We evaluate this concern
by comparing our estimates to a particular form of involuntary non-employment, i.e., disability. Using
Social Security data, Hosseini et al. (2018) estimates that the share of individuals with disability increases
over the same age period, from a base of 1.8% to 13.9%. ese numbers suggests that our estimates for
the long-lasting out-of-work shock are more restrictive than the Social Security de nition of disability
which only requires a period of inability to work of one year.




   35   e lowest value of     is age- and education-dependent in our wage process. Moreover, these values depend on
the discretization procedure. In our procedure (based on the Rouwenhorst method), these values imply that wages are
approximately between 27 and 58% below the age-education group average. Using the PSID data, we estimate that the
wages of households who are currently working but were not working the previous year to be, on average, 29% lower than
the one of those who were working, controlling for age and education.


                                                         19
                                                  Figure 3: Model: Period (4-Year) Out-of-Work Transition Probabilities
                                            Working Prior Period                                                              Not Working Prior Period

                             20                                                                                 100
  Prob. of Not Working (%)




                                                                                     Prob. of Not Working (%)
                                       High-School                                                                         High-School
                                       College                                                                             College
                                                                                                                80
                             15

                                                                                                                60
                             10
                                                                                                                40

                             5
                                                                                                                20


                             0                                                                                   0
                                  20         30         40      50     60                                             20         30       40   50        60
                            Age                                                Age
Notes: e probability of not working next period by age, conditional upon working the prior period (le ) and not
working the prior period (right).



School Taste In this class of models it is di cult to match the intergenerational persistence of edu-
cation without introducing something like school tastes/psychic costs of education, (e.g., Abbo et al.,
Forthcoming; Krueger and Ludwig, 2016). We assume that school (dis)taste in utility terms is given by

                                                              ( , ) = exp    +               ( )+                                  (     )+                   (20)

   is speci cation allows higher-skilled individuals to have (on average) lower levels of school distaste if
     < 0 and/or        < 0. Parental education also ma ers as is an idiosyncratic shock which is assumed
                                             2
to follow a normal distribution       ¯ - 2,       whose mean depends on the parent's education. Without
loss of generality, we assume that this mean is zero for children of high-school graduates. Although the
parameters are simultaneously estimated to match the moments in the data, it is intuitive to think that
  is estimated to match the college graduation share from NLSY;        and     are estimated to match the
relation between college graduation and cognitive and non cognitive skills, respectively, as measured
by regressing college graduation on the log of cognitive (AFQT score) and non cognitive (Ro er's locus
of control score) skills; is estimated to match the variance in college graduation a er controlling for
skills (i.e., the variance of the residual in the previously mentioned regression); and ¯ is estimated to
match the intergenerational persistence of education (measured according to the determinant of the
intergenerational education transition matrix).36 See Table 2 for the values of these moments.


College loans College students have access to subsidized loans at rate = + . According to the
National Center for Education Statistics report "Student Financing of Undergraduate Education: 1999-
         36 AFQT
           and Ro er's locus of control are common measures of cognitive and non-cognitive skills, respectively. Given
that we use Cunha et al. (2010) estimates for our skill development function, we highlight that they also use AFQT and
Ro er's locus of control scores in the measurement equation of their estimation.


                                                                                   20
2000," among the undergraduates who borrow, nearly all (97%) took out federal student loans, while
only 13% took out non-federal loans. Moreover, the average loan value was similar for both federal and
non-federal loans. Since average values were similar but federal loans were signi cantly more common,
we focus on federal loans for our model estimation. Among federal loans, the Sta ord loan program
was the most common: 96% of undergraduates who borrowed took out Sta ord loans. As there are
various types of Sta ord loans, we use the weighted average interest rate to set = 0.009 (see Daruich
and Kozlowski (2019)). e borrowing limit in college is set to match the cumulative borrowing limit
on Sta ord loans ($23,000).

                                                                                                                  1-
Preferences As noted, we specify the period utility over consumption and labor as ( ,  ) =                       1-      -
  1+ 
 1+  .  We follow the literature and assume that = 2 and  = 3 (i.e., the Frisch elasticity is                  1/3).37
is estimated to match average hours of labor. Recall that parental disutility from time spent with their
children is linear, i.e., ( ) = . is estimated to match estimated average hours with children. Finally,
the altruism factor is estimated to match the average monetary transfers from parents to children, as
estimated from the Rosters and Transfers supplement to the PSID.38


                                                  1
Aggregate production function We set = 3            in the aggregate Cobb-Douglas production function
and estimate  = 0.43 and = 0.53 (in equation 5) following the standard procedure of regressing the
variation of wage bills with the change in labor supply as suggested by the rst order conditions of the
representative rm (e.g., Katz and Murphy, 1992; Heckman et al., 1998).


3.2      Simulated Methods of Moments: Results

Fourteen parameters of the model are estimated using simulated method of moments. Recapitulating,
  relates to the degree of altruism, whereas and are the disutility of labor and of the time spent with
children, respectively. ,       (vector of two parameters), ¯, and relate to the distribution of school
taste and its relation to skills and parental education. determines the intergenerational persistence
of the initial draw of skills. ¯, , and relate to the e ect of parental time and money investments in
building skills. Finally, and relate to the government's average tax rate and redistribution of income,
respectively.

We use a Sobol sequence to estimate the model in a fourteen-dimensional hypercube in which parame-
ters are distributed uniformly and over a "large" support. is provides a global method to nd poten-
tially good combinations of parameters. Table 2 shows the estimated parameters and the corresponding
moments in the simulated economy.

   37 See Meghir and Phillips (2010) for a discussion on estimates of the Frisch elasticity.
   38 Daruich  (2019) estimates the average transfers per age-group of children and obtains an estimate of total parental
transfers per child of $37,300, equivalent to 62% of average annual income.


                                                           21
                                         Table 2: Estimation: parameters and moments
 Parameter Value Description                                               Moment                           Data Model
 Preferences
                     136.8        Mean labor disutility                    Avg. hours worked                62.5   63.1
                     0.44         Altruism                                 Parent-to-child transfer         0.75   0.78
                                                                           as share of income

 School Taste:        ( , ) = exp +           ( )+          ( )+ ;           ( ¯ , ) ; ¯ =0 = 0, ¯ =1 = ¯
                     5.41      Avg. taste for college                      College share                    33     30
                     -0.42     College taste and cog. skills relation      College: cog skills slope        0.23   0.23
                     -1.24     College taste and noncog. skills relation   College: noncog skills slope     0.16   0.16
                     2.59      SD of college taste shock                   College: residual variance       0.20   0.18
 ¯                   -1.89     Draw of school taste:                       Intergenerational persistence    0.70   0.69
                               mean by parent's education                  of education

 Skill Formation Productivity: = ¯ [         + ( 1 - ) ] 1/
               0.03    Parental time disutility                            Avg. weekly hours                18.0   15.3
                       of time with children                               with children
  ¯            35.7    Returns to investments                              Average log-skills               0.0    0.0
               0.97    Money productivity                                  Ratio of money to hours          214    191
               -0.53   Money-time substitutability                         Money-time correlation           0.93   0.95
               0.38    Initial draw of skills:                             Intergenerational persistence    0.26   0.25
                       correlation with parents' skills                    of income

 Government
                     0.79         Tax function                             Avg. tax rate                    0.22   0.22
     (×102 )         4.11         Lump-sum transfer                        Income variance ratio:           0.69   0.71
                                                                           Disposable to pre-gov
 Notes: See the text for de nitions and data sources.




As can be seen from the table, the model provides a good t of the data. e education distribution and
its correlation with skills and parental education are close to the data estimates. Average time working
and with children are successfully matched. e relation between money and time investments is well
captured in the model. Finally, the characteristics of the current tax system in the US is well matched:
average tax rates and income redistribution, as measured by the ratio of the variances of log disposable-
income and log pre-government-income, (as well as the progressivity of the tax function) are in line with
the data.


3.3      Validation

We examine the validity of the estimated model in two ways. First, we can contrast non-targeted model
moments with data moments, choosing those that are informative of the t of the model in important
dimensions for the evaluation of a UBI policy. Second, we use results from two studies of cash transfer
programs (the closest comparison we could nd to UBI) on labor supply and on child development and


                                                              22
compare them to model predictions obtained using similar policies.

Table 3 summarizes the rst validation results, i.e., those from non-targeted moments. Starting with in-
vestments of time and money in children, we can compare with range of estimates obtained in Daruich
(2019) using CEX and CDS data as reported in Table 3.39 e data shows that families with more edu-
cation and/or with more labor income invest more in their children, a feature shared by the estimated
model.     e rst two entries in this panel are the coe cients obtained on an indicator for a college
parent in two separate regressions: weekly hours with children and annual expenditures on children.
As can be seen, the model does a good job in matching these moments.          e last two entries in this
panel are the coe cients obtained on the log of parental income in two separate regressions: log of
weekly hours with children and log of annual expenditures on children.        e model produces larger
coe cients which implies that the model could overestimate the crowding out of parental investments
among higher-income parents.

                                  Table 3: Validation: Non-Targeted Moments

                  Moment                                           Data                      Model
                 Investments in Children (Daruich, 2019)
                 Weekly hours on college ed. parent              2.5­3.7                         2.9
                 Annual expenditures on college ed. parent     666­730                          715
                 Log weekly hours on log parent income        0.05­0.12                         0.25
                 Log annual expenditures on log parent income 0.39­0.63                         0.93

                 Labor Income Inequality (PSID)
                 Gini                                                               0.32        0.30
                 Top-Bo om Income Ratio                                              3.7         3.2

                 Savings (Inklaar and Timmer, 2013)
                 Capital-Output Ratio (annualized)                                   3            3.1

                 Net Return to college (Heckman et al., 2006)
                 Yearly return                                                    10%           8.3%
                 Notes: Parental investment estimates (OLS regressions) are obtained using families in the
                 CEX (for expenditures) and PSID Child Development Supplement data (for hours). e top-
                 bo om income ratio is that of the average income of those in the top 80­95 percentiles and
                 those in the bo om 5­20 percentiles (PSID). See text for other de nitions.




Finally, labor income inequality is captured well by the model. Both the Gini coe cient and top-bo om
ratio de ned as the ratio of average incomes between the top 80­95 percentiles and the bo om 5­20
percentiles are similar to the data (the la er calculated using our PSID sample). We can also estimate
the return to college in the model, another endogenous source of inequality. We nd the yearly return
   39  e exact estimate depends on whether the whole sample or only the (smaller) sample of households with two children
and two adults was used, hence we report the range.


                                                            23
to a college education by rst calculating, at steady state prices, by how much each agent's lifetime
income would change, in net present value terms, by a ending vs not-a ending college. We then
subtract from this gure the cost of a college education and then average over all individuals. is
yields an (annualized) return of 8.3%, which is in line with the empirical estimates in the literature of
approximately 10% as summarized by Heckman et al. (2006).


Validation: Income Elasticity of Labor Supply

A UBI program may decrease households' labor supply through an income e ect. As there is only
limited evidence on labor supply from UBI-type policies, we rely on a broader literature to provide
evidence on this elasticity. Blundell and MaCurdy (1999) summarize the labor supply literature and
report that the median income elasticity of labor supply (based on 22 alternative estimates for men) is
-0.07, with the 10th percentile and 90th percentile of these estimates being -0.29 and -0.01.40

To estimate the (non-labor) income elasticity of labor supply we transfer income equivalent to $1,000 per
year to all households in the economy, keeping all prices xed at their steady-state values, including
taxes (i.e., we do not fund this extra payment as the objective of this simulation is to calculate an
elasticity). Given that the empirical estimates in the literature come from environments that vary in the
duration of this additional non-labor income, we run the simulations for three alternative durations: one
period (or 4 years), ve periods (20 years), and for the remainder of life. In all cases, the introduction,
but not the duration, of the non-labor income is unexpected. We then compute, for each agent, the
labor supply elasticity as the ratio of the percentage change in hours worked to the percentage change
in non-labor income in the rst period in which the policy is introduced. Table 4 reports the mean and
median elasticities obtained from the simulations. e model's median elasticity is between -0.015 and
-0.084 (with a larger elasticity associated with cases in which the non-labor income lasts longer), all
within the range of estimates reported by Blundell and MaCurdy (1999).

                                Table 4: Validation: Income Elasticity of Labor Supply

                                     Model                                                                     Data
                           Based on $1,000 per year for:                                              Empirical Estimates in
             One period (4 years) Five periods (20 years)                    Rest of life          Blundell and MaCurdy (1999)
 Mean              -0.018                  -0.071                              -0.084                         -0.151
 Median            -0.015                  -0.062                              -0.084                         -0.070
 Note: e income elasticity of labor supply from an extra $1,000 per year of non-labor income given for di erent durations at xed prices. See
 the text for details.




   40  e mapping of this estimate to the model is not perfect as our agents are two-adult households in the data. Another
relevant empirical benchmark stems from the evidence on married women. Based on 18 alternative estimates, Blundell
and MaCurdy (1999) report that the median income elasticity of labor supply for married women is -0.175, with the 10th
percentile and 90th percentile of these estimates being -0.31 and 0.16.


                                                                     24
Validation: Cash Transfer Program and Child Skills

Dahl and Lochner (2012) estimate the e ect of income on children's development using changes to the
Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) as exogenous sources of income variation.            e changes led low-
income families to see an increase of up to $2, 100 of disposable income per year. Using an instrumental
variables strategy (which uses the change in EITC to predict income based on past income), they esti-
mate the causal e ect of income on children's math and reading achievement. eir baseline estimates
imply that a $1,000 increase in income raises combined math and reading test scores by 4.1 percent of
a standard deviation in the short run (with a standard error of 1.3 percent).41

We introduce a similar policy in the model in the steady-state of the model, by having the government
give families an extra $1,000 per year (i.e., an extra $4000 per period) during the periods that their
children reside with their parents (i.e., adult periods 8 through 11 or child periods 1 through 4), similar
to the EITC change. Since the EITC only a ected a relatively small group of families, we keep all prices
unchanged, including tax rates, at their original steady-state levels. We assume that the policy lasts one
generation and that agents make the same assumption. us, we evaluate the policy on the children of
the targeted generation.42

Figure 4 shows the predicted e ect on children's cognitive skills in the simulated model for families with
di erent levels of annual income and, separately, for high-school parents.43 e model predicts that the
cognitive skills of children whose parents' annual income is less $10,000, should increase between 2.8­
3.3 percent of a standard deviation. Parents with a high-school education with income in this range
should see an increase in their child's cognitive skills of 3.4­4.1 percent of a standard deviation. ese
estimates are within the range estimated by Dahl and Lochner (2012), shown in the shaded area in the
  gure. Note that their study could not estimate how the additional income a ects families with higher
incomes since the change in EITC mostly impacted households earning below $25,000 a year. It is easy,
however, to study this with the model simulations. Reassuringly, as shown in the gure, the e ect of the
additional income decreases with family income, becoming close to zero around $60,000. We conclude
that the model generates results in keeping with Dahl and Lochner (2012), a fact that lends credibility
to the model predictions regarding the consequences of a UBI policy.




   41 See  table 3 in Dahl and Lochner (2017).
   42    is assumption, in addition to being reasonable, simpli es the evaluation since it implies that we do not need to solve
a full transition exercise (since children's value functions for a given set of state variables are unchanged).
    43   ese estimates are obtained by calculating the e ects for many families. Figure 4 reports the average e ect by total
income, smoothed using a quadratic polynomial on income.


                                                              25
                       Figure 4: Validation: Cash Transfer Program and Cognitive Skills


                                                6

                                                5



                             (% of Std. Dev.)
                                                4

                                                3
                                       k,c



                                                2

                                                1
                                                        All Parents
                                                        HS Educated Parents
                                                0
                                                    0       10      20         30   40      50   60
                                                                 Annual Earnings ($1,000)
                         Notes: e change in a child's cognitive skills (as a percentage of a
                         standard deviation) from a transfer of $1000 per year ($4000 per period)
                         to parents, as a function of parental incomeok . e blue (solid) line is
                         for all parents and the red (circles) line is for for high-school-graduate
                         parents. e gray area represents the empirical estimate by Dahl and
                         Lochner (2017) +/- 1 std dev. See text for details.




4        UBI Policy Evaluation

In this section we introduce the UBI policy as a lump-sum transfer made annually to all individuals
once they become adults. We focus our analysis on a particular level of UBI that has been suggested
by policy makers and is currently being tested in a short-run small-scale environment. Every adult
(ages 16-79 in our model or periods = 5 to = 20) receives an annual transfer of $5,500 a year or,
equivalently, $11,000 per household. is is the transfer level that, in year 2000 dollars, puts a 2-adult
household just above the poverty line in the absence of any additional income.44 is policy has been
proposed by Democratic presidential candidate Andrew Yang and is also being tested in a small-scale
short-run randomized control framework by the YC Research group in Oakland, California.45

We examine the dynamic consequences of such a policy, analyzing how it a ects the welfare of di er-
ent cohorts by taking into account intergenerational dynamics as well as general equilibrium e ects
through prices and taxes.




    44   e poverty line for a 2-adult household was approximately $11,000 in the year 2000.
    45   is is the gure evaluated by Hoynes and Rothstein (2019).


                                                                              26
4.1    UBI: Unchanged Progressivity of the Marginal Labor Income Tax ( )

We assume that the policy is implemented by increasing and nanced by increasing labor income
taxes using so as to keep the budget balanced each period (see equation 1).46          e subscript on
indicates that this parameter will need to vary endogenously to keep the budget balanced each period
until a new steady state is reached. We refer to this implementation of a UBI policy as the unchanged
case and in the next section we contrast it with a linear marginal labor tax rate ( = 0). In the gures
that follow the unchanged case is always depicted with blue (solid) lines.

Figure 5 shows the transition e ects of the UBI policy on a series of outcomes: i. average labor income
             - 1- -
taxes (i.e.,         averaged over all individuals) starting in period 0 (when the policy is introduced);
ii. the average productivity of each cohort born a er the policy is introduced as measured by the wage
returns to cognitive skills (i.e., by log ( ) averaged over the indicated cohort); iii. a er-tax inequality
as measured by the variance of the log of a er-tax income in the cross-section of the population as of
the period in which the policy is introduced; and, iv. intergenerational mobility of gross income (as
measured by the rank-rank coe cient used by Che y et al. (2014) multiplied by -1) for each cohort of
children born a er the policy is introduced. e new steady state essentially reached by period 30. All
the gures show changes relative to the original steady state.

    e top le panel of Figure 5 shows that the UBI policy requires an initial increase in average labor
taxes of 4 percentage points and that this increases over time to 5.8 percentage points above its initial
steady state level. e further tax increase is required because the initial increase in decreases agents'
incentives to invest in early childhood development and college education. Parental money and time
investments are reduced by 41% and 28%, respectively, for the rst generation born once the UBI policy
is introduced, and these reductions become even larger ­ 50% and 29%, respectively ­ in the new steady
state. e percent of agents with a college education falls by 3.0 pp for the rst cohort born a er the
policy is introduced and by 3.7 pp in the new steady state.

In terms of inequality, the e ects are mixed. Although higher-income parents reduce their investment
in child skills the most, the general reduction in parental investments leads to a larger relative role of
other sources of persistence and a reduction in intergenerational mobility. Nonetheless, as shown in
the bo om le panel, a er-tax inequality is signi cantly reduced. e variance of log income falls by
46% as soon as the policy is introduced, and consumption smoothing increases. e average variance
                           1-
of consumption utility 1- over the life cycle is reduced by 14%.




   46 Recall that the government is assumed to have some constant amount of government expenses    which are the residual
in original steady-state of taxes net of transfers ) and retirement bene ts. See Appendix A for the expression. is held
constant in all counterfactuals.


                                                           27
                          Figure 5: Transition Dynamics of UBI: Unchanged                                 policy vs Replacing Current Progressivity

                                               Average Labor Tax           Average Productivity of New Cohorts                               log (   )


                                6                                                                    6




                                                                            Labor productivity (%)
         Avg. Tax Rate (p.p.)




                                4                                                                    4

                                2                                                                    2

                                0                                                                    0

                                -2               UBI: unchanged y                                    -2
                                                 UBI: y = 0
                                -4                                                                   -4
                                  0               10             20   30                               0             10          20          30

                                              A er-Tax Inequality                                               Mobility of New Cohorts
                                50                                                                   50
 Var of Log(Income) (%)




                                                                            IGE Mobility (%)




                                 0                                                                    0




                          -50                                                                        -50
                             0                    10             20   30                                0             10            20        30
                                                        Period                                                             Period
Notes: e unchanged UBI policy is in blue (solid) and the alternative UBI policy ( = 0) is in purple (circles). e
0 in the x axes of the average labor tax and the a er-tax inequality gures refers to the period in which the policy is
introduced and is measured for the cross-section of agents alive in that period. In the other gures it refers to the rst
cohort born when the UBI policy is introduced. See text for details.


We can provide a summary measure of welfare under a UBI policy by measuring consumption equiv-
alence (under the veil of ignorance for generations that will be born a er the policy is introduced).47
   e le panel of Figure 6 shows the average welfare gain from the unchanged UBI policy for di er-
ent cohorts where the y-axis measures by how much more ­ in consumption equivalence units ­ the
UBI policy is preferred to the original steady state. Cohort 0 is the rst cohort born when the policy
is introduced. Cohorts to the le of zero (that is, until negative 20) are the cohorts who were already
alive when the policy was introduced; cohorts to the right of zero are those born a er the policy is
introduced. For the former we show average welfare gains by cohort, while for the la er we shows

                     47 See           Appendix C for details.


                                                                           28
welfare gains under the veil of ignorance.

   e UBI policy a ects current versus future cohorts very di erently. Future cohorts su er large welfare
losses since the UBI policy leads to large tax increases, reducing investment in skills and education. In
addition, the parents of future generations themselves have lower education, which further negatively
a ects children's skill development as shown by the production function (equation (13)). Given the
choice between being born in the steady state of the economy with UBI or in that of the UBI economy,
an individual would be willing to sacri ce over 9% of consumption to be in the former.

For generations already alive when the policy is introduced, older cohorts gain whereas younger cohorts
su er losses. On average, for those adults (i.e, those of period age = 5 to 20), welfare measured in
consumption equivalent terms increases by 1.2% and, indeed, we nd that 56% of adult agents would
vote in favor of introducing the UBI policy.48 Figure 7 illustrates this in greater detail by graphing the
gains for high-school vs college graduate households by their age when the policy is introduced. As
can be seen, the welfare gains are largest for older workers as these are retired (age 68 and above) or
more likely to be out of work as a result of a negative shock. Gains are larger for those without a college
education as well because they tend to have lower levels of income. Young college-graduate workers,
instead, would lose signi cantly since they bear the brunt of the tax increase over their lifetimes.

                    Figure 6: Welfare Dynamics of UBI: Unchanged                          policy vs Replacing Current Progressivity
                                Unchanged                                                 Replacing Current Progressivity (      = 0)

                    10                                                                    10
 Cons. Equiv. (%)




                                                                       Cons. Equiv. (%)




                      0                                                                    0



                    -10                                                                   -10
                      -20       0        20             40                                  -20        0      20            40
                                      Cohort                                                               Cohort
Notes: Welfare gain (as measured by consumption equivalence) from the introduction of UBI for di erent cohorts.
Cohort 0 is the cohort born the period in which the policy is introduced. A cohort with a negative number indicates
that it was born that (absolute) number of periods prior to the introduction of the policy whereas a positive number
indicates a cohort that will be born that number of periods a er the policy is introduced. See the text for details.




           48 For
         agents of age              = 5, the share who favors the policy is calculated assuming            is known but prior to making their
education choice.


                                                                      29
           Figure 7: Distribution of Welfare Gains of UBI at Period 0 by Age and Education

                                            8

                                            6

                                            4



                         Cons. Equiv. (%)
                                            2

                                            0

                                            -2

                                            -4

                                            -6     College
                                                   High-School
                                            -8
                                                 76 72 68 64 60 56 52 48 44 40 36 32 28 24 20
                                                                      Age
                     Notes: Welfare gain (as measured by consumption equivalence) from
                     the introduction of UBI for di erent cohorts according to their age when
                     the policy is introduced). Age 16 not shown as whether they will be
                     college educated or not depends on the policy.


In order to understand the welfare consequences of UBI, it is useful to think about some of the sources
of gains and losses. First, UBI provides a oor to how low income can fall, which is especially useful
for poorer agents with high marginal utility of consumption. It therefore allows agents to decrease the
variance in their consumption and permits them to invest more in their children. We will refer to this as
e ect (i). E ect (ii), on the other hand, comes from the possibility that agents will be less likely to invest
in their children if the la er are guaranteed a minimum income. Even given the same level of skills, a
child may nd college less tempting. A third e ect arises from the fact that taxes need to be adjusted
to balance the budget. Finally, by modifying skill formation and education incentives, UBI may lead to
GE changes regarding wages and interest rates (e ect (iv)).

In order to quantify the importance of these channels, Table 5 reports the results from several exercises
that shed light on their quantitative signi cance. e rst row reports the e ects of UBI in the short run
by providing the bene t to only one cohort, as well as leaving prices and taxes at their original steady
state level. is cohort understands that only they will be provided with the UBI bene t and thus over
time the economy will transition back to its original steady state. As can be seen from the table, this
cohort reacts by increasing investments in children substantially (both time and money) and increasing
transfers to their children by a large proportion as well.      is results in an increase in average labor
productivity (in the sense described previously) of 1.4 pp, an increase in the proportion of children who
become college graduates by 2 pp (which is a 6.7 percent increase over its mean), and an overall increase
in welfare (in consumption equivalent terms) of 17.3%.        is e ect is not surprising: this scenario is
providing the cohort with a free gi .       ey share the bene ts of this gi with their descendants by

                                                                     30
providing them with greater skills which, over time, go back to their original steady-state levels.

   e second row turns to the longer-run consequences and asks what would be the welfare e ect if
all cohorts were given this gi . It abstracts both from any need to fund UBI and from any general
equilibrium consequences on prices arising from changes in agents' decisions. e numbers reported
here are from the new steady state in the sense that they re ect outcomes and welfare for cohorts born
in the new steady state obtained under these premises. E ect (ii) now comes into play. Investment in
children and parental transfers fall substantially, as does average labor productivity and, especially, the
proportion of college graduates. e fact that all cohorts receive this bene t reduces the desire to invest
in children as well as the la er's desire to a end college. e need to save also decreases substantially as
indicated by the 14.5% fall in the capital stock. Welfare nonetheless necessarily increases as the bene ts
now accrue to all and, since these are free, concavity implies that all generations bene t as parents also
want future descendants to be be er o .

   e third row keeps the universality of the bene ts but now requires them to be funded. Prices, however,
are kept at the original steady-state value. As can be seen, both money investments in building children
skills as well as transfers to children fall substantially, decreasing average labor productivity by over
5% and the proportion who graduate from college by a large proportion - over 9 pp. e capital stock's
fall is much larger now - 42%. is row also shows that taking into account that taxes need to increase
to fund the UBI is responsible for all of the long-run welfare losses, in fact exceeding it by over 2.5
pp. Finally, the full steady-state e ects of the UBI policy are studied in the 4th row which incorporates
the general equilibrium e ect of price changes in addition to tax changes.           e general equilibrium
e ects help mitigate the negative e ects of taxes. e return to college increases due to the fall in the
proportion of college graduates, leading more agents to a end college and thus causing this fraction
to fall by 3.7 pp rather than the 9.4 pp of the previous exercise. e overall steady-state welfare loss is
correspondingly smaller.

                                           Table 5: UBI: A Decomposition

  Alternative Exercises                                    Change from Baseline (%)
  Long Budget GE                  Time       Money       Parental Labor College Capital                         Cons.
  Run Balanced                                           Transfers Prod.    (p.p.)                              Equiv.
   No       No      No              7.8         22.2         52       1.4     2.0     ­                           17.3
   Yes      No      No             -26.7       -17.7        -37      -2.9    -7.7   -14.5                         24.1
   Yes      Yes     No             -29.4       -49.7        -64      -5.2    -9.4   -42.0                        -11.9
   Yes      Yes     Yes            -29.3       -49.8        -33      -3.9    -3.7   -20.2                        -9.2
  Notes: e column "Long Run" indicates whether the variables, including welfare measured in consumption equivalence
  units, are those from the stationary equilibrium obtained under the experiment conducted in the text. Labor productivity
  refers to the value of   log ( ) .




It is also of interest to understand how the aggregate variables respond in the steady state. As can be
seen in Table 6, GDP falls by 12.9%. 52% of this decrease is due to a fall in the capital stock (of 20.2%) and

                                                            31
the remainder to the aggregate e ciency units of labor (i.e., as shown in equation 5). For the la er,
we can examine how the di erent components contribute to this. As noted previously, the proportion
of college graduates fall by 12.4% (or 3.6 percentage points). e average labor productivity of college-
educated individuals falls by 3.7% and that of high-school individuals falls by 1.9%. Hours worked over
the life cycle are reduced for both groups: on average by 2.8% for college grads and 7.2% for high school
graduates.

                                 Table 6: UBI: Long-Run Aggregate E ects

                                                                            Change from Baseline
              GDP                                                                  -12.9%
              Capital                                                              -20.2%
              Labor (E ciency Units)                                                -9.2%
                 College Share                                                     -12.4%
                 Average Labor Productivity: High-School                            -1.9%
                 Average Labor Productivity: College                                -3.7%
                 Average Hours Worked: High-School                                  -7.2%
                 Average Hours Worked: College                                      -2.8%
              Notes: E ciency units of labor   is de ned in equation 5. Labor productivity refers to the
              value of   log ( ) .




4.2   UBI and Linear Labor Income Taxation

In the preceding analysis, UBI is modeled as an additional source of income redistribution beyond that
already provided by the current tax system.      is tax system includes social programs and bene ts
primarily targeted to poorer households as well as redistribution (e.g., Medicaid, food stamps, AFDC,
and EITC). Given that the UBI policy would ensure that households did not fall below the poverty level,
it may be reasonable to think that some of these programs would be cut back or even eliminated.

Reducing the importance of these social programs could be interpreted, through the lens of the tax
function, as a reduction of the tax progressivity parameter since it would reduce the tax bene ts of
low-income households. Although the degree to which these programs would be reduced is unclear,
one way to explore this question is by evaluating the extreme case of a linear labor income tax. us,
in this section we model UBI as an increase in as before but simultaneously set = 0. e level of
non-modeled government expenditures remains unchanged, hence the labor tax parameter must
adjust to balance the budget.

Given that the policy experiment essentially consists of two parts (i) a change in the marginal tax system
to a linear tax (i.e., is set to zero) and then (ii) an increase in by the amount of the UBI transfer, it
is useful to rst ask how much each contributes to the change that is required in . If the change were
restricted to se ing     = 0, would decrease from its original value of .79 to .77 on the rst period,


                                                          32
eventually increasing to .78 in the new steady state.49 In terms of the average labor tax rate, this drops
by 2.8pp in the rst period and by 3.5pp in the new steady state.

Next, the purple (circled) lines of Figure 5 graph the e ect of asking this new tax system to fund the
increase in required by UBI. As shown in the upper le -hand gure, this policy requires a signi cantly
                                                                ( 1- )-
smaller increase in the average labor-income tax rate (i.e., in         averaged over all individuals) than
when was le unchanged. When the policy is introduced, the average labor-income tax rate requires
an immediate increase of 1.5 p.p. instead of the 4 p.p. in the preceding case. Moreover, in contrast with
the original UBI program, this alternative requires smaller further increases in the average tax rate.
   e linear labor tax, furthermore, reduces the disincentive for higher-income agents to invest in skills
and education relative to the unchanged case. Parental money and time investments are reduced
by 21% and 12%, respectively, in the new steady state--less than half of the reduction of that in the
unchanged UBI. e percent of agents with a college education falls by 0.7pp in the new steady state,
about one- h of the reduction obtained under the unchanged UBI.

Intergenerational mobility does not fall as much as under the previous UBI policy. Furthermore, as
shown in the bo om le -hand side of Figure 5, the counterpart of the linear tax rate UBI policy is
that the variance of log income is reduced by far less than in the unchanged policy. is is a direct
consequence of the lack of progressivity in the marginal labor tax rate.

Lastly, the right-hand side of Figure 6 shows that this alternative UBI leads to relatively similar average
welfare gains for generations who are alive when the policy is introduced as the benchmark case. Older
agents are be er o but younger ones are worse o , leading to a similar average gain. A vote on the
policy would have 61.7% of adults preferring the policy to the original status quo. e gains for the older
individuals, as in the prior case, come from receiving a larger payment in retirement. Young college-
educated households and, particularly, future cohorts prefer this alternative policy to the original UBI
policy.    is is because young high-skilled workers bene t from the lack of progressive marginal tax
rates on labor income and because future cohorts see a smaller reduction in parental investments in their
skills. Parental skills, of course, are also higher and both are inputs into skill formation and education
outcomes. It is worth emphasizing, however, that all future generations prefer not to have a UBI policy.
Individuals would be willing to sacri ce 1.8% of consumption to be born (under the veil of ignorance)
in the no UBI steady-state environment than to be born in the steady state of the alternative UBI policy.


4.3    Robustness

We now examine the robustness of the results to a variety of alternative modeling and estimation
choices.



  49 Recall   that a decrease in   is an increase in the labor tax (for a xed   ).


                                                               33
UBI with increased wage shocks variance

  e baseline model essentially assumes complete markets within a 4-year-long period and, by doing so,
may diminish the welfare consequences of a UBI policy. To evaluate the importance of this assumption,
we double the variance of the wage shocks, and examine how this a ects the welfare gains from UBI.

   e rst column of Table 7 reproduces the results from introducing UBI keeping unchanged. e sec-
ond column shows the results of doubling the variance of the wage shocks (leaving all other parameter
values unchanged) for the rst UBI case of an unchanged . In this case, the welfare gains for are on
average larger for the adults alive when the policy introduced and the losses smaller for those who will
be born in the new steady state. In both cases, UBI would win the popular vote: with 63.7% of the votes
in the new scenario, relative to 56.4% in the unchanged case and the basic con ict between currently
alive generations and those in the long-run future remains.

                                               Table 7: UBI: Robustness

                                               Unchanged              Double    UBI substitutes for initial
 Share in favor of UBI at = 0                     56.4%                 63.7%              57.5%
 Welfare gains for adults at = 0                   1.2%                 2.7%                2.1%
 Welfare gains in steady state                    -9.2%                 -7.7%              -7.6%
 Notes: = 0 refers to the period in which the policy is introduced.




UBI substitutes for initial

In Section 4.2, we examined a UBI policy assuming that it might eliminate some of the current social
programs and bene ts targeted to poorer households. We interpreted this as a reduction of the tax
progressivity parameter , se ing it to zero. An alternative might be an unchanged progressivity of
the marginal tax rate and that instead the old transfers (the value of in the original steady state) are
eliminated. is is equivalent to assuming that the net increase in UBI per household per year is $11,000
(baseline UBI value) - $2,400, where the last gure is the estimated value of in the steady state of the
benchmark economy. e third column of Table 7 shows that the welfare e ects are similar to those
obtained under the original UBI policy.



5    Automation and Universal Policies

   e very di erent welfare consequences from a UBI policy in the short versus the long run highlights an
interesting political issue. Whereas future cohorts would prefer not to have a UBI policy introduced, a
majority of currently-alive adults (primarily driven by older individuals and the majority of high-school
graduate workers) would vote in favor of UBI. How is this con ict of interest across generations a ected

                                                             34
by a more di cult economic environment? We now turn to this question, motivated by current fears
of the future consequences of robotization and automation.


5.1     Automation

A major concern over robotization/automation is that it will considerably reduce the number of jobs
available by making certain occupations obsolete. A UBI policy would help provide the basic needs
of individuals who were a ected. Although the present model is not designed to re ect all important
aspects of automation, it is able to capture its main concern in a simple fashion by viewing the con-
sequences of this technological advance as an increase in the proportion of workers who receive an
out-of-work shock. In particular, we model automation as an unanticipated and permanent increase in
the rate with which individuals get hit by an "out-of-work" shock. us the higher rate of automation
should be seen as an increase in the rate at which jobs are destroyed, making particular occupations
obsolete, but leaving una ected the ability of the economy to create new jobs/occupations. More con-
cretely, we introduce the higher rate of automation by increasing each age-dependent probability of
entering the out-of-work state (as shown by the le panel of Figure 2) by a common education-speci c
factor in such a way as to match available estimates on the share of current jobs that would be lost in
the next 30 years.50

    e baseline (steady state) model implies that, conditional upon currently working, individuals who are
of period age = 5 to period age = 10 inclusive, will experience an out-of-work shock with probability
3.3% over the next 7 periods (i.e., 3.3% of the individuals who are between 16-20 and 36-40 years old
and working get hit by an out-of-work shock over the next 28 years as they age to being between 44-48
and 64-68 years old). McKinsey (2017) and OECD (2019) predict the share of current jobs lost could
be between 5% and 15% but numbers even closer to 25 or 30% have been suggested (Frey and Osborne,
2017). Most of the empirical evidence also suggests that the occupations of less-educated individuals are
more likely to be a ected automation. Following the estimates of McKinsey (2017), we assume that the
probability that a college graduate loses their job is 58% lower than the one for a high-school graduate.
Note that, ceteris paribus, this mechanically implies a higher unit wage for high-school graduates, as a
greater chance of being in the "out-of-work" state essentially makes them scarcer (see equation 6). As
this is simply a consequence of using a model in which unemployed workers do not compete for jobs
and, furthermore, contradicts most predictions regarding the returns to less-skilled labor, we adjust the
weight of college vs non-college work in the aggregate production function (5). In particular, we adjust
  such that if aggregate capital ( ) is unchanged from its initial steady state value and aggregate labor
supply ( 0 and 1 ) adjusts only due to the exogenous increase in the probability of being out-of-work
(i.e., no endogenous changes in skills, education or labor supply), the wage of high-school graduates,

   50   at is, the probability of being out of work in period if an individual with education was working in period - 1
goes from to ( 1 + ) for all working periods,  {0, 1}. We leave unchanged the probability of a worker transitioning
from out-of-work to employment.


                                                          35
    would remain unchanged.51 Lastly, as there is no reason to believe that automation would reduce
    0,
GDP (which would otherwise fall, ceteris paribus, simply as a result of greater out-of-work shocks), we
increase total factor productivity in (5) such that, a er adjusting , GDP remains constant at the original
capital stock and aggregate labor (with the la er adjusted only be the higher probability of being out
of work).

More rigorously, let 0  ,  , and  be the initial steady-state values of high-school labor, college labor,
                           1
and capital, respectively. Let ^ 0 and ^ 1 be the corresponding values if the only adjustment were in the
(exogenous) increase in the probability of being out-of-work (i.e., keeping unchanged skills, education,
and labor supplied conditional on working). To keep the return to an e ciency unit of high-school
workers unchanged, we nd ^ such that 0 ^ 0, ^ 1,  | ^ = 0 0          , ,  | , as de ned by equation
                                                                          1
         ^
(6). Let ( ^) be the resulting aggregate labor supply using ^. To keep output unchanged, we then
                                                                                                                                   1-
increase total factor productivity, (previously normalized to equal 1), to ^ such that ^ (                           )    ^ ( ^)         =
(    )    (    ) 1-   .

                                     Table 8: Automation: Long-Run Aggregate E ects

    Jobs Destroyed                                                        5%        10%        15%          20%           25%           30%

                                                                                        Change from Baseline
    GDP                                                                 0.0%        -0.1%   0.0%    0.7%    1.3%  2.0%
    Capital                                                             1.9%         6.0%   9.7%   13.8% 17.4% 20.8%
    Labor (E ciency Units)                                              -1.5%       -5.5% -8.7% -11.4% -13.9% -16.3%
       College Share                                                     0.9%        4.5%   8.9%   12.9% 17.3% 20.9%
       Average Labor Productivity: High-School                           0.0%        0.1%   0.1%    0.2%    0.3%  0.6%
       Average Labor Productivity: College                               0.0%       -0.1% -0.0% -0.1% -0.5% -0.7%
       Average Hours Worked: High-School                                -1.6%       -5.8% -9.4% -11.8% -14.1% -16.3%
       Average Hours Worked: College                                    -0.8%       -3.2% -5.5% -7.8% -9.9% -11.7%
       Average Hours Worked: All, Excl. Out of Work                      0.2%        0.7%   1.0%    1.1%    1.3%  1.4%
    Total Factor Productivity ^                                         0.4%         1.8%   3.1%    4.6%    6.2%  7.9%
    High School Weight in Aggregate Labor ^                             -0.3%       -1.2% -2.1% -2.9% -3.9% -4.7%
    Interest Rate                                                       -3.7%      -12.7% -20.4% -25.9% -31.1% -36.8%
    High-School Wage 0                                                  1.3%         4.6%   7.9%   10.5% 13.1% 16.2%
    College Wage 1                                                      0.4%         1.8%   2.9%    4.2%    5.5%  7.1%
    Average Labor Income Tax Rate                                       1.1%         4.7%   7.6%    9.4%   11.0% 12.9%

    Welfare in Steady State                                            -0.68% -1.75% -1.92% -1.42% -0.69% 0.01%
    Welfare for Adults at = 0                                          -1.08% -3.45% -5.26% -6.30% -7.17% -7.80%
    Notes: E ciency units of labor     is de ned in equation 5. Labor productivity refers to the value of    log (   ).




Table 8 reports some key aggregate variable values for the new steady state reached under di erent
     51 is strategy implies that college workers have a more sizable role in the economy which is in line with the prediction
that the new jobs created by automation will require more skills (e.g., McKinsey, 2017; Frey and Osborne, 2017; OECD, 2019).


                                                                  36
occupation/job destruction rates, ranging from 5% to 30%. Note that GDP does not react in a monotonic
fashion: it rst falls and then increases. e la er is a consequence of an endogenously growing capital
stock as agents increase savings to be er protect themselves against the increased income risk, an
endogenously larger share of college educated workers as the la er face lower risk making college
more a ractive, an endogenously higher number of hours worked conditional upon working (as can
bee seen by the column that excludes the hours of out of work agents, and an exogenous change in TFP
stemming from the procedure described previously. Welfare in the steady state is also non-monotonic
but the welfare of adult cohorts when the environment becomes riskier is unambiguously decreasing
in risk. Note that, of course, steady state welfare does not take into account the transition required to
achieve the higher capital stock and more educated labor force.


5.2   Automation and UBI

We next revisit how the introduction of a UBI policy a ects welfare under these changed environments,
starting from the steady state, in each case, of the higher "out-of-work" economy. e rst column of
Table 9 labeled "Adults at = 0" reports, in consumption equivalence units, the average amount of
consumption adults (i.e., those of age 16 and above) would be willing to sacri ce in the steady state of
the higher out-of-work economy to have the unchanged UBI policy introduced that period. e third
column performs a similar consumption equivalence exercise but this time for cohorts that will be born
in the new steady state of the economy of the UBI economy (under the veil of ignorance).

                                  Table 9: Automation: UBI and ECD Welfare

                                               Welfare Gains: Cons. Equiv. (%)
              Jobs                       Adults at = 0                  Steady State
           Destroyed                  UBI           ECD            UBI             ECD
         Baseline = 3.3%              1.21          -1.75          -9.16            8.82
              5.0%                    1.51          -1.76          -9.22            8.83
             10.0%                    1.94          -1.65         -10.02            8.82
             15.0%                    2.09          -1.66         -11.15            8.73
             20.0%                    2.26          -1.64         -11.76            8.84
             25.0%                    2.40          -1.67         -12.55            8.66
             30.0%                    2.50          -1.70         -13.08            8.48
         Notes: Unchanged UBI policy and ECD policy: Adults at = 0 refers to agents who are adults when
         the policy is introduced; steady state refers to agents born in the new steady state with welfare evaluated
         behind the veil of ignorance.




As can be seen by contrasting columns (1) and (3), living in a riskier economy (automation) has very
di erent implications for current adults vs future cohorts. e cohorts that are adults when the policy
is introduced are the ones least able to adjust to the increased risk, both in terms of education choices
and asset accumulation. us, higher levels of automation increases the value of UBI for them. Future

                                                             37
cohorts are also more likely to lose their jobs, but the losses from UBI are larger since the tax base in
the new steady state has fallen as a result of the greater proportion of agents hit by automation, making
the nancing of UBI even more costly.


5.3     Automation: Early Childhood Education vs UBI

In this section we provide an evaluation of an alternative universal policy and its interaction with au-
tomation: an early-childhood development (ECD) policy. An ECD policy allows a potentially higher
level of investment in children than what parents, given their circumstances, might choose in its ab-
sence. is ma ers because children cannot use their future UBI payments to invest in their own early
childhood development.

We consider an ECD policy based on the programs studied by Garcia et al. (2020). e authors evaluate
a randomized control trial (RCT) in which a small group of disadvantaged children were exposed to
one of two high-quality early childhood development programs (ABC and CARE in North Carolina) at
a cost of approximately $13,500 per year.52 e children entered the program when they were around
8 weeks old remained in it for ve years. ey show that the policy led to an increase in the college
graduation rate of between 9 and 23 percentage points and predict a return in lifetime earnings (in net
present value) of 1.3 dollars for every dollar spent.53

To study the e ect of an ECD policy in the model, we have the government run a program that costs
$13,500 (2000 USD) for 4 years per child, for a total, in net present value (discounted at 4% ­ the steady
state rate of the baseline economy), of $50,964 per child. We assume that these funds are a perfect
substitute for parental money , as shown by the parental investment equation below:

                                         = ¯[      (   + ) + (1 -        ) ] 1/                                     (21)

Appendix section B.6 conducts a validation exercise by showing that the model (in partial equilibrium
and for lower-income households) generates results in terms of college graduation rates and lifetime
earnings that are quantitatively similar to those estimated by Garcia et al. (2020).

What are the consequences of an ECD policy and how do they contrast with a UBI? How does the policy
comparison change as the level of automation increases? We next turn to these questions by comparing
the ECD policy described above with the benchmark UBI policy of section 4.1 before concluding with a
comparison under di erent levels of automation risk. It is important to note from the outset that these
policies have di erent costs. From the perspective of an individual, the ECD program spends $13,500
(2000 USD) for 4 years on them, for a total, in net present value (discounted at the initial equilibrium
interest rate of 4%), of $50,964 per individual.  e baseline UBI instead transfers $70,145 (also in net
   52 Notethat all prices are expressed in year 2000 dollars.
   53 Garciaet al. observe the education and income of these children at two speci c ages (the latest being age 30), from
which they estimate the e ect on lifetime labor income.


                                                           38
present value evaluated at birth) to each individual. From the perspective of the government, on the
other hand, the ECD policy requires it to raise, per period, $13,500x4/20=$2,700 per capita which it then
gives to only one cohort per period.      e UBI policy requires it to raise $5,500x4x16/20=$17,600 per
capita per period which it then spreads uniformly across all adult cohorts each period.54 In both cases,
the additional income needed to nance the policy is accomplished via a change in the parameter in
the labor tax function so as to maintain a balanced budget.

Figure 8 illustrates how the average tax on labor income, the average productivity of cohorts, the vari-
ance of log income, and intergenerational mobility, all measured as de ned previously, evolve once the
policies are put in place. As seen, the ECD policy has a relatively small e ect on a er-tax inequality
whereas it has a very large e ect on average labor productivity over time, when compared to UBI. is
di erence is re ected in the behavior of the average labor income tax rate over time. Although the ECD
policy requires the average tax rate to be increased substantially early on (by 3 percentage points) it
decreases over time until it is reduced to almost its original value. is re ects that the new cohorts are
becoming more productive over time, both directly because of the increase in the monetary investment
in skills from the policy and, for each new generation, because their parents are becoming more skilled
and more educated, each contributing to the skill formation of their descendants and thereby increasing
the tax base as well. Under the UBI policy the average tax on labor income increases over time as the
average productivity of cohorts drops.

Where do the gains in productivity come from under ECD? Recall that when UBI is introduced parental
money and time investments fall by 41% and 28%, respectively. Even though ECD leads to almost full
crowding out of parental nancial investments in child skills, the total nancial investment in children
­ the sum of parent and government investment in young children's skill development ­ increases.
Moreover, the complementarity between time and money in child skills leads to an almost doubling in
parental time. It is important to note that the ECD program is reducing the di erence in skill investment
for children of poorer households and richer ones. Overall, there is a large increase in intergenerational
mobility under this policy ­ the opposite of what happens under UBI.

UBI and ECD policies also have very di erent welfare implications. e le panel of Figure 9 ­ which
reproduces Figure 6 to facilitate the comparison ­ shows the average welfare gains (in consumption
equivalent units), by cohort, from the introduction of the UBI policy to the steady-state of the bench-
mark economy; the right panel shows the equivalent from the ECD policy. A UBI policy, as discussed
previously, leads to large welfare losses (of 9.2% in the new steady state) for future cohorts (under the
veil of ignorance) due to the tax increases and to the reduction in skills over time discussed previously.
   e loss in skills not only a ects the agents directly, but also indirectly as future generations end up
with lower-skilled and less-educated parents. Individuals alive at the time UBI is introduced are gen-
erally be er o (average welfare gains of 1.2%). ECD, instead, leads to large welfare gains (8.8% in the
new steady state) for future cohorts since this policy mitigates the market incompleteness that does not
   54 An alternative measure of the cost is the percent of the benchmark per capita steady-state GDP required to nance the
policy: 2.1% per period for ECD vs 13.6% for UBI.


                                                           39
allow children to compensate their parents for greater early childhood investments. ECD welfare gains
exhibit some jumps across cohorts which show the importance of parents in an agent's welfare: e
  rst jump is given by the rst cohort born to intervened parents, the second is the rst cohort born to
intervened parents and grandparents, etc.. ese as the counterparts of the jumps in productivity by
cohort seen in Figure 8. Note, however, that despite future cohorts being be er o , people alive at the
time ECD is introduced are generally worse o (average loss of 1.8%) given that they need to pay higher
taxes and the gains are achieved indirectly through their children.

                                     Figure 8: Transition Dynamics of UBI (unchanged                   ) and ECD

                                 Average Labor Tax                Average Productivity of New Cohorts                  log (   )



                          10                                                               10



                                                                  Labor Productivity (%)
 Avg. Tax Rate (p.p.)




                           5                                                                5

                           0                                                                0

                           -5     UBI: unchanged y                                          -5
                                  ECD
                          -10                                                              -10
                             0      10            20       30                                 0   10              20   30

                                 A er-Tax Inequality                                                   Mobility
                          50                                                                50
 Var of Log(Income) (%)




                                                                      IGE Mobility (%)




                           0                                                                 0




                          -50                                                              -50
                             0      10            20       30                                 0   10              20   30
                                         Period                                                          Period
Notes: e baseline UBI policy is in blue (solid) and the ECD policy is in prange (circles). e 0 in the x axis of the
average labor tax and a er-tax inequality refers to the period in which the policy is introduced and is measured for
the cross-section of agents alive in that period. In the other gures it refers to the rst cohort born when the UBI policy
is introduced. See text for details.




                                                                 40
                                     Figure 9: Welfare Dynamics of UBI (unchanged                   ) and ECD
                            Universal Basic Income                                       Early Childhood Development

                    10                                                              10
 Cons. Equiv. (%)




                                                                 Cons. Equiv. (%)
                     0                                                               0



                    -10                                                             -10
                      -20        0       20          40                               -20       0        20      40
                                      Cohort                                                          Cohort
Notes: Welfare gain (as measured by consumption equivalence) from the introduction of UBI (le ) and ECD (right)
for di erent cohorts. Cohort 0 is the cohort born the period in which the policy is introduced. A cohort with a negative
number indicates that it was born that (absolute) number of periods prior to the introduction of the policy whereas a
positive number indicates a cohort that will be born that number of periods a er the policy is introduced. See the text
for details.


Lastly, we turn to the e ect of a riskier environment from automation/robotization. Table 9 provides a
comparison of outcomes of ECD for an economy with increasing levels of "out-of-work" risk, allowing
side-by-side contrasts with the UBI policy. Unlike UBI, Table 9 shows that the ECD policy provides
a large and rather stable gain in the long run in an environment with large out-of-work shocks. e
welfare consequence of ECD for the adults alive at = 0 are almost una ected by the rate of automation.

Altogether, the results above suggest that a combination of policies may improve welfare for all, on
average. A UBI may be a useful transitional policy to help older individuals whose skills are signi -
cantly more likely to become obsolete and who are unprepared for a world of increased risk. Applied
simultaneously, an ECD policy may improve long-run welfare by allowing future cohorts to increase
their skills, education, and probability of employment.



6                   Conclusion

   e objective of this paper is to evaluate a UBI policy in a framework able to capture the fundamental
features of its potential costs and bene ts. We develop an overlapping generations, general equilib-
rium, life-cycle model with imperfect capital markets and endogenous choices of labor supply, saving,
education, and investment in the skills of one's children. Agents are subject to various sources of uncer-
tainty including income and "out-of-work" shocks.        e steady state of the model is estimated to match
household level data with a tax function that is parametrized to be a good t for the US economy.

                                                                41
We introduce a UBI policy that provides each adult with $5500 per year, nanced by additional taxes.
  is policy has very di erent welfare implications depending on the cohort. Older agents are on average
made be er o when the policy is introduced (by 1.2 percent), especially if they do not have a college
education. Younger agents on average are made worse o . If agents were to vote upon whether the UBI
policy should be introduced, it would win against the status quo. In the new steady state, evaluating
welfare behind the veil of ignorance, individuals would strongly prefer to live in the steady state of the
economy without the UBI policy ­ they would be willing to sacri ce over 9% of consumption. Although
UBI helps relieve credit constraints and smooth consumption, the large increase in the labor income tax
required makes skill formation and college education less a ractive, leading to even higher taxes.

  e paper also examines how increased automation/robotization a ects the desirability of UBI, model-
ing automation as an increase in the probability of su ering an out-of-work shock using estimates from
the literature on the fraction of current jobs/occupations predicted to become obsolete. We nd that
UBI becomes more a ractive on average to adult cohorts that are alive when the policy is introduced,
with its desirability increasing in the level of automation. e welfare loss in the steady state, however,
remains sizable and larger in absolute value the greater the riskiness of the environment since more
automation implies a shrinking fraction of actively employed individuals, decreasing the tax base, and
requiring a higher rate of taxation.

We conclude with a remark about the current situation of a pandemic-induced historically-high "out-of-
work" shock that, once again, has disproportionately a ected individuals with less education. e call
for UBI has resurfaced, becoming more popular both in the US and in Europe.55 While strong income
support measures for all those in these circumstances and the creation of a permanent machinery that
allows these payments to be made quickly and e ciently is of rst-order importance, our analysis
indicates that a move to a permanent universal income system would entail large losses in the longer
run.56




   55 A recent eupinions poll found that 71% of Europeans believe that the state should give all citizens a basic income (See
Garton Ash and Zimmermann, 2020)
   56 See, e.g., the recent NYT, Politico, and NBC news articles on the inabilities of the current unemployment payment

system to deal with making payments to unemployed Americans (Schwartz et al., 2020; Cassella and Murphy, 2020; Solon
and Glaser, 2020).


                                                             42
References
Abbo , B., G. Gallipoli, C. Meghir, and G. L. Violante (Forthcoming). Education Policy and Intergener-
  ational Transfers in Equilibrium. Journal of Political Economy .

Akee, R., W. Copeland, E. J. Costello, and E. Simeonova (2018). How does household income a ect child
  personality traits and behaviors? American Economic Review 108 (3), 775­827.

Akee, R. K., W. E. Copeland, G. Keeler, A. Angold, and E. J. Costello (2010). Parents' incomes and
  children's outcomes: a quasi-experiment using transfer payments from casino pro ts. American
  Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2 (1), 86­115.

Almond, D., H. W. Hoynes, and D. W. Schanzenbach (2011). Inside the war on poverty:           e impact of
  food stamps on birth outcomes. e review of economics and statistics 93(2), 387­403.

Atkinson, A. B. (1991). Basic income schemes and the lessons from public economics. In Issues in
  Contemporary Economics, pp. 22­38. Springer.

Banerjee, A., P. Niehaus, and T. Suri (2019). Universal basic income in the developing world. Annual
  Review of Economics.

Barro, R. J. and G. S. Becker (1989). Fertility Choice in a Model of Economic Growth. Econometrica 57 (2),
  481­501.

Bastian, J. and K. Michelmore (2018). e long-term impact of the earned income tax credit on children's
  education and employment outcomes. Journal of Labor Economics 36(4), 1127­1163.

Benabou, R. (2000). Unequal societies: Income distribution and the social contract. American Economic
  Review 90 (1), 96­129.

Benabou, R. (2002). Tax and education policy in a heterogeneous-agent economy: What levels of redis-
  tribution maximize growth and e ciency? Econometrica 70 (2), 481­517.

Blundell, R. and T. MaCurdy (1999). Labor supply: A review of alternative approaches. In Handbook of
  labor economics, Volume 3, pp. 1559­1695. Elsevier.

Bovenberg, A. L. and B. Jacobs (2005). Redistribution and education subsidies are siamese twins. Journal
  of Public Economics 89 (11-12).

Cassella, M. and K. Murphy (2020). States overwhelmed by previously unimaginable layo numbers.
  Politico.

Che y, R., J. N. Friedman, and J. Rocko (2011). New evidence on the long-term impacts of tax credits.
  IRS Statistics of Income White Paper .



                                                   43
Che y, R., N. Hendren, P. Kline, and E. Saez (2014). Where is the land of opportunity? the geography of
  intergenerational mobility in the united states. e arterly Journal of Economics 129 (4), 1553­1623.

Cunha, F., J. J. Heckman, and S. M. Schennach (2010). Estimating the Technology of Cognitive and
  Noncognitive Skill Formation. Econometrica 78 (3), 883­931.

Dahl, G. B. and L. Lochner (2012).  e impact of family income on child achievement: Evidence from
  the earned income tax credit. American Economic Review 102 (5), 1927­56.

Dahl, G. B. and L. Lochner (2017).   e impact of family income on child achievement: Evidence from
  the earned income tax credit: Reply. American Economic Review 107 (2), 629­31.

Daruich, D. (2019).    e macroeconomic consequences of early childhood development policies. Working
  paper.

Daruich, D. and J. Kozlowski (2019). Explaining intergenerational mobility:           e role of fertility and
  family transfers.

Feenberg, D. and E. Cou s (1993). An introduction to the taxsim model. Journal of Policy Analysis and
  management 12 (1), 189­194.

Feldstein, M. S. (1969).   e e ects of taxation on risk taking. Journal of Political Economy 77 (5), 755­764.

Fern´
    andez, R. and J. C. Wong (2017). Free to leave? a welfare analysis of divorce regimes. American
  Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 9 (3), 72­115.

Frey, C. B. and M. A. Osborne (2017). e future of employment: How susceptible are jobs to comput-
  erisation? Technological forecasting and social change 114, 254­280.

Garcia, J. L., J. J. Heckman, D. E. Leaf, and M. J. Prados (2020). antifying the life-cycle bene ts of an
  in uential early childhood program. Journal of Political Economy .

Garton Ash, T. and A. Zimmermann (2020). In crisis, europeans support radical positions. Eupinions.

Ghatak, M. and F. Maniquet (2019). Universal basic income: some theoretical aspects. Annual Review of
  Economics 11, 895­928.

Gross, D. B. and N. S. Souleles (2002). Do liquidity constraints and interest rates ma er for consumer
  behavior? evidence from credit card data*. e arterly Journal of Economics 117 (1), 149­185.

Hanna, R. and B. A. Olken (2018). Universal basic incomes versus targeted transfers: Anti-poverty
  programs in developing countries. Journal of Economic Perspectives 32 (4), 201­26.

Heathcote, J., K. Storesle en, and G. L. Violante (2017). Optimal tax progressivity: An analytical frame-
  work. e arterly Journal of Economics 132 (4), 1693­1754.


                                                     44
Heckman, J. J., L. Lochner, and C. Taber (1998). Explaining rising wage inequality: Explorations with a
  dynamic general equilibrium model of labor earnings with heterogeneous agents. Review of Economic
  Dynamics 1(1), 1­58.

Heckman, J. J., L. J. Lochner, and P. E. Todd (2006, June). Earnings Functions, Rates of Return and Treat-
  ment E ects: e Mincer Equation and Beyond. , Volume 1 of Handbook of the Economics of Education,
  Chapter 7, pp. 307­458. Elsevier.

Hosseini, R., K. Zhao, K. Kopecky, et al. (2018). How important is health inequality for lifetime earnings
 inequality? In 2018 Meeting Papers, Number 1093. Society for Economic Dynamics.

Hoynes, H. W. and J. Rothstein (2019). Universal basic income in the us and advanced countries. Tech-
  nical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Humlum, A. (2020). Robot adoption and labor market dynamics. Technical report, Working Paper.

Inklaar, R. and M. P. Timmer (2013). Capital, labor and tfp in pwt8. 0. University of Groningen (unpub-
  lished), 23­24.

Jones, D. and I. Marinescu (2018). e labor market impacts of universal and permanent cash transfers:
  Evidence from the alaska permanent fund. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Katz, L. and K. M. Murphy (1992). Changes in relative wages, 1963­1987: Supply and demand factors.
     e arterly Journal of Economics 107 (1), 35­78.

Krueger, D. and A. Ludwig (2016). On the optimal provision of social insurance: Progressive taxation
  versus education subsidies in general equilibrium. Journal of Monetary Economics 77 (C), 72­98.

Manoli, D. and N. Turner (2018). Cash-on-hand and college enrollment: Evidence from population tax
 data and the earned income tax credit. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 10 (2), 242­71.

Martinez, J. (2019). Automation, growth and factor shares. Technical report, Working Paper.

McDaniel, C. (2007). Average tax rates on consumption, investment, labor and capital in the oecd 1950-
 2003. Technical report.

McKinsey, G. I. (2017). Jobs lost, jobs gained: Workforce transitions in a time of automation. Technical
 report.

Meghir, C. and D. Phillips (2010). Labour supply and taxes. Dimensions of tax design:   e Mirrlees review ,
 202­74.

Morris, P., L. A. Gennetian, G. J. Duncan, and A. C. Huston (2009). How welfare policies a ect child
 and adolescent school performance: Investigating pathways of inf uence with experimental data. In
 Welfare reform and its long-term consequences for America's poor. Cambridge University Press.


                                                   45
OECD (2019). Employment outlook 2019:        e future of work. Technical report.

Persson, M. (1983).     e distribution of abilities and the progressive income tax. Journal of Public
  Economics 22 (1), 73­88.

Rothenberg, T. J. et al. (1971). Identi cation in parametric models. Econometrica 39 (3), 577­591.

Schwartz, N. D., T. Hsu, and P. Ti any (2020). Stymied in seeking bene ts, millions of unemployed go
  uncounted. New York Times.

Solon, O. and A. Glaser (2020). A `perfect storm' for chaos: Unemployment system's failures were a
  long time coming. NBC News.

Van Parijs, P. and Y. Vanderborght (2017). Basic income: A radical proposal for a free society and a sane
  economy. Harvard University Press.

Wignaraja, K. (2020). Universal basic income is the answer to the inequalities exposed by covid-19.    e
 European Sting .




                                                   46
A      Stationary Equilibrium

We introduce some notation to de ne the equilibrium more easily. Let               be the age-speci c
state vector of an individual of age , as de ned by the recursive representation of the individual's
problems in Section 2. Let the Borel sigma-algebras de ned over those state spaces be =                .
   en, a stationary recursive competitive equilibrium for this economy is a collection of: (i) decision
rules for education       =5 , consumption, labor supply, and assets holdings        ,        ,        ,
parental time and money investments                              ,            , and parental transfers ^                           ; value functions
        ,             ,              ; (iii) aggregate capital and labor inputs { ,                        0,   1 };   (iv) prices { ,    0,   1 };   (v)
tax policy        ,       , , ,       ; and (vi) a vector of measures               such that:


    1. Given prices, decision rules solve the respective household problems and                                                ,          ,
       are the associated value functions.

    2. Given prices, aggregate capital and labor inputs solve the representative rm's problem, i.e., it
       equates marginal products to prices.

    3. Labor market for each education level clears.
       For high-school level:

                                     17                                              5    
                             0   =            ,0   ( , )             | =0       +                     ,1   ( )          | =1
                                     =5                                              =5


      where the rst summation is the supply of high-school graduates while the second is that labor
      supply of college students.
      For college level:
                                      17 
                                  1 =          ,1 ( , )    | =1      .
                                                            =6

    4. Asset market clears
                                                                      20   
                                                                 =                           .
                                                                      =5

    5. Good market clears:
             20                                        5                                                   9    
                                          +   +    +                 1          =1               =5   +                              =   ( , )
             =5                                        =5                                                  =8


      where the last two term on the le hand side represent the expenditures on education and child-
      hood development, respectively.



                                                                         47
    6. Government budget holds with equality

                                  20                                    20   
                                                ( , )       +       =                    ,         ,         .
                                  =18                                   =5


       Government expenditures on retirement bene ts and                            equal net revenues from taxes--which
       include the lump-sum transfer .

    7. Individual and aggregate behaviors are consistent: measures is a xed point of ( ) = ( , )
       where ( , ·) is transition function generated by decision rules and exogenous laws of motion,
       and is the generic subset of the Borel-sigma algebra de ned over the state space.



B      Estimation: Details

B.1     Replacement bene ts: US Social Security System

   e pension replacement rate is obtained from the Old Age Insurance of the US Social Security System.
We use education as well as the skill level to estimate a proxy for average lifetime income, on which the
replacement bene t is based. Average income at age is estimated as ( , ) =              , ( , ) ×  where
  is the average shock (i.e., zero) and ¯ are the average hours worked (in the economy). Averaging over
  allows average lifetime income ( , ) to be calculated and used in (22) to obtain the replacement
bene ts.

    e pension formula is given by

                    0.9 ( , )                                                                      if ( , )  0.3 ¯
                    0.9 ( 0.3 ¯) + 0.32 ( ( , ) - 0.3 ¯)                                           if 0.3 ¯  ( , )  2 ¯
                   
                                                                                                                                   (22)
                   
            ( , )=
                    0.9 ( 0.3 ¯) + 0.32 ( 2 - 0.3) ¯ + 0.15 ( ( , ) - 2 ¯)                         if 2 ¯  ( , )  4.1 ¯
                    0.9 ( 0.3 ¯) + 0.32 ( 2 - 0.3) ¯ + 0.15 ( 4.1 - 2) ¯
                   
                                                                                                   if 4.1 ¯  (   , )
                   

where ¯ is approximately $288,000 ($72,000 annually).


B.2     Child Skill Production Function

Cunha et al. (2010) estimates the multistage production functions for children's cognitive and noncog-
nitive skills used in our paper

                                                                                    1/
        ,   =    1    ,
                          +   2         ,
                                            +    3      +       4        +      5            exp       ,            ( 0,   ,   )



                                                                        48
for  { , }, i.e., cognitive and noncognitive skills. Using a nonlinear factor model with endogenous
inputs, their main estimates, which are based on 2-year periods, are reported in Table B1. We interpret
their 1st stage estimates as referring to the period in which the child is born in our model, i.e., the
parent's period-age is = 8 (child's period-age is = 1, or 0­3 years old). e 2nd stage is assumed
to refer to the period a er the child is born, i.e., the parent's period-age is = 9 (child's period-age is
   = 2, or 4­7 years old).

               Table B1: Child Skill Production Function: estimates from Cunha et al. (2010)


                                                             Cognitive Skills                 Non-Cognitive Skills
                                                           1st Stage 2nd Stage                1st Stage 2nd Stage
                                                            ( = 8)     ( = 9)                  ( = 8)    ( = 9)
      Current Cognitive Skills ^1                            0.479      0.831                   0.000     0.000
                                                            (0.026)    (0.011)                 (0.026)   (0.010)
      Current Non-Cognitive Skills ^2                        0.070      0.001                   0.585     0.816
                                                            (0.024)    (0.005)                 (0.032)   (0.013)
      Parent's Cognitive Skills ^3                           0.031      0.073                   0.017     0.000
                                                            (0.013)    (0.008)                 (0.013)   (0.008)
      Parent's Non-Cognitive Skills ^4                       0.258      0.051                   0.333     0.133
                                                            (0.029)    (0.014)                 (0.034)   (0.017)
      Investments ^5                                         0.161      0.044                   0.065     0.051
                                                            (0.015)    (0.006)                 (0.021)   (0.006)

      Complementarity parameter ^                             0.313          -1.243             -0.610           -0.551
                                                             (0.134)         (0.125)            (0.215)          (0.169)
      Variance of Shocks ^           ,                        0.176           0.087              0.222            0.101
                                                             (0.007)         (0.003)            (0.013)          (0.004)
      Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. e 1st stage refers to the period in which the child is born, i.e., the parent's
      period-age is = 8 (child's period-age is = 1, or 0­3 years old). e 2nd stage refers to the period a er the child
      is born, i.e., the parent's period-age is = 9 (child's period-age is = 2, or 4­7 years old).




To go from 2-year periods to 4-year periods (as in our model), we follow the steps explained in Daruich
(2019). Using ^ to notate the estimates in Cunha et al. (2010) and for the values in our model,
the two main steps/assumptions for the transformation are: (i) we iterate in the production func-
tion under the assumption that the shock only takes place in the last iteration, i.e., replace , by
                                                                1/
  1      ,
            + 2     ,
                        + 3      + 4       + 5           ;57 and (ii) we assume that the cross-e ect of
skills (i.e., of cognitive on non-cognitive and of non-cognitive on cognitive) is only updated every two
periods.58 Under these assumptions, the persistence parameter needs to be squared (i.e., 1 = ^1       2

   57 We assume that the variance of the shock in the 4-year model is twice the one in the 2-year model (i.e.,
                                                                                                             , 2 = ^ , 2 ).
   58 Removing    this assumption does not change results signi cantly since the weights corresponding to these elements are
very small or even zero in the estimation (in Table B1, see row 2 under columns 1 and 2, as well as row 1 under columns 3
and 4 ), but it eliminates the CES functional form if           .


                                                               49
and 2 = ^2   2 ), while other parameters inside the CES function need to be multiplied by 1 plus the

persistence parameter (e.g., 2 = 1 + ^1 ^2 ).


B.3   Wage Age Pro les

                         Table B2: Wage Age Pro les by Education Group

                                                    (1)                    (2)
                                                High School              College

                         Age                      0.0312***             0.0557***
                                                  (0.00387)             (0.00577)
                         Age2                   -0.000271***          -0.000530***
                                                 (4.65e-05)            (6.89e-05)
                         Inv. Mills Ratio         -0.739***             -0.715***
                                                   (0.0813)               (0.127)
                         Constant                  2.084***              1.927***
                                                   (0.0779)               (0.118)

                         Observations               9,130                  6,015
                         R-squared                  0.051                  0.093
                         # of households            1357                    864
                         Source: PSID (1968­2016). A period is 4 years long. Standard
                         errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. e re-
                         gressions include year xed e ects. To control for selection into
                         work we use a Heckman-selection estimator. e inverse Mills
                         ratios is constructed by estimating the labor force participation
                         equation separately for each education group, using the number
                         of children as well as year-region xed e ects. Standard errors
                         in parentheses.




                                                        50
B.4    Out of Work Estimation

                            Table B3: Yearly Out-of-Work Probit Estimation

                                                   (1)                          (2)
                    VARIABLES                  High School                    College

                    Working -1                      -1.410                     -1.872
                                                   (0.872)                    (1.579)
                    Working -1 × Age              0.161***                   0.188***
                                                  (0.0389)                   (0.0696)
                    Working -1 × Age2           -0.00153***                 -0.00183**
                                                 (0.000409)                 (0.000724)
                    Age                            -0.0224                    -0.0346
                                                  (0.0364)                   (0.0665)
                    Age2                         -0.000415                  -0.000252
                                                 (0.000378)                 (0.000686)
                    Female                        -0.199**                    -0.0169
                                                  (0.0919)                    (0.167)
                    Constant                        1.496*                     1.653
                                                   (0.835)                    (1.530)

                    Observations                   25,203                     14,893
                    Source: PSID (1968­1996). Robust standard errors in parentheses. *, **, ***
                    denote statistical signi cance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent level, respectively.
                    Methodology is explained in the main text.




B.5    Wage Process Using Yearly Data

In the baseline estimation of the wage process we use wage data averaged over 4 years, following the
de nition of the model periods. An alternative, as in Krueger and Ludwig (2016), is to estimate the
wage process using yearly data and then transform the estimates to 4-year periods. Denoting with
 ^ and ^ the yearly variables, the corresponding 4-year period variables are        = ( ^ ) 4 and  =
           2       4       6
  1 + ( ^ ) + ( ^ ) + ( ^ ) ^ . Table B4 shows the results from the estimation, transformed to the 4-
year period equivalent. e results are very similar to the baseline estimation reported in Table 1.




                                                          51
               Table B4: Returns to skill and wage process by education group using yearly data

                                           (1)                          (2)
                                       High School                    College

                                           0.486                        0.948
                                           0.891                        0.969
                                           0.034                        0.012
                                0
                                           0.040                        0.050
                              Source: PSID (1968­2016) and NLSY (1979­2012). Estimation us-
                              ing yearly data and then transformed to 4-year periods.




B.6     Validation: Early Childhood Development Program

Here we validate the model's predictions regarding the ECD policy. Garcia et al. (2020) study a ran-
domized control trial (RCT) in which a small group of disadvantaged children were exposed to one of
two high-quality early childhood development programs (ABC and CARE in North Carolina) at a cost
of approximately $13,500 per year.59 e children entered the program when they were around 8 weeks
old remained in it for ve years. ey show that the policy led to an increase in the college graduation
rate of between 9 and 23 percentage points and predict a return in lifetime earnings (in net present
value) of 1.3 dollars for every dollar spent.60

We introduce a similar policy in the model by having the government unexpectedly spend money in
the early development of children. We give parents 13,500 x 4 in the rst period in which they have a
child and 13,500 in the second period to approximate 5 years of funding. e program is assumed to
exist only for one generation and this is common knowledge. Similar to the case of the cash-transfer
validation, the policy in the model is introduced as a partial-equilibrium experiment, i.e., prices are kept
constant at their steady state value as only a few people were a ected.

Figure B1 shows the model prediction of the percentage point increase in college graduates (le panel)
and in the return per dollar (right panel) as a function of family income. As shown, the model predicts
large increases in college graduates, similar to the estimates given by the study. For example, for children
whose parents' annual income is $10,000, college graduation rates increase by 14.3 and 15.6 percentage
points if the parents are high-school and college graduates, respectively. e rate of return predicted
by the model for these same children is 1.14 and 1.33, respectively. Similar to the case of cash-transfers,
the model predicts larger gains (both in education and lifetime earnings) for children of low-income
parents.


   59 Notethat all prices are expressed in year 2000 dollars.
   60 Garciaet al. observe the education and income of these children at two speci c ages (the latest being age 30), from
which they estimate the e ect on lifetime labor income.


                                                           52
                                                         Figure B1: Validation: Early Childhood Program
                                        College Graduation                                                                    Lifetime Earnings Return

                                                                                                                1.5


                     20




                                                                                            Return per Dollar
    College (p.p.)




                                                                                                                 1
                     15


                     10

                                                                                                                0.5
                     5

                              All Parents
                     0        HS Educated Parents
                                                                                                                 0
                          0       10       20       30       40         50        60                                  0   10       20         30         40      50   60
                                        Annual Earnings ($1,000)                                                                Annual Earnings ($1,000)

Notes: e blue (solid) line is for all parents; the red (circles) line is for high school graduate parents. E ects are
calculated for many families and we report the smoothed average e ect per income level. e gray area represents the
empirical estimates by Garcia et al. (2020) +/- 1 std dev. e dashed line represents the empirical estimate of lifetime
income return per dollar invested (in NPV) (no standard errors provided).




C                     Welfare De nition: Consumption Equivalence

Let = {0, 1, 2, ... } denote the policy introduced, with = 0 being the initial economy in steady state. We
refer to consumption equivalence as the percentage change in consumption () in the initial economy
that makes agents indi erent between the initial economy ( = 0) and the one with the policy in
place.

For agents about to become adults (having received the transfer from their parent but not the realization
of the school taste shock), in particular, let ~ =5 ( , , , ) be the expected welfare of agents with initial
states ( , , ) in the economy if their consumption (and that of their descendants) were multiplied by
( 1 + ) :
                                                                  =20
                                   ~   =5 ( , , , ) =
                                                                         ( -5 )
                                                                                       ( 1 + ) ,                          +    ( 12-5)   ~        ( ^,   , , )
                                                                                                                                             =5
                                                                  =5

where, to simplify notation, we do not include time subscripts (needed for the transition analysis), the
school taste parameter, nor show that the policy functions depend on the state. Note that these policy
functions are assumed to be unchanged when  is introduced (e.g., refers to the consumption chosen
by an individual in economy and is unchanged by ). For agents of other ages  5, we de ne a
similar element as ~ ( , ) where is a vector of state variables corresponding to period .

For any agent we de ne the consumption equivalence  ( ) as the  that makes individuals indi erent



                                                                                       53
between being in the baseline economy ( = 0) and the one with policy     in place,

                                      ~0   ,  ( ) = ~ ( , 0)

And we can obtain a measure of average welfare (equivalent to welfare under the veil of ignorance) as
                                               
                                     ¯ ( ) =      ~ ( , )    ( )


where    refers to the distribution over states in the economy . en, we de ne the consumption
equivalence ¯ to be the one that makes a cohort indi erent between the baseline economy and having
policy in place, i.e.,
                                           ¯0  ¯ = ¯ ( 0)




                                                  54
