                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  CORPORATE CULTURE AS A THEORY OF THE FIRM

                                        Gary B. Gorton
                                     Alexander K. Zentefis

                                      Working Paper 27353
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27353


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2020




We thank Nick Barberis, James Choi, Julia DiBenigno, Stefano Giglio, Will Goetzmann, Zhiguo
He, Jon Ingersoll, Bryan Kelly, Sang Kim, Tara Levens, Gen Li, Mark Newman, Tauhid Saman,
Kelly Shue, Ted Snyder, Heather Tookes, Kaushik Vasudevan, and seminar participants at Yale
SOM for their valuable feedback and comments. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Gary B. Gorton and Alexander K. Zentefis. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Corporate Culture as a Theory of the Firm
Gary B. Gorton and Alexander K. Zentefis
NBER Working Paper No. 27353
June 2020
JEL No. D02,D4,G30

                                         ABSTRACT

Markets and firms offer contrasting methods to arrange production. In markets, contracts govern
the purchase of parts and services that compose production. In firms, the shared values, customs,
and norms coming from a corporate culture govern employees' joint development of those parts
and services. We argue for this distinction as a theory of the firm. Firms exist because corporate
culture at times is more efficient at carrying out production than detailed contracts. The firm's
boundary encircles the parts of production for which a manager optimally chooses corporate
culture as the organizing device. The model can explain why some mergers and acquisitions fail,
in a way consistent with empirical evidence, and why corporate cultures are hard to change.


Gary B. Gorton
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
Gary.Gorton@yale.edu

Alexander K. Zentefis
Yale School of Management
165 Whitney Ave
New Haven, CT 06511
USA
alexander.zentefis@yale.edu
1        Introduction
General Motors has over 180,000 employees worldwide as of 2019 (General
Motors, 2020). Why are these 180,000 people in a firm and not independently
contracting with GM? Is this relationship more productive than market ex-
changes using detailed contracts? Evidently it is, but then how is production
carried out efficiently among thousands of employees? Without contracts spec-
ifying precisely what to do, what determines how employees coordinate and
behave? These questions get to the heart of why firms exist, and we address
them in this paper.
    We provide a theory of the firm based on corporate culture. The glue
that binds employees together and directs their collective behavior at work
is corporate culture, which is a system of shared norms and values formed
inside the firm. We model how corporate culture takes shape, demonstrate
how it arranges a firm's internal organization, and show how it determines
the boundary of the firm. Production occurs inside firms rather than through
markets when corporate culture is the optimal means to allocate resources
rather than contracts.
    In markets, prices aggregate agents' information into numbers, which then
govern agents' actions, often through contracts. Inside firms, there are no
prices.1 Instead, people communicate. A manager who oversees production
normally expresses views and directions on the manner she prefers productive
tasks be carried out (e.g., the times people arrive, the safety standards that
should be implemented, whether mistakes or critiques are tolerated, the amount
of risk-taking that is acceptable, how to foster innovation). These expressions
are communicated through spoken words, sent emails, extended gestures, or
    1
        Transfer prices are for accounting purposes.


                                                1
instituted policies. Employees interpret these instructions from their own
perspective, interact, and communicate their views with each other. Out of this
collection of interpretations forms a corporate culture of values, norms, and
customs that establish tacitly agreed rules for behavior. This culture becomes
a set of basic assumptions that guide social order in the firm and cooperative
decisions during production in place of prices or contracts.2
    When arranging for productive inputs, the manager can adopt for each
component one of two systems to regulate behaviors: contractual agreements
or corporate culture. The manager relies on the first system when procuring
a part from an outside party in the market. The structure of compensation
and threat of litigation for breach of contract configures incentives in this
system. Its central weakness is the impossibility of anticipating and translating
unambiguously into words all possible conditions, needs, and contingencies
when tailoring the terms for the arrangement. Conversely, the manager can
make the part internally and rely on a corporate culture to fill in the gaps
that bedevil contracts (e.g., to make adjustments, provide flexibility, resolve
uncertainty). A fixed wage and social pressures to abide by shared norms and
values primarily make up incentives in this system. In deciding whether to
make or buy a part of production, a manager chooses which of the two systems
achieves the highest output from her perspective. Firms exist because corporate
culture at times is a more effective mechanism to carry out production than
contracts. The boundary of the firm is drawn at the limits of corporate culture.
   2
     This is not to say that firms have no sort of contracts with their employees. However,
these contracts differ significantly in kind from the contracts a firm has with its suppliers.
Employment relationships in the US are generally "at-will," which means that either party
can terminate the relationship for any or no cause and without notice (Rothstein, Knapp,
and Liebman, 1987). In fact, "a majority of employees in the United States are employed on
an `at-will' basis, without a written employment contract, and only with a written offer of
employment that outlines the basic terms and conditions of their employment" (L&E Global,
2013).


                                              2
   When leveraging culture as a system to carry out production, the manager
faces an inherent constraint: she can neither observe nor control the interpre-
tations that others have of her directions. Her speeches, written words, and
actions can imply meanings based on their context beyond what she literally
expressed. These implied meanings complicate giving instructions, and the cor-
porate culture that develops in part from her espoused values can deviate from
what she intended. Importantly, these implied meaning make up an important
piece of corporate cultural formation, so it is worth elaborating on them.
   The linguist Paul Grice coined the term "implicatures" to define meanings
implied but not explicitly said (Grice, 1989). A vast literature on implicatures
and how people interpret meaning in context was spawned thereafter (see
Davis, 1991; Bianchi, 2004; Chapman, 2005; Huang, 2012; Korta and Perry,
2015). Implicatures are a crucial piece in how people produce meaning during
a communicative interaction (Searle, 2007). Implicatures can be intentional,
though unconsciously supplied, or unintentional. They need not have unique
interpretations, and often people will differ in their inferences. Implicatures
pertain to spoken, written, and even observed expressions (e.g., seeing an
oncoming car flash its lights). Grice (1989) (p. 32) provides a famous example
of two people in an exchange:

   A: I am out of petrol.
   B: There is a garage around the corner.

   One interpretation of B's response is that B is unwilling to supply petrol to
A and would rather direct A elsewhere. A more benign interpretation is that
the garage that B references is currently open and has petrol available to sell
to A. Because we concern ourselves with the role of implied meanings in the
development of corporate culture, we focus on a manager's expressions in a

                                       3
corporate setting. A couple examples follow, with possible interpretations of
the speaker's implicature in italics.
   In 2013, the former CEO of Uber, Travis Kalanick, wrote employees an
email containing rules for a company party in Miami (Swisher and Bhuiyan,
2017). Among others, one read:

   We do not have a budget to bail anyone out of jail. Don't be that guy.
   I don't care what you do, just don't get arrested.

   In January 2017, Tim Sloan, the former CEO of Wells Fargo, gave a speech
to employees following several revelations of misdeeds at the bank, including
the creation of thousands of unauthorized accounts (Sloan, 2017):

   As you've heard me say before, rebuilding trust is the No. 1 priority for me
and all of the members of our Operating Committee.
   We've obviously screwed up big time.

   Employees interpret the meaning of a manager's directions differently in part
because of unique life experiences, memories, personal cultures, and differential
efforts required to process contextual clues (Sperber and Wilson, 1986). We use
these ideas from linguistics to analyze the outcome of conversations between
employees upon hearing a manager's directions. These interactions microfound
the endogenous development of a corporate culture, which is the basis for an
employee's behavioral choice, and bears a direct effect on both production and
the boundary of the firm.
   In the model, a chief executive officer (CEO) owns the non-human capital
used in production (e.g., machinery, computers, or customer lists). To harness
this technology, the CEO must rely on the human capital owned by employees.
Both the CEO and employees make decisions subject to a fixed technology.

                                        4
This technology induces a network of interactions among employees (e.g.,
along assembly lines, within warehouses, or at a law office). The network
is divisible into teams which are characterized by dense sets of interactions
between members.
   Corporate cultural formation begins with the CEO communicating her
desired culture (setting a "tone at the top") to all employees. Each employee
interprets the meaning of the CEO's expressions and implicatures from the
perspective of a personal culture and by using contextual clues. After hearing
from the CEO firsthand, employees communicate their views with each other
according to the network. They then combine their personal account and their
interpretations of their colleagues' secondhand accounts to reach a concluding
inference of the CEO's intended culture. The corporate culture actually observed
aggregates the collection of all employee interpretations. The tone set by the
CEO, employee personal cultures, their interpretations of the CEO, and their
interpretations of each other, all influence the corporate culture and the cultures
of each team.
   With team cultures and a corporate culture established, employees choose
behaviors in which to conduct themselves (e.g., inspecting products, coordinat-
ing delivery times across teams, motivating teamwork, providing encouragement
after failure). Each employee chooses a behavior to maximize utility. Personal
culture, team culture, and corporate culture enter the utility function. In this
way, an employee's social and cultural circumstances matter to his choice. The
combination of all chosen behaviors within a team make up the team's input
to production.
   The CEO has in mind a maximal level of production achievable if all
employees chose behaviors consistent with her desired culture. In practice,
that benchmark is unlikely to be reached because employees differ in their

                                        5
interpretations of her directions and in their personal cultures. In choosing the
boundary of the firm, the CEO compares (1) each team's input to what she
would prefer it to be and (2) how well distinct teams would coordinate if they
interacted internally. The magnitude of (1) and (2) determines whether she
develops an input within the firm or buys it from the market. Management
matters because it sets the seed of a corporate culture that affects production.
Consequently, two firms starting with identical technologies can have different
firm boundaries because their corporate cultures differ.
   To study the canonical problem of integration, we establish a setting where
the CEO currently employs a single team and considers incorporating a second
team (a supplier). Alternatively, the CEO can tailor a contract to purchase the
supplier's input. Integration is optimal if corporate culture does better than
a contract to influence the supplier's behavior (such as its choice of quality)
to be closer to both the CEO's desired behavior and the first team's behavior.
Otherwise, purchasing the supplier's input under contract achieves a higher
production level than any the CEO can reach with corporate culture. The
rationale for integration weakens if an incorporated supplier would spoil the
corporate culture by distorting the first team's interpretations of the CEO.
Likewise, integration is suboptimal if there are significant conflicts between
the two team's cultures or between the personal cultures of the two sets of
employees. The latter effects play a larger role in the CEO's decision if the two
teams would interact extensively inside the firm or if their cooperation is more
central to production than their standalone contributions (e.g., designers and
tailors in a fashion company).
   A key advantage of the model is that it can extend beyond a bilateral
exchange with a single supplier. The boundary of the firm can be studied for
an arbitrary number of productive teams, accommodating countless employees,

                                       6
akin to the giant corporations of large and developed economies. In a numerical
exercise involving a network of ten teams, we discuss several characteristics of
the teams that are inside compared to outside the firm's boundary. First, teams
that the CEO can manage closer to her liking using a corporate culture over a
contract are more likely to be inside the firm. Nevertheless, the CEO is willing
to incorporate a team internally despite its differences from her preference if
that team coordinates well with another team that the CEO wants inside the
firm. Second, teams that are core to the firm's technology (either because they
interact with several other teams or are critical to the firm's production) are
relatively more likely to be inside the firm, provided they cooperate well with
other teams when motivated by corporate culture. Finally, teams that are at
the periphery of the firm's technology (those that interact with few teams or
whose input is less important to the firm's output) are relatively less likely
to be inside the firm. Such teams are particularly strong candidates to being
an external supplier if they would cooperate or coordinate poorly under the
corporate culture than a contract.
   We apply the model to discuss mergers and acquisitions. A merger fails if
the boost to production from the union is less than the losses from cultural
clashes between interacting teams. The clashes are costlier if the target becomes
a core piece of the combined firm's production, or if it does not coordinate well
with the acquirer's existing suppliers. This conclusion aligns with empirical
evidence in Datta (1991) and Datta and Puia (1995), who find poor performance
outcomes in mergers between firms with weak cultural fit. Stahl and Voigt (2008)
document that integration problems are particularly acute when employees from
the different firms interact extensively, consistent with the model's prediction.
   We also examine corporate cultural change. If a new CEO joins the firm,
she is interpreted by existing employees from the perspective of the prevailing

                                       7
corporate culture. We show that once team and corporate cultures are formed,
they can be hard to change. Large changes are particularly more challenging to
implement than small changes. A former CEO that had a significant influence
on a company's culture, such as Lee Kun-hee at Samsung or Ray Kroc at
McDonald's, can continue affecting the culture long after stepping down.
   Over time, a large literature has developed on the theory of the firm.
See Garrouste and Saussier (2005), Hart (1989), and Holmstrom and Roberts
(1998) for surveys. Specific works include Coase (1937), Cyert and March (1963),
Williamson (1971), Alchian and Demsetz (1972), Grossman and Hart (1986),
Hart and Moore (1990), Holmstrom and Milgrom (1994), DeMeza and Lockwood
(1998), and Holmstrom (1999). See also Cremér, Garicano, and Prat (2007)
for a theory of firm scope and structure based on the specificity of technical
languages, and Alfaro, Bloom, Conconi, Fadinger, Legros, Newman, Sadun, and
Van Reenen (2019) for a recent contribution examining firm boundaries and
delegation. There is also a vast literature on corporate culture. See Gordon and
DiTomaso (1992) and Martin (1992) for surveys from organizational behavior.
Notable papers on corporate culture include Schein (1983), Denison (1984),
Denison (1990), Kreps (1990), Hermalin (2001), Hodgson (1996), and Cremér
(1993), though this list is far from exhaustive. See Grennan (2019) and Grennan
(2020) for recent work on corporate culture and shareholder value.
   We differ significantly from the previous literature by focusing on the so-
ciality of people (i.e., how they form groups and cooperate to succeed), their
communications with each other, and the endogenous development of a corpo-
rate culture. Corporate culture is the root of social cohesion among employees
inside a firm. Working together toward a goal of optimal production requires
cooperation. But that cooperation cannot be determined by a contractual
enumeration of acceptable and unacceptable behaviors. For example, a contract

                                       8
could say "men are not to roll their eyes when a woman wearing a hijab walks
by." But the number of such rules would be enormous, and it would be impossi-
ble to enumerate all such rules in advance. Let alone, the interpretations of the
language written in any set of those rules could vary between parties and even
in the eyes of the magistrate if the contract is litigated in court. Cooperation
instead depends on following norms and rules that are not written down, but
broadly taken for granted, and enforced through social pressure originating
from a corporate culture.
    The paper proceeds as follows. We model the formation of corporate culture
and its influence on production. We then argue for the model as a theory of
the firm by demonstrating its usefulness in several areas pertaining to that
subject. These areas include the canonical problem of vertical integration, the
boundary between firms and markets, the viability of a merger or acquisition,
and the hysteresis of corporate culture.


2       Model
We present the model by detailing the environment, the formation of corporate
culture, and the choice of behaviors that influence production.

2.1     Environment
A CEO and employees make decisions in an environment determined by a fixed
production technology. This technology induces a set of interactions between
employees.

2.1.1    Interactions

Interactions are regular exchanges between employees during which they com-
municate. Interactions can be formal, as in attending a company meeting, but



                                       9
also informal, as in chatting about work across cubicles. Interactions can be
positive or hostile. An animator collaboratively planning a character design
with an artist is an interaction. So too is a safety inspector routinely arguing
with a foreperson on a car shield production line.
       A convenient way to represent these interactions is with a network. A node
in the network stands for one employee. A single link in the network stands
for an interaction, which is between two distinct employees. The network is
undirected (i.e., employee u interacts with employee v if and only if v interacts
with u) and connected (i.e., for every partition of employees into two groups X
and Y , at least one employee in group X interacts with an employee in group
Y ).

2.1.2      Teams

The technology inherently leads some employees to interact more with one
another than with others. In a museum, for example, curators communicate
and work with each other more frequently than they do with lawyers in the
general counsel's office. The technology thus naturally divides people into
teams. A team is characterized in the network by a dense collection of links
among members of the team, with only sparse links between members of
different teams (see Radicchi, Castellano, Cecconi, Loreto, and Parisi, 2004;
Newman, 2006). The technology implies a family T of non-overlapping teams
that partitions the network. A team i  T is the set of employees that belong
to that team. Starting at the micro-level in the formation of teams is similar
to the micro-structure view of organizations described in Puranam (2018).




                                         10
2.2     Formation of corporate culture
Corporate culture will emerge naturally out of the network of employee inter-
actions. In detailing the formation of corporate culture, we start by addressing
the sole topic of communication among people in the model: culture.3

2.2.1    Culture

Our notion of culture follows Gorton and Zentefis (2020). Culture is the values,
customs, norms, traditions, assumptions, symbols, and language, etc. that are
shared by the members of a group. This definition is consistent with that
in anthropology (Tylor, 1871; Goodenough, 1957; Keesing, 1974), sociology
(Williams, 1995; Macionis, 2013) and organizational behavior (Schein, 1983;
Deshpande and Webster Jr, 1989; Martin, 1992). We consider cultural elements
that apply to the workplace, such as a norm to arrive at 6am or a value of
tolerating dissent from junior employees. Rather than specifying the exact
components, we focus on the weights a person places on these elements in terms
of how important they are to her culture. A higher weight indicates greater
importance. For convenience, we assign the CEO and employees their own
personal cultural weights over the same support from the exponential family
of distributions, which permits a wide variety of arrangements. Each person's
cultural weights are uniquely characterized by a natural parameter vector  . To
simplify the exposition, we refer to a person's culture by its natural parameter
vector instead of its distribution of weights. Employee v has culture v , whereas
the CEO has culture c , which is also the CEO's desired corporate culture.
   3
     The organizational development literature has a similar conception that work cultures
take shape as an outgrowth of social interactions (see the review in Trice and Beyer, 1993).




                                            11
2.2.2    CEO communicates

Initially, the CEO communicates a desired corporate culture, through speeches,
emails, gestures, meetings, and written policies, etc. With each expression, the
CEO intends the listeners or observers to comprehend the desired corporate
culture and behave accordingly. Communication of a culture takes place on
many occasions over time, but to simplify the analysis, we collapse this process
to a single period.4
    The CEO's culture c is unobservable, as is every other employee's culture.
The CEO can only communicate c to others through natural language. But that
medium is inherently imprecise because it carries implicatures. No employee can
fully understand the corporate culture the CEO has in mind without knowing
both what the CEO said and what the CEO meant. Although the CEO intends
to convey c , employees might interpret the meaning of the CEO's expressions
differently than what was intended.5
    Because of unique, personal cultures­arising from distinct experiences, mem-
ories, or professional training­employees can interpret the CEO differently, even
though each person heard, read, or observed the same expressions. Employees
infer the CEO's meaning from the perspective of their personal cultures. If a
employee shares similar cultural weights as the CEO, he interprets the meaning
more closely to what the CEO intended (e.g., what Travis Kalanick meant for
Uber's corporate culture by saying "we do not have a budget to bail anyone
                 6
out of jail").
   4
      Implicatures are present even if a person lies, withholds information, or is strategic.
Therefore, assuming the CEO tells the truth, as we do in the model, does not change the
results.
    5
      Cultural transmission through language is a perspective analyzed in a growing branch
in the organizational behavior literature (see Goldberg and Srivastava, 2017; Lu, Chatman,
Goldberg, and Srivastava, 2018).
    6
      Some expressions surely have more predictable interpretations that vary little between


                                            12
    Consider employee v who hears the CEO's expressions of c firsthand. The
employee's firsthand interpretation of the CEO's desired corporate culture is
denoted v,c and given by

                            v,c = c + (1 - v,c ) (v - c ) .                              (1)

    Equation (1) decomposes the interpretation of language into perfect infer-
ence of meaning, the first term, and potential misinterpretation of implicatures,
the second term. The magnitude of the misinterpretation is a product of the
parameter v,c  [0, 1] and the difference in the cultures between the CEO
and the employee. If v,c = 1, employee v interprets precisely the meaning the
CEO intended so that v,c = c . Likewise, there is no misinterpretation if the
employee matches the CEO in cultural weights (v = c ). All cultures in the
model are members of the exponential family, which implies that employee v s
interpretation v,c is a member as well. Employee v assigns more dissimilar
weights in his interpretation of the CEO's desired corporate culture than the
CEO intends if either v,c is low or the two are more unalike in their cultures.
    To make the interpretation of the CEO's communications more concrete,
let us continue with Travis Kalanick's expression from before. Suppose the
statement was one among many to convey his weight of importance on "partying
at company retreats." For ease of exposition, suppose also that a higher  implies
greater importance on that cultural value. A employee with v > c might
overestimate the intended meaning, perhaps interpreting Travis's statement as
unsaid permission to break the law, but outrun police, even though Travis meant
something less reckless. Another employee with u < c might underestimate
people (e.g., "start time is 5:30am"). Other expressions are more ambiguous (e.g., "fast is
better than slow"). To avoid complexity, we model the CEO communicating the entire density
c at once instead of issuing separate statements about individual cultural elements. employee
interpretations are more likely to exhibit greater differences over this larger collection of
expressions.


                                             13
Travis's meaning, possibly taking the statement as approval to celebrate without
disturbing the peace.
   The parameter v,c captures a employee's use of context while interpreting
the meaning of the CEO's communications about corporate culture. The
employee uses all sorts of information beyond what is literally said to infer
the meaning intended to be conveyed, including previous knowledge about
the CEO, the circumstances that surround the statements, and the manner
in which expressions are made (e.g., angrily or kindly.) We microfound the
contextual parameter v,c by drawing on Relevance Theory, which is a leading
psychological theory of people's use of contextual clues to interpret implicatures
(Birner, 2012). The theory was developed by cognitive scientists Dan Sperber
and Deirdre Wilson in 1986, and a vast literature on the topic developed
thereafter (see Yus, 2019 for an extensive bibliography).
   Sperber and Wilson argue that people­when inferring meaning from con-
text­search for the interpretation that is most relevant, where relevance is
defined as cognitive effects less processing costs (Sperber and Wilson, 1986).
Cognitive effects are "worthwhile differences to the individual's representation
of the world" (Sperber and Wilson, 2004, pp. 608), whereas processing costs
are the efforts required to "access the contextual information and derive any
cognitive effects" (Wilson, 2009, pp. 394). When hearing, reading, or observing
a communication, a person might search through all the contextual clues to
derive an interpretation, but doing so can be mentally taxing. Instead, the
person compares effects and costs until some threshold of relevance is reached
(Sperber and Wilson, 1986, pp. 130-131; Sperber and Wilson, 2004, pp. 258-269;
Allott, 2013 p. 67). To represent this process, we use a simple model that treats
each employee's use of context as a stopping problem that trades off cognitive



                                       14
effects and processing costs.7
    The relevance to employee v of the CEO's communications about the desired
corporate culture is denoted Rv,c and is given by

                                                 1
                                  Rv,c = ev,c t - t2 ,                                  (2)
                                                 2

where ev,c are cognitive effects,  are processing costs, and t is time spent
searching the context for an interpretation. Equation (2) succinctly characterizes
the trade-off between cognitive effects and processing costs. employee v is willing
to spend more time searching for the CEO's intended meaning if either cognitive
effects are high or processing costs are low. The equation also coincides with
Sperber and Wilson's notion that processing costs are unavoidable to achieve
any cognitive effects (Sperber and Wilson, 1986, p. 126).
    Processing costs  are constant and identical across employees. Costs
can be high because the CEO's communications are rambling, unclear and
confusing, because the communications are too voluminous to review, or because
obtaining clarification requires strenuous effort. Cognitive effects ev,c are also
constant, but employee-dependent. Cognitive effects can be high if the CEO's
communications confirm or refute employee v s existing impression of the CEO's
desired corporate culture. Startling, unusual, or mixed messages can yield large
effects. For example, if the employee had an impression that the CEO puts a
high weight on "supporting family farms," but then hears the CEO announce
   7
     While searching for optimal relevance, a employee need not be absorbed in heavy mental
calculation and may not even be consciously aware of assessing the trade-off. The model aims
to capture the idea that a person unconsciously comparatively judges rewards and effort
in processing context and stops at the first interpretation that seems most relevant. For
example, if a employee observes the CEO pat another employee on the back, the most relevant
interpretation might be that the CEO values a task well done being visibly rewarded. But
another interpretation could be that the employee just returned with the secret ingredients
to a competitor's recipe after six months as a mole and the CEO instead values publicly
encouraging corporate espionage. But that inference involves multiple deductive steps that
might not be worth taking unless the cognitive effects from the context suggest otherwise.


                                            15
a plan to "reevaluate our small supplier contracts," the cognitive effect might
be large enough to justify spending time searching for the CEO's intended
meaning.
                                                                ev,c
   Equation (2) implies that the optimal search time is t =      
                                                                     .   We convert
this time to the unit interval with the function (t)  [0, 1] to substitute the
employee's use of context into the firsthand interpretation v,c from equation
(1). The function is continuously differentiable and increasing. Higher cogni-
tive effects or lower processing costs lead employee v closer to interpreting
the meaning the CEO intended (v,c  c ). With this microfoundation, the
contextual parameter v,c in equation (1) is defined as
                                            ev,c
                                v,c              .                              (3)
                                             

2.2.3   Employees communicate

After hearing directly from the CEO, employees then share their firsthand
interpretations according to the network of interactions. Communication be-
tween employees takes place over one round. Because interactions are two-sided,
not only do employees communicate, but they also listen, read, or observe
other's interpretations, and they interpret the meaning of those secondhand
expressions. To maintain tractability, an employee treats each other person's
interpretation as new information, akin to the listening structure in DeMarzo,
Vayanos, and Zwiebel (2003).
   We denote by Dv the set of employees that person v interacts with and
her number of interactions d (v ) = |Dv |. Suppose person u  Dv interprets the
CEO's culture as u,c . employee v 's interpretation of u, denoted v,u , is

                      v,u = u,c + (1 - v,u ) (v - u,c ) .                       (4)

Equation (4) is analogous to employee v 's direct interpretation of the CEO in

                                       16
equation 1. Once again, the employee interprets meaning from the perspective
of his or her personal culture v . In doing so, the employee interprets others
from a "blank slate," without having adjusted for her firsthand interpretation
of the CEO. Employee v maintains an open mind for alternative interpretations
of the CEO's meaning before reaching a conclusion.
   When employees communicate with each other, the topic of communication
is always the CEO's desired corporate culture. What differs between interactions
are the expressions used when people convey their interpretations and the
context of those expressions. Employees once again maximize relevance when
processing the context, which implies that the contextual parameter v,u 
   ev,u
    
          .
   After interacting, employee v has d (v ) secondhand interpretations of what
the CEO means plus his or her firsthand interpretation v,c . The employee
combines this set of interpretations by equally weighting them, such that each
                1
weight is     1+d(v )
                      .   (A heterogeneous weighting would not change the results.)
At the end of the round, employees combine their firsthand and secondhand
interpretations to reach a conclusion of the CEO's desired corporate culture.
That concluding interpretation is denoted v and is provided in the next
proposition, which gives our first main result.

Proposition 1. After listening to the CEO directly and communicating with
others, employee v 's concluding interpretation of the CEO's desired corporate




                                             17
culture is

v =          c      +            v,c          +          v(u,c)           +     v,u      ,

        perfect               firsthand               secondhand               pure
       inference        misinterpretation             corrections/            whispers
                                                  misinterpretations
                                                                                      (5)
where the terms

                                 1
                     v,c =               (1 - v,c ) (v - c ) ,
                              1 + d (v )
                                 1
                   v(u,c)   =                 v,u (1 - u,c ) (u - c ) ,
                              1 + d (v ) uDv
                                 1
                     v,u    =                 (1 - v,u ) (v - c ) .
                              1 + d (v ) uDv

   The first two components of employee v 's concluding interpretation derive
entirely from the employee's firsthand impression of the CEO's meaning in
Eq. (1). The employee's firsthand interpretation significantly influences her
concluding inference, particularly if she talks to few others or hears little to
change that first interpretation; i.e., v(u,c)  0 and v,u  0.
   The third term v(u,c) captures v 's communication with other employees. It
is v 's best inference (through v,u ) of each employee u's misinterpretation of the
CEO's intended meaning (1 - u,c ) (u - c ). Upon hearing other's secondhand
impressions of the CEO's meaning, v 's initial interpretation can worsen or
improve. Listening to employee u can lead v closer to the CEO's intended
meaning if the two interpreted the CEO firsthand in "contrasting ways;" i.e.,
the signs of v - c and u - c are opposite.
   To be concrete, consider again the previous example of two employees
listening to Travis Kalanick's statement. Employee v interpreted Travis as

                                            18
approving more reckless partying than Travis meant, whereas u interpreted
it a meaning less recklessness. By communicating, the two employees correct
each other's interpretation and move closer to Travis's intention. If v instead
communicates with a different employee r who interpreted Travis in a similar
way (i.e., the signs of v - c and r - c match), v is either unchanged or
driven further astray from the Travis's intended meaning.
   Employee v 's use of context when interpreting the meaning of another
employee u's implicatures is reflected in the term v,u . Greater cognitive effects
while communicating with u leads v to spend more time searching for u's
meaning (e.g., if u sharply contradicts v with a vastly different interpretation
of Travis's statement). But larger processing costs leads v to miss more of u's
intended meaning (e.g., if u digresses from one topic to another).
   The final term v,u is person v 's misinterpretations (through 1 - v,u ) of each
employee u's own misinterpretation of the CEO's intended meaning. When
communicating with u, employee v can misjudge the information implied when
u communicates his firsthand impression of the CEO's meaning (i.e., when
u communicates u,c ). While observing or listening, v interprets u from her
cultural perspective culture v ,which explains the presence of v - c in the
term. Because the sign of v,u matches the sign of v,c , these second-order
misinterpretations unambiguously push v further way from correctly grasping
the CEO's true desired corporate culture c , so we call them pure whispers.
These whispers are less consequential when employee v spends more time using
contextual clues while communicating with u (higher v,u ).
   The inferential model of communication presented in the proposition reveals
the benefit and hazard to v from communicating with other employees. The
benefit is the opportunity to move closer to the CEO's intended meaning by
listening to different interpretations. But the hazard of doing so is potentially

                                       19
misinterpreting what others mean, never truly recognizing that one has, and
ending up with a less successful interpretation of the CEO than if she had
communicated with no one.

2.2.4     Corporate culture forms

Corporate culture is an aggregation of all employees' concluding interpretations
in equation (5). The aggregation starts at the team level. Consider team i  T .
The team's culture is a weighted average of each team member's concluding
interpretation v . A employee's weight is her share of interactions among
members of the team. The team culture thus tilts to the interpretations of
employees who are more central to the team, such as a team leader. Person v 's
weight in team i is denoted i (v ). The team's culture is8


                        i = c +            i (v ) v,c + v(u,c) + v,u .                           (6)
                                     v i

    The corporate culture is a weighted average of the team cultures, where
team i's weight is denoted i . The weight stands for the team's importance
in the formation of the corporate culture. If the structure of interactions is
a hierarchical, teams near the top of the hierarchy may have a higher weight
(e.g. the E-commerce team of an online retailer). Teams that also interact with
several other ones and carry more influence (e.g. the physicians in a hospital)
might also have a higher weight. The aggregation of team cultures generates
    8
      Formally, employee v 's weight in the team culture is defined as follows. Let di (v ) be
the number of interactions between employee v and other employees in team i. The quantity
di (v ) is v 's degree in the smaller network that comprises only team i s members and the set of
                                                                                        di (v )
their interactions with just each other. employee v 's weight in the team is i (v ) =       d (v )
                                                                                                   .
                                                                                                 i
                                                                                           v i
Degree centrality is a simple measure to define the weights. Other centrality measures (e.g.,
closeness, betweenness, eigenvector, Katz) are just as acceptable.




                                                20
the corporate culture

                 c = c +            i i (v ) v,c + v(u,c) + v,u .              (7)
                           iT v i

   Equation (7) reveals that the observed corporate culture is anchored around
the CEO's desired corporate culture c (e.g., the "tone at the top"). But
employees' concluding interpretations of the CEO's communications can shift
the observed corporate culture c away from what the CEO desires. Greater
cultural differences between employees, as well as higher processing costs and
lower cognitive effects when interpreting meaning lead to sharper disparity.
Teams with outsized influence and a contrasting interpretation can also distort
the culture. Corporate and team cultures that contrast with the desired one
concerns the CEO because employees choose their behaviors according to the
observed cultures, which impacts production.

2.3     Behaviors and Production
The last piece of the model describes how corporate culture influences employee
behavior and how those behaviors determine the output produced.

2.3.1   Behaviors

Each employee chooses a behavior bv that maximizes utility. A behavior is
conduct that materially affects the production process (e.g., exerting meticulous
effort, creating quality standards, or inspecting processes). Behaviors are con-
sistent with the values, norms, rules, etc. of a culture. The notion that a culture
provides instructions for governing behaviors is consistent with Geertz (1973).
Gelfand (2019) discusses differences in behaviors between tight cultures (those
with strong norms) and loose cultures (those with weak norms). Behaviors in
a tight corporate culture include rigid rule-following, obeying authority, and
embracing decisions from a top-down hierarchy. Conversely, behaviors in a

                                         21
loose culture entail deviating from orders, challenging bosses, and abandoning
structured decision-making.
   Each employee v supplies one unit of labor inelastically at a fixed wage w
and has utility

                                                             2                           2
   Uv = w - 1 (bv - b (v ))2 - 2 bv - b i                        - 3 bv - b c                ,         (8)
         wage
                     personal conflict   team culture conflict    corporate culture conflict


where the constants (i )3
                        i=1 are identical across employees, and b ( ) maps the

space of natural parameters to the space of behaviors measured on the real
line. This function is distance-preserving, which implies that greater differences
in culture induce behaviors that are less alike.
   In choosing a behavior, a employee trades off straying from the behavior
consistent with her personal culture, her team's culture, and the corporate
culture. Greater deviations from either of the three cultures lowers utility. Inner
conflict or a loss of identity may arise from behaving differently than suggested
by one's personal values (Cote and Levine, 2002; Weinreich, 2003). Social
pressure or threats to conform may create the loss in utility from deviating
from a team or corporate culture (Asch, 1955; Kandel and Lazear, 1992).
   The utility function of Eq. (8) displays sociality in that the employee's
choice of behavior is affected by a team culture and the corporate culture. The
social milieu matters in the person's decision. It is not that the employee's
utility depends on the utility of others, but rather, the cultural and social
setting around the person matters to her choice. In this way, team culture and
corporate culture complement explicit performance incentives such as bonuses
and promotions.
                k                                                                                3
   Let k =      
                    be the weight on each component of utility, where  =                         k=1   k .



                                              22
The optimal behavior for employee v that maximizes equation (8) is

                         bv = 1 b (v ) + 2 b i + 3 b c .                                (9)

2.3.2    Production

Production aggregates team-level inputs to create a single output. Each team's
input is a result of its collective behavior (e.g., a brand design team that values
clever rule-breaking creates a different logo than another team that sticks with
classical styles). Team i's input is its aggregated behavior bi , which is the
weighted average of each team member's behavior:

                    bi = 1         i (v ) b (v ) + 2 b i + 3 b c ,                    (10)
                             v i

where each employee's contribution to the team input is her centrality i (v )
to the team.
    Under the fixed production technology, the CEO perceives the amount y
                                                                        ^ to
be the highest possible log output achievable. From the CEO's perspective, y
                                                                           ^ is
a benchmark. This amount of output is made if the CEO could fully regulate
each employee's behavior to conform perfectly with the desired corporate
culture c . That behavior is bc  b (c ). From equation (10), all team behaviors
bi would also coincide with bc . Differences in employees' personal cultures v
and the variety in the interpretations of c limit the observed output from
reaching the benchmark.9
    We express observed log output y as deviations from the benchmark within-
and across-teams:
                                     ^-
                                   y=y             ij  ij ij ,                        (11)
                                           i,j T

    9
      In some settings, a CEO might want certain teams to behave differently from each other
(e.g. the sales and trading group compared to the mergers and acquisitions group in a bank).
The model can accommodate these disparities by having the CEO's desired behavior be
team-specific. To keep things simple, we make bc the same across teams.


                                            23
where ij > 0 are team-specific constants, ij is the share of network interactions
that are between team i members and team j members, and ii =                               j =i ij   is
the share of all interactions that are between members of team i and every
other team. Symmetry of interactions implies both ij = ji and ij = ji for
         10
i = j.
    The within- and across-team deviations in behavior are, respectively,

                                          ii = (bi - bc )2 ,                                      (12)

                                          ij = (bi - bj )2 .                                      (13)

The within-team deviations in equation (12) stand for the CEO's interest in
having each team behave consistently with the desired corporate culture. At
the same time, congruity in behaviors between teams that interact with each
other is important for production (e.g., in a law firm, a careless document
production team would clash with an exacting trial lawyer team). The across-
team deviations in equation (13) stand for the CEO's interest for team behaviors
to cooperate and coordinate.
    Either kind of deviation leads to a larger drop in observed output when
more employees are involved (i.e., higher ij or ii ). The constant ii represents
the standalone importance of each team to production, whereas ij stands
for the importance of two team's interactions in production (e.g., aerospace
drafters and technicians). A large ii is associated with a team that is the
primary activity in production (see core competency in Prahalad and Hamel,
   10
     The shares ij are formally defined as follows. Let d (i, j ) denote the number of employees
                                                                                        d(i,j )
in team i who interact with at least one member of team j . The share ij                     d(i,j )
                                                                                                     .
                                                                                          i,j T
To see that ii = j =i ij , note that j =i d (i, j ) is the number of employees outside of
team i who interact with at least one member of team i. Denote this number d (i) (i.e.,
d (i) = | (i) |, where  (i) is the edge cut of team i; see Bondy and Murty (2008), section
                           d(i)                   d(i,j )
                                           j =i
2.5). The share ii             d(i)
                                      =            d(i,j )
                                                             =   j =i ij .
                          iT              i,j T




                                                        24
1990). Behavior deviations are more damaging when committed by these teams
(e.g., Intel's semiconductor unit compared to its wearable fashion division).
Conversely, deviations in desired behavior are less harmful to production when
ij is low, even if the team interacts with several others (e.g., cafeteria food
services).11


3        Theory of the firm
The model is well suited to explain several subjects pertaining to a theory of the
firm: the boundary of the firm, vertical integration, mergers and acquisitions,
and corporate cultural change.

3.1      Firm boundary problem
The boundary of the firm distinguishes the production activities among em-
ployees inside a corporation and the activities contracted for with agents in the
market. In the firm, corporate culture governs employee behaviors in production.
In markets, contracts govern agent behaviors in production. The CEO unilat-
erally chooses the boundary by deciding team-by-team across the technology
whether contracts or culture is optimal to generate output.
     For each team, a perfectly competitive market exists from which the CEO
can buy the team's input rather than produce it internally. The competition
renders the cost of buying the input (e.g., search costs, haggling costs, purchase
price) identical to the cost of producing it inside (e.g., total wages and benefits of
the team's employees). Even if acquired outside, a team's input is a composition
of behaviors, though the behaviors are influenced by a second-best contract
instead of the CEO's observed corporate culture. The contract would be
    11
    Equation (11) implies that the CEO only is interested in real output rather than
company profits. Incorporating a sales price and costs would not affect the results, but add
unnecessary complication.


                                            25
with another firm having its own distinct culture. The contract is incomplete,
but expressed as best as possible to tailor the input optimally for the firm's
production. Let bi denote team i's behavior if procured as an outsourced
input.12
    We accommodate the CEO's boundary decision by replacing bi and bj in
the within- and across-team deviations from Eqs. (12)-(13) with a function B
that selects any team's input as either internally or externally generated. For
team i, the value of the function is

                              B (zi ) = bi zi + bi (1 - zi ) ,                         (14)

where zi  {0, 1}. If zi = 1, team i's input is created inside the firm according
to team behavior bi from equation (10) . If zi = 0, team i operates outside the
firm according to bi from a second-best contract.
    The CEO forms the firm boundary by maximizing log output, which amounts
to minimizing the deviations from the benchmark output in equation (11). The
firm boundary problem is

                                  min           ij ij ij (zi ) ,                       (15)
                                 {zi }iT
                                           ij

    The problem can be represented visually using a weighted network of teams.
A node in the network stands for one team. A single link exists between team i
and team j = i if any member of team i interacts with a member of team j . Each
team also features a loop (which connects a node to itself) to account for the
team's total interactions with other teams. Links have weights wij  ij ij ij
and loops have weights ii ii ii . The boundary decision assigns nodes as inside
or outside the firm, taking into account the weight of each choice on output.
  12
     The theory of optimal contracting is well established. Rather than repeating a generic
contracting problem that adds little value, we assign an exogenous behavior for the external
input.


                                                26
    Figure 1 gives an example illustration of this decision. The boundary of the
firm is the dashed curve. Teams inside the curve are within the firm; teams
beyond the curve are outside the firm.

                   Figure 1: Example Firm Boundary Problem




Notes : The figure illustrates the firm boundary problem using an example network of teams
induced by the firm's technology. Each vertex represents a team. A link exists between teams
if any member of one team interacts with a member of the other team. The colored vertices
inside the curve represent teams that are optimally inside the firm, whereas the uncolored
vertices are teams that are optimally outside the firm. The boundary of the firm is the
dashed curve. Loops and edge weights are excluded to simplify the figure.



3.2     Integration
To build intuition for the firm boundary solution, we begin with a production
technology that induces just two teams. Two teams introduce the canonical
integration problem: should two distinct parts of production operate under
separate firms or a single firm? In the next section, we broaden the problem to a
general technology with an arbitrary network of teams. To lay the groundwork
for the question of integration, we make the following assumptions:
Assumption 1. Team 1 is currently inside the firm.
Assumption 2. Team 2 is currently outside the firm.


                                            27
    The CEO currently influences the behavior of one part of production (team
1) and considers incorporating a second part (team 2) rather than writing
a contract to purchase it from the market. The question for the CEO is:
does integrating team 2 into the firm rather than contracting with it increase
production? The next proposition presents the condition in which the answer
is yes.
                                22 22
Proposition 2. Let  =        22 22 +212 12
                                             denote team 2's relative standalone
importance to production. Integration is optimal if and only if

                              |b2 - b | < |b2 - b |,                         (16)

where b = bc + (1 - ) b1 is the weighted average of team 1's observed behavior
and the CEO's desired behavior for employees.

    The integration decision simplifies to comparing the second team's behavior
inside to outside the firm. As a barometer for that comparison, the CEO uses
a blend b between the first team's behavior and the behavior the CEO desires
for the firm. If corporate culture can influence the second team's behavior to
be closer to b than a second-best contract can, then integration is optimal.
Otherwise, purchasing the second team's input under contract achieves a higher
production level than any the CEO can reach with corporate culture.
    The distance in behaviors expressed in Ineq. (16) is a measure of fit between
the second team's behavior and the firm's b (e.g., how well the second team
would embrace the same safety standards as the firm would). If team 2's
behavior when inside the firm would be dissimilar to both the CEO's desired
behavior bc and the first team's behavior b1 , the case for integrating is weaker.
    Whether team 2's behavior is closer to the CEO's or team 1's behavior
relies on the relative importance of either similarity to production, captured by


                                        28
. If the second team is an important component to overall production (e.g.,
product distribution for an overnight oats maker), the CEO cares more that
the team is more aligned with the behavior that she insists on for the firm (e.g.,
maintaining precise humidity and temperature controls in shipping). Conversely,
if the interaction between the two teams is relatively more important (e.g., the
creative and media teams of a marketing agency), the CEO tolerates a larger
deviation from his or her desired behavior in favor of better cooperation or
coordination in behaviors between the two teams.
   Integrating the second team into the firm allows the CEO to direct the team's
behavior under a corporate culture, but the team in return would affect the
corporate culture. Such a consequence would be missing if the CEO purchased
the second team's input under written contract. By integrating with the firm,
each person in team 2 would interpret the CEO's expressions, communicate
with each other, alter the corporate culture, and could even influence team
1's interpretations by interacting with its members. Both team's behaviors
would be endogenous inside the firm. The following corollary accompanies the
previous proposition. In it we analyze the parts of culture and its transmission
via communication that give reasons against integration.
   To prepare for the corollary, we introduce some abbreviated notation. Let
team 2's aggregated interpretations of the CEO's implicatures be defined as

                      ^2 
                                  2 (v ) v,c + v(u,c) + v,u .                (17)
                            v 2

Let team 1's aggregated interpretations of the CEO's implicatures with and
without integration, respectively, be denoted

                      ^1,w 
                                    1 (v ) v,c + v(u,c) + v,u ,              (18)
                              v 1

                    ^1,w/o 
                                    1 (v ) v,c + v(u,c) + v,u .              (19)
                              v 1


                                          29
Note that ^1,w may not match ^1,w/o . If team 2 were integrated, members of team

2 might interact with members of team 1 and influence team 1's interpretations
(i.e., the terms v(u,c) or v,u could change with integration).

Corollary 1. The CEO is less likely to integrate team 2 if any of the following
three conditions hold

   1. Integration would spoil the corporate culture

        · |b (c ) - 3 b c + 1 ^1,w + 2 ^2 | > |b (c ) - 3 b c + ^1,w/o |,

   2. Teams would not cooperate or coordinate well

        · |2 (1 - ) b c + ^1,w -2 b c + ^2 | > |2 (1 - ) b c + ^1,w/o -

           b2 |,

   3. Personal cultural differences between team members is significant

        · |1 (1 - )     v 1   1 (v ) b (v ) - 1   v 2   2 (v ) b (v ) | is large.


   The corollary isolates three conditions­one at the corporate level, one at
the team level, and one at the employee level­that do not favor integration.
Each condition uncovers the specific components from language and culture
that direct the endogenous behaviors.
   The first condition identifies changes in employee behaviors that arise from
integration altering the corporate culture. The left-hand-side of the condition
is the difference between the CEO's desired behavior for the firm and the
behavior consistent with the corporate culture that forms under integration.
The right-hand-side is the difference in the two behaviors without integration.
If adding team 2 spoils the corporate culture from the CEO's perspective so
that employees are more likely to choose behavior unlike what the CEO desires,
the case for integration weakens.


                                         30
   One factor that can lead to this outcome is when the second team severely
misinterprets the CEO's expressions (large ^2 ) potentially due to (i) personal

cultures among its member differing from the CEO, (ii) higher processing costs
from difficulty in achieving clarity, or (iii) lower cognitive effects from strong
misimpressions of the CEO's culture that are not overturned. Team 2 having a
large influence on the corporate culture (high 2 ) amplifies its interpretation's
effect. Other factors include employees tilting more in choosing a behavior
consistent with the corporate culture (high 3 ) and team 2 interacting with
the first team enough to distort its interpretation of the CEO (large ^1,w ) in a

way worse than its interpretation without interference (^1,w ).

   The second condition relates to differences in behavior between the two
teams. If the team cultures are dissimilar enough to harm coordination or
cooperation, the CEO might instead be better off purchasing team 2's input
under written contract. This team-level condition matters more for integration
if employees face greater social pressure to adhere to their team cultures when
choosing behaviors (high 2 ) or when the interaction between teams is pivotal
for production (high 1 - ).
   Finally, the third condition describes conflicting behaviors between mem-
bers of team one and two that are triggered by dissimilar personal cultures.
Employees choose behaviors while taking into account the behavior consistent
with their personal cultures (e.g., abiding by an ethical code). The influence
of a personal culture is stronger when an employee puts more weight on it
when choosing how to behave (1 is high). If the team 1 and team 2 employees
conflict in their personal cultural weights, integrating them together can prove
harmful. Even a sharp difference in cultures between the leaders of the two
teams (those with high  (v )) can be enough to question integration.
   When contemplating integration, the CEO contrasts the production levels

                                       31
from either obtaining the second team's input under contract or making it
internally under a corporate culture. A feature unique to absorbing the second
team is the impact its members would have on the existing corporate culture. If
the distortion to the exiting culture or the potential conflict with the first team
is severe enough, better to sign an incomplete contract. Alternatively, if the
incentive structure that only accompanies a corporate culture (i.e., the social
pressures to abide by norms and values) can fill in the gaps of an imperfect
contract, better to integrate. These factors that influence the firm boundary
with just two teams extend to more complex production systems as well.

3.3    General technology
Here we consider the firm boundary problem in (15) for a general technology
with an arbitrary number of teams. As written, problem (15) is a quadratic
binary program that is unconstrained. The next proposition explains that the
problem is isomorphic to a simpler one.

Proposition 3. The firm boundary problem in equation (15) is isomorphic to
a constrained linear binary programming problem.
   In Appendix A.4, we explain in detail the conversion. In a nutshell, the
process transforms the problem from choosing nodes in a team network to
choosing links and loops in a duplicated network. The linear constraints guar-
antee that each team is either inside or outside the firm, but not both. The
advantage of converting the quadratic boundary problem into a linear problem
is that solution methods to linear programs are well established (see Conforti,
Cornuéjols, and Zambelli, 2014, ch. 1).
   A solution to the general boundary problem exists, as one feasible solution
is to integrate all teams. But finding the optimal solution is computationally
challenging (i.e., the problem is NP-complete). The time necessary to uncover

                                        32
an optimal boundary increases rapidly in the number of teams (see Schrijver,
1998, ch. 18). In the worst case, the rate of increase is exponential. To illustrate,
suppose the CEO takes one hour to solve the two-team integration problem in
practice. To determine the optimal firm boundary for just twenty teams could
take 220 hours, which is nearly 120 years! In other words, large firms that house
an army of divisions (e.g., Citigroup) are very challenging, if not impossible, to
manage optimally.
   Several sophisticated algorithms have been developed to cut down on the
time to solve many binary integer programs. A naive approach enumerates
all the combinations of integer values in search of an optimum. Instead, these
algorithms intelligently evaluate only a small set of solutions while ignoring the
large remainder of inferior combinations. In doing so, the methods can cover
an entire population of feasible choices in an efficient manner (Chen, Batson,
and Dang, 2010, ch. 11).
   We use these algorithms to gain insight into the economic factors that
influence the firm boundary with many teams. We start by fixing the network
formation of teams induced by a technology. We use the network of ten teams
presented in Fig. 1 as our basis. Proposition 2 reveals that the key determinants
of the boundary decision are (1) the relative importance of each standalone
team ii and each team interaction ij to production, and (2) the difference
between the CEO's preferred mode of conduct bc and the behavior of a team
incentivized by either corporate culture bi or a contract bi .
   To examine the relation among these determinants, we repeatedly draw
random samples over a range of plausible values they can take. For each drawing,
we solve the boundary problem and keep track of the teams from the group of
ten that are optimally inside and outside the firm.
   In selecting the sample space from which to draw, we know that ii and

                                         33
ij must all reside in the closed unit interval and together sum to one. We
have no reason to favor one value for ii or ij over another, so each possible
point in the interval should be equally likely. The network in Fig. 1 suggests 10
values are needed for ii (one for each team) and 12 values for ij (one for each
link). A distribution that satisfies these criteria is the flat (uniform) Dirichlet
distribution with dimension 22 and concentration parameter 1.
   The sample space for the behavioral choices is less strict. Here, we fix the
value of bc and use it as an anchor for the values of bi and bi . A reasonable
range for the team behaviors is zero to two times the value of bc . Again
lacking reason to favor one multiple over another, we draw the values from two
uniform distributions that are independent from each other and the Dirichlet
distribution for ij . In the numerical exercise, we draw one hundred thousand
samples of ij , bi and bi , solve the boundary problem for each sample, and
analyze characteristics affiliated with teams inside the firm compared to those
outside.
   Figure 2 presents the probability densities of team behaviors among teams
optimally inside and outside, relative to the behavior the CEO prefers. The
density for teams inside is in solid blue, whereas the density for the teams
outside is in dotted red. The support of the two densities is |bi - bc | - |bi - bc |,
which is the difference in proximity between the CEO's preferred behavior
for the firm under her desired corporate culture bc and team i's behavior if it
were influenced by the observed corporate culture (bi ) or by a contract bi .
A negative value implies that the CEO can achieve a closer behavior to her
preference under a corporate culture than a contract. A positive value indicates
that the CEO can tailor a contract closer to her preference than what she can
achieve with a corporate culture.
   The figure reveals two important characteristics of the firm's boundary.

                                         34
   Figure 2: Probability Densities of Behaviors: Teams Inside and Outside


   0.15




    0.1




   0.05




      0
          -12         -8           -4              0           4             8            12




Notes : The figure illustrates the probability densities of behaviors for teams optimally inside
(solid blue curve) and outside (dotted red curve) the firm. The production technology in this
example is the network of teams presented in Fig. 1. The value |bi - bc | - |bi - bc | is the
difference in proximity between the CEO's preferred behavior for the firm under her desired
corporate culture bc and team i's behavior if it were influenced by the observed corporate
culture (bi ) or by a contract bi . A negative value implies that the CEO can achieve a
closer behavior to her preference under a corporate culture than a contract. A positive value
indicates that the CEO can tailor a contract closer to her preference than what she can
achieve with a corporate culture. The probability distribution originates from one hundred
thousand independent random samples of ij ,bi , and bi . The values for ij  Dirichlet(22, 1)
and bi , bi  Uniform (0, 2bc ), where bc = 10. For each sample, the boundary problem is
then solved numerically, thereby distinguishing teams that are optimally inside and outside
the firm. The densities are formed using a kernel density estimator with a Gaussian kernel
and an optimal bandwidth as described in Bowman and Azzalini (1997).


First, teams that can be incentivized to behave closer to the CEO's preference
with a corporate culture than a contract are more likely to be inside the
firm than outside (i.e., the solid blue density displays more mass over the
negative region of the support than the positive region). Conversely, teams
that are managed better from the CEO's perspective by a contract than a
corporate culture are more likely outside the firm (i.e., the dotted red density


                                              35
has more mass over the positive support). Reasons why a team's behavior
might significantly differ from the CEO's preference under a corporate culture
are the same as those described in Proposition 2 and Corollary 1 (e.g., its
member's cultures are quite different than the CEO's, they put a large weight
on adhering to their personal cultures, they easily misinterpret the meaning
of the CEO's expressions, or they would spoil the corporate culture). Second,
although proximity to the CEO's preferred mode of conduct influences whether
a team is inside or outside, this factor alone does not guarantee the team's
placement. Teams that would actually behave closer to the CEO's preference
under contract than a corporate culture are at times integrated inside the firm
(i.e., the solid blue density has mass over the positive region of the support).
These are teams whose interactions with other units inside the firm is important
to production. They can better coordinate or cooperate if both were internal
adhering to a common corporate culture rather than having one abide by a
contract.
    Figure 3 illustrates the importance of those team interactions in determining
the boundary. The figure displays the likelihood that team i is either inside
or outside the firm, given its interactions with other teams j = i and the
relative importance of those interactions to production. The value bj is team

j 's behavior under the firm's optimal boundary. Specifically, bj = bj if team

j is optimally inside, whereas bj = bj if team j is optimally outside. In the

densities, this term is held fixed, as it represents the basis for comparison
as the value bc did in the previous figure. The support of the two densities

  j =i   ij |bi - b             
                   j | - |bi - bj | is the weighted difference in proximity between

team j 's behavior and team i's behavior if team i were influenced by the
observed corporate culture (bi ) or by a contract bi , where each difference is
weighted by the importance of the interaction. A negative value implies that

                                          36
team i would cooperate or coordinate better with other teams if team i were
influenced by corporate culture than a contract. A positive value indicates
that cooperation between team i and its neighbors is poor under a corporate
culture.
   The figure reveals three important characteristics of the firm's optimal
boundary. First, teams that coordinate better with other teams when motivated
by corporate culture are relatively more likely to positioned inside the firm (i.e.,
the solid blue density has more mass over the negative support than positive
support). Conversely, teams that coordinate better under a contract are more
likely outside the firm. Teams that coordinate about the same under corporate
culture or contracts share a roughly equal likelihood of being inside or outside,
provided their interactions are not important to production (i.e., ij is close to
zero across interactions). Second, teams that are more central to the business
with higher values of ij ­either because they interact with several teams or their
interactions are more important to production­are relatively more likely to be
inside the firm, so long as they can better coordinate with other teams when
motivated by corporate culture than a contract (i.e.,         j =i   ij |bi - b              
                                                                               j | - | bj - bj |

is negative). Alternatively, if a team coordinates better under a contract and
their interactions are vital to production (i.e.,      j =i   ij |bi - b             
                                                                        j | - |bj - bj | is

positive), that team is relatively more likely to be outside. Finally, teams that
are less central to production (i.e., values of ij closer to zero) are relatively less
likely to be inside the firm. The relatively likelihood of being inside the firm
shrinks the more peripheral a team is (i.e., the lower is ij across interactions).
   In summary, the proximity of a team's behavior to the CEO's preference and
the quality of its cooperation with other teams if incentivized by a corporate
culture both strongly influence whether the team is within the boundary of the
firm in a multi-team setting. A CEO might be willing to internally assemble an

                                         37
Figure 3: Probability Densities of Interaction Importance: Teams Inside and
Outside


    2


   1.6


   1.2


   0.8


   0.4


    0
         -2.5   -2   -1.5    -1     -0.5     0      0.5     1      1.5      2      2.5




Notes : The figure illustrates the probability densities of interaction importance for
teams optimally inside (solid blue curve) and outside (dotted red curve) the firm.
The production technology in this example is the network of teams presented in
Fig. 1. The value bj is team j 's behavior under the firm's optimal boundary. The
support of the two densities j =i ij |bi - b               
                                              j | - |bi - bj | is the weighted difference
in proximity between team j 's behavior and team i's behavior if team i were influenced
by the observed corporate culture (bi ) or by a contract bi , where each difference is
weighted by the importance of the interaction. A negative value implies that team
i would cooperate or coordinate better with other teams if team i were influenced
by corporate culture than a contract. A positive value indicates that cooperation
between team i and its neighbors is poor under a corporate culture. The probability
distribution originates from one hundred thousand independent random samples of
ij ,bi , and bi . The values for ij  Dirichlet(22, 1) and bi , bi  Uniform (0, 2bc ),
where bc = 10. For each sample, the boundary problem is then solved numerically,
thereby distinguishing teams that are optimally inside and outside the firm. The
densities are formed using a kernel density estimator with a Gaussian kernel and an
optimal bandwidth as described in Bowman and Azzalini (1997). The distribution is
truncated at the 1 and 99 percentiles for illustration purposes.




                                           38
input to production, even if she knows that she can achieve an input designed
closer to her preference by procuring it from the market, because tailoring the
input within according to a corporate culture allows improved coordination
with other inputs. The make-or-buy decision does not just treat each input
in isolation, but takes into account their integration. The centrality of each
input to production also enters the decision. Peripheral parts of production
are relatively more likely bought, whereas core parts are relatively more likely
made, provided those core parts can coordinate well with other teams internally
under a shared corporate culture.

3.4    Mergers and Acquisitions
The model easily permits analysis of mergers and acquisitions. Over the past
35 years, announced M&A transactions in the US have neared $35 trillion in
total across over 325,000 deals, equivalent to one deal every hour (Institute for
Mergers, Acquisitions and Alliances, 2020). And yet, overwhelming evidence
suggests that M&A activity leads to disappointing financial performance for
acquirers (King, Dalton, Daily, and Covin, 2004; Cartwright and Schoenberg,
2006; Haleblian, Devers, McNamara, Carpenter, and Davison, 2009). In addition,
only half of mergers are considered successful by the managers who undertook
them (Schoenberg, 2006), executives from the target firm report experiencing
considerable stress during the firm integration, and the vast majority of them
depart within five years (Krug and Aguilera, 2005). Here, we explain why a
merger can fail, arguing that contrasting cultures between the participating
firms is a key reason.
   Consider firm c that features a technology which induces an arbitrary
network of teams. Firm c's corporate culture is c , and its CEO contemplates
merging with or acquiring another firm x that has corporate culture x . Suppose


                                       39
firm x consists of a single team with behavior bx  b x . (The analysis can
readily be generalized so that firm x is made up of several teams, each with its
own team culture.)
    If acquired, x would interact with several of c's teams. Let K denote the
set of teams that are within c's boundary, and let K denote the set of teams
outside its boundary. An example merger and acquisition problem using the
team network is illustrated in Fig. 4.

               Figure 4: Example Merger and Acquisition Problem




Notes : The figure illustrates the merger and acquisition problem using Fig. 1's example
network of teams induced by a firm's technology. The firm is represented by the light blue
colored vertices. The firm's CEO considers extending the firm boundary to combine with
another firm, which is represented by the gold X-marked vertex. The teams which would
interact with this other firm are represented by links that have one end at the gold X-marked
vertex. Loops and link weights are excluded to simplify the figure.


    An unsuccessful merger or acquisition requires that observed output yc+x of
the combined firm falls short of the observed output of firm c alone, denoted
yc . Proposition 4 presents the condition when a potential merger or acquisition


                                             40
fails.

Proposition 4. A potential merger or acquisition between firm c and firm x
would fail if

                 synergies < culture clash + supplier interference,                 (20)

where the terms in the inequality are defined as

                    synergies  y
                               ^c+x - y
                                      ^c ,

                culture clash  xx xx (bx - bc )2 + 2          xk xk (bx - bk )2 ,
                                                         kK
                                                          2
         supplier interference  2        xk xk bx - bk    .
                                    kK


    The benefit of a merger is the potential increase in the benchmark level
                               ^c+x - y
of output from combining firms y      ^c (i.e., the synergies). The costs of a
merger are the potential clashes in culture between firm x's employees and firm
c's employees, as well as x's interference with the teams that firm c contracts
with in the market (i.e., c's suppliers). A merger fails if the costs exceed the
benefit.
    The proposition pinpoints the spots in the firm that are most harmful to
a merger. Negative synergies automatically doom a union. Culture clashes
between x and c's teams are costlier if x integrates as a core piece of the
combined firm's production (high xx or xk ), or if x interacts with several
of c's existing teams (high xx or xk ). Similarly, clashes are more damaging
if x has severe cultural differences with the CEO's desired behavior (bc ) or
the behaviors of the teams it interacts with (bk ). This conclusion is consistent
with research empirically finding that cultural incompatibility is an important
source of M&A difficulties, such as Datta (1991) and Datta and Puia (1995).
Stahl and Voigt (2008) provide a meta-analysis of 46 studies covering 10,710

                                           41
mergers and acquisitions. They document that in mergers requiring a high
level of integration (i.e., involving more extensive interaction among employees
of the two firms), accounting performance measures such as sales growth and
return on assets are lower when cultural differences are larger.
   The troubled merger between telecommunication firms Sprint and Nextel
in 2005 adds color to the model's result. The merger was a full integration of
each other's technology and operations, suggesting high 's and  's (Sanchez,
2004). But Nextel's entrepreneurial and aggressive style conflicted with Sprint's
top-down bureaucratic approach; i.e., (bx - bc )2 was large. Many meetings
between the two sides "ended with Nextel employees storming out, leaving
the Sprint side baffled" (Hart, 2007). The cultural differences permeated the
interactions between teams; i.e., (bx - bk )2 . For example, the two companies
had distinct marketing strategies­Nextel focusing more on its business clients
and Sprint targeting the consumer market­that created a confusion in branding
(Holson and Richtel, 2007). Three years later, Sprint reported a $29.7 billion
write-down related to the merger (Holson, 2008).
   Firm x might also conflict with c's existing suppliers. These are teams
that c's CEO found more efficient to contract with than manage internally.
Like before, the costs from this interference are higher the more central are
those teams to the firm's production (high xk or xk ) or greater differences
                                               2
than supplier's contracted behaviors bx - bk . A concrete example is Quaker
Oats Company's 1994 failed acquisition of the fruit drink company Snapple.
A commonly cited reason for their mismatch was their dissimilar distribution
channels. Quaker had existing relations with large retailers and supermarkets for
distribution. But Snapple was skilled in distributing through smaller avenues,
such as convenience stores, gas stations, and independent distributors. Within
three years, Quaker sold Snapple at a loss of $1.4 billion (Feder, 1997).

                                       42
3.5    Cultural change
So far we have analyzed the model in which a single CEO influences the
corporate culture. Suppose now a new CEO attempts to alter an existing
corporate culture. This CEO is the k -th one in the company's history and his
or her desired corporate culture is ck . For simplicity, suppose the network
structure of interactions between employees remains unchanged between CEOs.
   Before, employee v interpreted a CEO's expressions (and a fellow employee's
interpretation of the CEO) according to his personal culture v . Now, having
worked under an existing corporate culture, v instead infers the new CEO's
meaning according to v 's concluding interpretation of the former CEO's culture
ck-1 . Employee v 's perspective when interpreting meaning has thus adapted
to his existing corporate environment. That perspective is denoted vk-1 .
   From this starting point, after observing or listening to the new CEO k
firsthand and interacting with other employees, v 's concluding interpretation
of CEO k is

                    vk = ck + vk-1 ,ck + vk-1 (uk-1 ,ck ) + vk-1 ,uk-1 ,        (21)

where the terms are

                              1
            vk-1 ,ck =                 1 - vk-1 ,ck vk-1 - ck ,
                           1 + d (v )
                              1
      vk-1 (uk-1 ,ck )   =                v ,u       1 - uk-1 ,ck vk-1 - ck ,
                           1 + d (v ) uDv k-1 k-1
                              1
          vk-1 ,uk-1     =                 1 - vk-1 ,uk-1 vk-1 - ck .
                           1 + d (v ) uDv

   Employee v 's concluding interpretation vk has the same construction as the
concluding interpretation of a single CEO from Proposition 1. The contextual
parameters from Relevance Theory adjust to reflect the cognitive effects and

                                            43
processing costs derived from the new CEO's expressions. Specifically, vk-1 ,ck 
   evk-1 ,ck                      evk-1 ,uk-1
      
               and vk-1 ,uk-1         
                                                .
   Equation (21) reveals a recursion in employees' interpretations of a new
CEO's desired corporate culture. Specifically, each employee's concluding in-
terpretation vk of the new CEO relies on her concluding interpretation vk-1
of the previous CEO. Because corporate culture aggregates these employee
interpretations, the observed corporate culture under one CEO is influenced
by the cultures under earlier ones. Proposition 5 presents the relation between
corporate cultures across generations of CEOs.

Proposition 5. The corporate culture under the k -th CEO is

ck = ck + k-1 ck-1 - ck + k-2 ck-2 - ck-1 + . . . + 1 (c1 - c0 ) + k0 ,
                                                                             (22)
where c0 is the desired corporate culture of the first CEO, k0 is the history
of employee interpretations, and t , for t = 1, . . . , k - 1, are constants. Both
k0 and t are defined in Appendix A.6.

   At a firm with a history of CEOs, the corporate culture resembles a moving
average process. The current corporate culture ck is centered around the
current CEO's desired corporate culture ck , but it is also pushed around in
different directions according to the full saga of corporate cultures. The term
k0 standards for the history of employee interpretations, and it contains
each employee's interpretations of all previous CEO's implicatures, and the
implicatures of all the other employees that each person communicates with,
and the implicatures of all the people that those people communicates with,
and so on, through the initial CEO.
   Large differences between a previous CEO's corporate culture and the
current CEO's desired culture can have lasting effects. That influence can

                                           44
also make corporate cultures difficult to change. One year into his position in
2018, Uber's current CEO Dara Khosrowshahi expressed disappointment in not
transforming the firm's culture quickly enough (O'Brien, 2018). A year later,
the company cited in its pre-IPO disclosures to the SEC that its culture is a
risk factor to investors: "Our workplace culture and forward-leaning approach
created significant operational and cultural challenges that have in the past
harmed, and may in the future continue to harm, our business results and
financial condition" (Uber Technologies, Inc., 2019).
    Large coefficients t can also subject the current corporate culture more
to its past. We explain in the appendix that these coefficients are functions
of employee interpretations of CEO k through CEO t. A coefficient can be
considered the sensitivity of the current corporate culture to a previous CEO. A
former CEO that had a significant influence on a company's culture (e.g., Jack
Welch at General Electric) can continue affecting the culture after departing.
The coefficients may or may not decline with each passing generation, so even
company founders can have a lasting impact (e.g., Walt Disney).
    That being said, if employees successfully interpret the meaning that CEO
k intended when expressing his or her desired corporate culture, the coefficients
t shrink closer and closer to zero. Communications that are displayed, spoken,
or written with high relevance that are succinct, precise, and repeated (reducing
processing costs) reduce employee misinterpretations and weakens the current
corporate culture's dependence on previous CEOs.


4     Conclusion
In markets, transactions are mediated through contracts that are based on
agreed prices. Contracts are written primarily with the semantic meaning
of language in mind, with greater emphasis on the exact, literal meaning of

                                       45
the words and sentences expressed than their inferred meaning from context.
Because contractual interpretations draw heavily on semantic meaning, the
agreements are enforceable in courts.
   But not all transactions occur in markets. Quite distinct from markets,
firms have internal economies that can be enormous. No prices or contracts
intermediate the exchanges in those economies. Instead, managerial directions
guide behavior. These instructions can be nuanced and imply meanings beyond
the literal sense of their statements. They contain implicatures­an inherent
feature of human language. How then do firms function? What causes employees
to work together following some directions? We propose that a corporate
culture arises out of employees interacting, communicating, and interpreting
the instructions they hear. This corporate culture dictates the firm's internal
organization: it is the governing force that allocates resources inside firms in
place of contracts and prices.
   In our model, corporate culture originates with a CEO communicating a
set of cultural weights that she desires for her firm. Employees listen, read, and
observe the CEO, and they infer her implied meaning from the perspective
of their personal cultures. Part of their inference involves maximizing the
relevance of the CEO's expressions in context. Employees then communicate
their inferences with each other to reach a concluding interpretation of the
CEO's desired corporate culture. The observed corporate culture takes shape
as an aggregation of all these interpretations. With a corporate culture formed,
employees choose behaviors (e.g., modes of conduct) to maximize utility. Internal
conflict from straying from one's personal culture and social pressure from
deviating from one's team culture and the corporate culture influence an
employee's decision. The integration of these employee behaviors contribute
team inputs to the production of a final output.

                                        46
   The dividing line between firm and market activity is regulated by the
CEO's configuration of production. In her decision, the CEO chooses one of two
incentive schemes for each team. The first harnesses a corporate culture as the
force to govern employee behaviors. The CEO can only take advantage of this
system if the team creates its input inside the firm. The CEO's second option is
to strike a contract with an outside party to procure the input from the market
in exchange for payment. The compensation structure of the contract and the
tacit threat of litigation for services unfulfilled function as the incentive system.
The CEO's optimal choice of production method across teams determines the
boundary of the firm.
   We use the model to explain other observations about firms beyond their
boundary. We explain that some mergers and acquisitions fail because cultural
clashes between the target and acquirer outweigh potential synergies from their
union, consistent with empirical findings. We also show that corporate cultures
can display hysteresis, in that they are swayed by an entire history of cultures
that prevailed under previous managers. A corporate culture's dependence on
this history can make it sticky over time and difficult to change. The model
has other avenues of analysis that we do not explore, such as incorporating
explicit hierarchies in the organization, explaining alternative forms of corporate
integration (e.g., joint ventures or partnerships), and studying how monetary
rewards, bonuses, and promotion policies influence corporate cultural formation
and vice versa.
   Generally speaking, neoclassical economics studies agents who are atomistic
price takers, or serve as principal or agent under contract, or interact strategi-
cally. Any or all of these elements may be appropriate for explaining activities
in markets. But notably, both culture and human sociality are absent in the
analysis, despite their visible presentation inside firms. Applying unmodified

                                         47
market notions to understand firms seems inadequate as a persuasive account.
   We propose that the details of how people interact without prices, contracts,
or strategic motives is important to explain firms. Consequently, we focus
on employees interacting and communicating as an aggregation mechanism
that delivers corporate culture as its outcome. This culture in turn affects
output in corporations. Admittedly, corporate culture and explicit performance
incentives interact. This is a subject of future research. Our view is that a
theory of corporate culture can lay the foundation for explaining observations
of firms beyond just their boundary. It can help explain, for example, the
investment projects a manager chooses over others, a firm's capital structure
balance between debt and equity, and a company's policy in paying dividends
to investors. Any decision inside a firm ought to be analyzed within the context
of its corporate culture.




                                      48
References
Alchian, Armen A and Harold Demsetz. Production, information costs, and
  economic organization. American Economic Review, 62(5):777­795, 1972. [8]

Alfaro, Laura, Nicholas Bloom, Paola Conconi, Harald Fadinger, Patrick Legros,
  Andrew Newman, Raffaella Sadun, and John Van Reenen. Come together:
  firm boundaries and delegation. Working paper no. 24603. National Bureau
  of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA, May 2019. [8]

Allott, Nicholas. Relevance theory. In Capone, Alessandro, Franco Lo Pi-
  paro, and Marco Carapezza, editors, Perspectives on Linguistic Pragmatics,
  chapter 3, pages 57­98. Springer, 2nd edition, 2013. [14]

Asch, Solomon E. Opinions and social pressure. Scientific American, 193(5):
  31­35, 1955. [22]

Bianchi, Claudia. The Semantics/Pragmatics Distinction. Center for the Study
  of Language, 2004. [3]

Birner, Betty J. Introduction to Pragmatics. John Wiley & Sons, 2012. [14]

Bondy, John Adrian and Uppaluri Siva Ramachandra Murty. Graph Theory.
  Graduate Texts in Mathematics. Springer, 2008. [24]

Bowman, Adrian W and Adelchi Azzalini. Applied Smoothing Techniques
  for Data Analysis: The Kernel Approach with S-Plus Illustrations. Oxford
  University Press, 1997. [35], [38]

Cartwright, Susan and Richard Schoenberg. Thirty years of mergers and
  acquisitions research: recent advances and future opportunities. British
 Journal of Management, 17(S1):S1­S5, 2006. [39]

Chapman, Siobhan. Paul Grice: Philosopher and Linguist. Palgrave Macmillan,
 2005. [3]

Chen, Der-San, Robert G Batson, and Yu Dang. Applied Integer Programming.
 John Wiley & Sons, 2010. [33]

Coase, Ronald. The nature of the firm. Economica, 4:386­405, 1937. [8]

Conforti, Michele, Gérard Cornuéjols, and Giacomo Zambelli. Integer program-
 ming. Springer, 2014. [32]


                                     49
Cote, James E. and Charles G. Levine. Identity, Formation, Agency, and
 Culture. Psychology Press, 2002. [22]

Cremér, Jacques. Corporate culture and shared knowledge. Industrial and
 Corporate Change, 2:351­386, 1993. [8]

Cremér, Jacques, Luis Garicano, and Andrea Prat. Language and the theory
  of the firm. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(1):373­407, 2007. [8]

Cyert, Richard and James March. A Behavioral Theory of the Firm. Prentice
  Hall, 1963. [8]

Datta, Deepak K. Organizational fit and acquisition performance: effects of
 post-acquisition integration. Strategic Management Journal, 12(4):281­297,
 1991. [7], [41]

Datta, Deepak K and George Puia. Cross-border acquisitions: an examination
  of the influence of relatedness and cultural fit on shareholder value creation
  in US acquiring firms. Management International Review, 35(4):337­359,
 1995. [7], [41]

Davis, Steven, editor. Pragmatics: A Reader. Oxford University Press, 1st
 edition, 1991. [3]

DeMarzo, Peter M, Dimitri Vayanos, and Jeffrey Zwiebel. Persuasion bias, social
  influence, and unidimensional opinions. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 118(3):909­968, 2003. [16]

DeMeza, David and Ben Lockwood. Does asset ownership always motivate man-
  agers? outside options and the property rights theory of the firm. Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, 1130:361­386, 1998. [8]

Denison, David. Bringing corporate culture to the bottom line. Organizational
 Dynamics, 13:5­222, 1984. [8]

Denison, David. Corporate Culture and Organizational Effectiveness. John
 Wiley & Sons, 1990. [8]

Deshpande, Rohit and Frederick E Webster Jr. Organizational culture and
 marketing: defining the research agenda. Journal of marketing, 53(1):3­15,
 1989. [11]

Feder, Barnaby J. Quaker to sell Snapple for $300 million. The New York
  Times, pages 81,92, March 1997. URL https://perma.cc/U2N7-EHCW. [42]

                                      50
Garrouste, Pierre and Stepahne Saussier. Looking for a theory of the firm:
 future challenges. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 58:178­199,
 2005. [8]

Geertz, Clifford. The impact of the concept of culture on the concept of man.
 In The Interpretation of Cultures, chapter 2, pages 37­61. Basic Books, 2017
 edition edition, 1973. [21]

Gelfand, Michele. Rule Makers, Rule Breakers: Tight and Loose Cultures and
 the Secret Signals That Direct Our Lives. Scribner, 2019. [21]

General Motors, . GM in the United States: by the numbers, May 2020. URL
  https://perma.cc/TJK2-E84A. [1]

Goldberg, Amir and Sameer B Srivastava. Language as a window into culture.
 California Management Review, 60(1):56­69, 2017. [12]

Goodenough, Ward. Cultural Anthropology and Linguistics, pages 167­173.
 Georgetown University Press, 1957. URL https://perma.cc/AXL4-26GB.
 [11]

Gordon, George G. and Nancy DiTomaso. Predicting corporate performance
 from organizational culture. Journal of Management Studies, 29(6):783­798,
 1992. [8]

Gorton, Gary B and Alexander K Zentefis. Social progress and corporate
 culture. Unpublished Working Paper. Yale University, New Haven, CT,
 March 2020. [11]

Grennan, Jillian. A corporate culture channel: how increased shareholder
  governance reduces firm value. Unpublished Working Paper. Duke University,
  Durham, NC, March 2019. [8]

Grennan, Jillian. Communicating culture consistently: evidence from banks.
  Unpublished Working Paper. Duke University, Durham, NC, January 2020.
  [8]

Grice, H Paul. Studies in the Way of Words. Harvard University Press, 1989.
  [3]

Grossman, Sanford and Oliver Hart. The costs and benefits of ownership: a
  theory of vertical and lateral integration. Journal of Political Economy, 94:
  691­719, 1986. [8]


                                      51
Haleblian, Jerayr, Cynthia E Devers, Gerry McNamara, Mason A Carpenter,
 and Robert B Davison. Taking stock of what we know about mergers and
 acquisitions: a review and research agenda. Journal of Management, 35(3):
 469­502, 2009. [39]

Hart, Kim. No cultural merger at Sprint Nextel. The Washinton Post, November
 2007. URL https://perma.cc/ZYY9-5QK4. [42]

Hart, Oliver. An economist's perspective on the theory of the firm. Columbia
 Law Review, 89:1757­1774, 1989. [8]

Hart, Oliver and John Moore. Property rights and the nature of the firm.
 Journal of Political Economy, 98:1119­11580, 1990. [8]

Hermalin, Benjamin. Economics and corporate culture. In Cooper, Gary L, Sue
  Cartwright, and P. Christopher Earley, editors, The International Handbook
 of Orgamizational Culture and Climate, chapter 10, pages 217­261. John
 Wiley & Sons, 1st edition, 2001. [8]

Hodgson, Geoffrey. Corporate culture and the nature of the firm. In Groe-
 newegen, John, editor, Transaction Cost Economics and Beyond, chapter 13,
 pages 249­269. Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1996. [8]

Holmstrom, Bengt. The firm as a subeconomy. The Journal of Law, Economics,
 & Organization, 15:74­102, 1999. [8]

Holmstrom, Bengt and Paul Milgrom. The firm as an incentive system. Amer-
 ican Economic Review, 84:972­992, 1994. [8]

Holmstrom, Bengt and John Roberts. The boundaries of the firm revisited.
 Journal of Economic Perspectives, 12:73­94, 1998. [8]

Holson, Laura M. Sprint Nextel posts $29.5 billion loss. The New York Times,
 2008. URL https://perma.cc/C3MF-JQTC. [42]

Holson, Laura M. and Matt Richtel. Sprint Nextel chief resigns, adding to
 line of departures. The New York Times, 2007. URL https://perma.cc/
 GVG4-VC5M. [42]

Huang, Yan. The Oxford Dictionary of Pragmatics. Oxford University Press,
 2012. [3]




                                    52
Institute for Mergers, Acquisitions and Alliances, . M&A in the United States.
  Online, May 2020. URL https://perma.cc/5JKQ-8UY9. Accessed: 2020-05-
  01. [39]

Kandel, Eugene and Edward P Lazear. Peer pressure and partnerships. Journal
 of Political Economy, 100(4):801­817, 1992. [22]

Keesing, Roger. Theories of culture. Annual Review of Anthropolgy, 3:73­97,
 1974. [11]

King, David R, Dan R Dalton, Catherine M Daily, and Jeffrey G Covin.
  Meta-analyses of post-acquisition performance: indications of unidentified
  moderators. Strategic management journal, 25(2):187­200, 2004. [39]

Korta, Kepa and John Perry. Pragmatics. In Zalta, Edward N., editor, The
 Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford
 University, winter 2015 edition, 2015. [3]

Kreps, David. Corporate culture and economic theory. Perspectives on Positive
 Political Economy, 90:109­110, 1990. [8]

Krug, Jeffrey A and Ruth V Aguilera. Top management team turnover in
  mergers and acquisitions. Advances in Mergers and Acquisitions, 4(1):123­
 151, 2005. [39]

L&E Global, . Employment contracts in usa. Online, November 2013. URL
 https://perma.cc/2WSA-MF4U. [2]

Lu, Richard, Jennifer A Chatman, Amir Goldberg, and Sameer B Srivastava.
  Deciphering the cultural code: cognition, behavior, and the interpersonal
  transmission of culture. Unpublished Working Paper. Stanford University,
  Stanford, CA, 2018. [12]

Macionis, John J. Sociology. Pearson, 15 edition, 2013. ISBN 0205985602. [11]

Martin, Joanne. Organizations in Cultures. Oxford University Press, 1992. [8],
 [11]

Newman, Mark EJ. Modularity and community structure in networks. Pro-
 ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 103(23):8577­8582, 2006. [10]

O'Brien, Sara Ashley. Uber's CEO one year in: the one thing I wish I had fixed
  sooner. CNN Business, August 2018. URL https://perma.cc/464R-VV74.
  [45]

                                     53
Prahalad, CK and Gary Hamel. The core competence of the corporation.
  Harvard Business Review, 68(3):79­91, 1990. [24]

Puranam, Phanish. The Microstructure of Organizations. Oxford University
  Press, 2018. [10]

Radicchi, Filippo, Claudio Castellano, Federico Cecconi, Vittorio Loreto, and
  Domenico Parisi. Defining and identifying communities in networks. Pro-
 ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 101(9):2658­2663, 2004. [10]

Rothstein, Mark A, Andria S Knapp, and Lance Liebman. Cases and Materials
 on Employment Law. University Casebook Series. Foundation Press, 1987.
  [2]

Sanchez, Jesus. Sprint acquires Nextel in $35 billion deal. Los Angeles Times,
  2004. URL https://perma.cc/5YQY-FZ69. [42]

Schein, Edgar H. The role of the founder in creating organizational culture.
  Organizational Dynamics, 12(1):13­28, 1983. [8], [11]

Schoenberg, Richard. Measuring the performance of corporate acquisitions: an
  empirical comparison of alternative metrics. British Journal of Management,
  17(4):361­370, 2006. [39]

Schrijver, Alexander. Theory of linear and integer programming. John Wiley
  & Sons, 1998. [33]

Searle, John. Grice on meaning: 50 years later. Teorema: Revista Internacional
  de Filosofía, pages 9­18, 2007. [3]

Sloan, Tim. We are on the right path, January 2017. URL https://perma.
  cc/P4KN-88FT. Remarks by Time Sloan in a companywide address from
  Dallas, TX. [4]

Sperber, Dan and Dierdre Wilson. Relevance: Communication and Cognition
  (2nd Ed.1996). Blackwell, Cambridge, MA, 2nd edition, 1986. [4], [14], [15]

Sperber, Dan and Dierdre Wilson. Relevance theory. In Horn, Laurence R and
  Gregory L Ward, editors, Handbook of Pragmatics, pages 607­632. Blackwell,
  Malden, MA, 2004. [14]

Stahl, Günter K and Andreas Voigt. Do cultural differences matter in mergers
  and acquisitions? a tentative model and examination. Organization Science,
  19(1):160­176, 2008. [7], [41]

                                     54
Swisher, Kara and Johana Bhuiyan. Uber CEO Kalanick advised employees
  on sex rules for a company celebration in 2013 Miami letter. Recode, 2017.
  URL https://perma.cc/7HW7-LUEW. [4]

Trice, Harrison Miller and Janice M Beyer. The Cultures of Work Organizations.
  Prentice-Hall, Inc, 1993. [11]

Tylor, Edward Burnett. Primitive Culture, volume 1. Cambridge University
  Press, 2010 edition, 1871. ISBN 1108017509. [11]

Uber Technologies, Inc., . Form S-1 registration statement. Securities and
 Exchange Commission, April 2019. URL https://perma.cc/56QG-Z6MR.
 EDGAR. [45]

Weinreich, Peter. Identity Structure Analysis, chapter 1, pages 7­76. Routledge,
 1st edition, 2003. [22]

Williams, Raymond. The Sociology of Culture. University of Chicago Press,
 1st edition, 1995. [11]

Williamson, Oliver. The vertical integration of production: market failure
 considerations. American Economic Review, 61:112­123, 1971. [8]

Wilson, Dierdre. Relevance theory. In Cummings, L., editor, The Pragmatics
 Encyclopedia, pages 393­399. Routledge, London, 2009. [14]

Yus, Francusci. Relevance theory online bibliographic service. Online, December
  2019. URL https://personal.ua.es/francisco.yus/rt.html. [14]




                                      55
A     Proofs
A.1     Proposition 1
To arrive at her concluding interpretation of the CEO's desired corporate
culture, employee v combines her direct inference with her interpretation of
other employees' inferences. She combines these 1 + d (v ) interpretations with
equal weights.
    Her direct interpretation of the CEO's intended corporate culture is v,c =
c + (1 - v,c ) (v - c ). Her interpretation of person u's inference of the CEO's
culture is v,u = v,u u,c + (1 - v,u ) v . Combining her own inference with the
others gives                                           
                                 1
                       v =              v,c +      v,u  .                   (23)
                             1 + d (v )        uDv

Substitute v,c and v,u into (23) to get
                                                                                      
         1      c + (1 - v,c ) (v - c ) +
v =                                            {u,c + (1 - v,u ) (v - u,c )} .
     1 + d (v )                           uDv
                                                                           (24)
Substitute u,c = c + (1 - u,c ) (u - c ) into (24) to get
                                                                            
                   1
            v =                     c  + (1 - v,c ) (v - c ) +   ,                  (25)
                1 + d (v ) u{v,Dv }


where the term

                         {(1 - u,c ) (u - c ) + (1 - v,u ) (v - u,c )} ,
                   uDv

and the set {v, Dv } is person v and the employees v interacts with. The first
                                    u{v,Dv }
                                               c         1+d(v )
term in (25) can be reduced:         1+d(v )
                                                   = c   1+d(v )
                                                                   = c . Next, substitute
u,c into  to get

 =          {(1 - u,c ) (u - c ) + (1 - v,u ) ((v - c ) - (1 - u,c ) (u - c ))} .
      uDv
                                                                                    (26)
Combine the first and third terms in (26) to re-write  as

            =          {v,u (1 - u,c ) (u - c ) + (1 - v,u ) (v - c )} .            (27)
                 uDv



                                               1
Finally, with  specified in (27), v can be written as
                               1
                v = c +                ((1 - v,c ) (v - c ) +  ) ,
                            1 + d (v )

which matches (5).
A.2     Proposition 2
Under Assumptions 1 and 2, the objective function for the boundary problem
is
         11 11 (b1 - bc )2 + 22 22 (B2 - bc )2 + 212 12 (B2 - b1 )2 .  (28)
Integration is optimal if B2 = b2 delivers a smaller objective function value
than B2 = b2 . The first term in Eq. (28) relates to the first team, which is
not affected by the CEO's choice variable. Therefore, the integration decision
reduces to the inequality
                                                    2                            2
    (b2 - bc )2 + (1 - ) (b2 - b1 )2 <  b2 - bc         + (1 - ) b2 - b1             ,   (29)
              22 22
where  = 22 22  +212 12
                        is the relative standalone importance of team 2 to
production.
   Re-arrange terms in Ineq. (29) to get
                                      2                    2
      (1 - ) (b1 - b2 )2 - b1 - b2         <    bc - b2        - (bc - b2 )2 .           (30)

Next, exploit the relation x2 - y 2 = (x + y ) (x - y ) and divide both sides of
                           2
the inequality by b2 - b2 to rewrite Ineq. (30) as
                                                                            
                    (b2 - b1 ) + b2 - b1            bc - b2 + ( bc - b2 )
         (1 - )                                <                            .            (31)
                           b2 - b2                         b2 - b2

Rearrange terms in Ineq. (31), then add and subtract b from the denominator,
where b = bc + (1 - ) b1 to get

                            ( b2 - b ) + b2 - b
                                                    < 0.                                 (32)
                            ( b2 - b ) - b2 - b

Finally, exploit the relation x +y
                              x-y
                                   < 0  |x| < |y |,to arrive at the integration
condition in Eq. (16) of the proposition.


                                           2
A.3     Corollary 1
Integration is suboptimal if

                                  |b - b2 | > |b - b2 |.                   (33)

Using Eq. (10), the optimal team 1, team 2 behavior inside the firm, and the
CEO's desired behavior are

                 bc = b (c ) ,
                 b1 = 1         1 (v ) b (v ) + 2 b 1 + 3 b c ,
                          v 1

                 b2 = 1         2 (v ) b (v ) + 2 b 2 + 3 b c .
                          v 2

Each team's culture i is defined in Eq. (6) and is a weighted average of each
team member's interpretation. To abbreviate notation, let
                      ^2 
                                   2 (v ) v,c + v(u,c) + v,u
                            v 2

denote team 2's aggregated interpretation of the CEO's implicatures if inte-
grated. Similarly, let team 1's interpretations of the CEO's implicatures with
and without integration, respectively, be denoted
                      ^1,w 
                                       1 (v ) v,c + v(u,c) + v,u ,
                                 v 1
                    ^1,w/o 
                                       1 (v ) v,c + v(u,c) + v,u .
                                 v 1


Note that  ^1,w may not match    ^1,w/o because members of team 2 might interact
with members of team 1 if integrated, who would influence team 1's interpre-
tations (i.e., v(u,c) or v,u could change with integration). The possible team
cultures are then

                                   1,w = c +  ^1.w ,
                                  1,w/o = c + ^1.w/o ,
                                        2 = c + ^2 .

The corporate culture with and without integration, respectively, is

                            c,w = c + 1  ^1,w + 2 ^2 ,
                           c,w/o = c + 1 ^1,w/o .


                                              3
    The corporate culture depends on whether team 2 is integrated. If the team
is brought inside the firm, Substituting the team behaviors into Eq. (33) allows
each side of the inequality to be written as

           |b - b2 | = |b (c ) - 3 b c + 1 ^1,w + 2 ^2

                    + 1 (1 - )         1 (v ) b (v ) - 1         2 (v ) b (v )
                                 v 1                       v 2

                    + 2 (1 - ) b c + ^1,w - 2 b c + ^2 |                         (34)

and

                   |b - b2 | = |b (c ) - 3 b c + ^1,w/o

                            + 1 (1 - )           1 (v ) b (v )
                                           v 1

                            + 2 (1 - ) b c + ^1,w/o - b2 |.                      (35)

    We reach the conclusions in the Corollary by comparing terms in Eqs. (34)
(35) while holding all outside terms fixed in each comparison. We put attention
on conditions at the corporate, team, and personal level that upset integration.
The three conditions are

   1. |b (c ) - 3 b c + 1  ^1,w + 2 ^2 | > |b (c ) - 3 b c + ^1,w/o |,
   2. |2 (1 - ) b c +   ^1,w - 2 b c +    ^2 | > |2 (1 - ) b c +    ^1,w/o - b2 |,
   3. |1 (1 - ) v1 1 (v ) b (v ) - 1 v2 2 (v ) b (v ) | is large.

The first condition relates to differences in behavior that arise from integration
spoiling the corporate culture; the second relates to differences in behavior
between the two teams if team 2 is integrated, compared to its input being
purchased under contract; the third relates to differences in behavior arising
from disparate personal cultures between members of the two teams. Large
personal differences hurts the case for integration. Satisfaction of any of the
three conditions makes integration more likely to be suboptimal.
A.4     Proposition 3
Converting the firm boundary problem in (15) into an constrained, linear binary
programming problem consists of five steps.
   In the first step, start with a weighted team network that assumes all
teams are inside the firm, and hence, all behaviors are characterized by bi for
i = 1, . . . , t. Denote this network Gt = (V, E, w) . The vertex set V , edge set


                                          4
E , and weight function w are

              V (Gt ) = {1, . . . , t} ,
              E (Gt ) = {eij }i,j V (Gt ) ,
                          
                                          2
                          ii ii (bi - bc ) ,  (i, j = i)  V (Gt )
                          
              w (eij ) =                  2
                         ij ij (bi - bc ) ,  (i, j = i)  V (Gt )

with ii and ij are constants that are defined in the text.
    In the second step, create an isomorphism of Gt , denoted Gt , which assumes
all teams are outside the firm. Doing so consists of establishing two bijections
 : V (Gt )  V Gt and  : E (Gt )  E Gt that preserves adjacency.
Mathematically, for every edge eij in Gt , the functions must satisfy  (eij ) =
 (i)  (j ). Let this pair of mappings (, ) be

          i  i, i  V (Gt )                      eij  eij ,  (i, j )  V (Gt ) .

Next, establish the weighting function w that reflects team behaviors being
outside the firm. This weighting function is defined as
                        
                                              2
                        ii ii     bi - bc         ,    i, j = i  V Gt
                        
             w eij =                          2
                        ij ij
                                   bi - bc        ,  i, j = i  V Gt .

    In the third step, construct an edge set that joins vertices between the
networks in a way that replicates their structure. Together with this step,
establish a weighting function that assigns appropriate weights to the elements
of the edge set. Let the edge set be denoted Et+ and the weighting function be
denoted w+ . The edge set is defined as

                      Et+ = eij | i  V (Gt ) , j  V Gt

and the elements of Et+ satisfy the relation

                        eij  E (Gt ) , j = i  eij  Et+

The weighting function w+ is
                                                           2
                           w+ eij = ij ij bi - bj              .

   In the fourth step, create a weighted supergraph of the team network,
denoted Gt = (Vt , Et , w ), by taking the union Gt = Gt  Gt  Et+ . Let the

                                              5
                        Table 1: Incidence Matrix for Supergraph

          e11   ...   eij   ...   ett   e1j   ...       eij   ...   etj   ...   e11   ...   eij   ...   ett
 1        ···   ···
 .
 .         .
           .    ...
 .         .
 t
 1
 .
 .
 .
 t

Notes : The incidence matrix M for the supergraph G . The columns are the edges of the
supergraph, whereas the rows are the vertices. Each element is the weight of the edge if and
only if that edge is incident with the vertex; otherwise, the element is zero.


weighting function of this supergraph w be defined to take values w (eij ) for
edges eij  E (Gt ), values w eij for edges eij  E Gt , and values w+ eij
for edges eij  Et+ .
    Let the incidence matrix of Gt be denoted M . Arrange the incidence matrix
so that columns begin with the edges in E (Gt ), continue with the edges in Et+ ,
and end with the edges in E Gt . Let the rows of the incidence matrix begin
with the vertices of E (Gt ) and continue with the vertices in E Gt . Visually,
the matrix is depicted in Table 1. Each element in the incident matrix is the
weight of the edge (either w, w, or w+ ) if and only if that edge is incident with
the vertex; otherwise the element is zero.
   In the fifth step, create a binary choice vector z that selects edges in the
supergraph. The dimension of z equals the number of edges in the supergraph.
A value of one in the vector indicates the edge is selected, whereas zero indicates
otherwise. 13
   Let the elements of z be ordered in the same way as the columns of M .
Hence, z = zij . . . zij . . . zij . To determine the dimension of z , let
     13
     The unconstrained problem in equation (15) had values of the choice vector restricted
to -1 and 1. The transformed problem is simpler to present, on the other hand, when the
choice vector is instead restricted to 0 and 1. Let zi  {-1, 1} be the choice variable in
equation (15). A straightforward conversion to the set {0, 1} is
                                                 1
                                          zi =     (1 + zi ) .
                                                 2




                                                    6
Gt have m edges. The isomorphism Gt also has m edges. The edge set Et+
doubles the number of links in Gt , which counts the total edges less the loops.
Therefore, the number of edges in Et+ is 2 (m - t) . The number of edges in the
supergraph is thus m + m + 2 (m - t) = 4m - 2t, which makes the dimension
of z be (4m - 2t) × 1.
    Using what we have established thus far, the firm boundary problem can
be expressed as
                                 min 1 M z,
                                     z
where 1 is a 1 × 2t vector of ones, M is the 2t × (4m - 2t) incidence matrix,
and z is the (4m - 2t) × 1 choice vector that selects edges from the supergraph.
    The nature of the problem, however, requires that some constraints on z be
applied. In the sixth and final step, we establish these constraints. The first set
of constraints requires that either the loop with ends at vertex i or the loop
with ends at vertex i be selected, but not both. This constraint is
                             zii + zii = 1, i  V .                            (36)
Because this relation must hold for every team in the network, there are t
of these constraints. Adding these t constraints shows that exactly t loops of
the supergraph are selected, which implies that every team is either inside or
outside the firm.
    The second and third sets of constraints are conditional on either loop
eii or loop eii being selected. Denote the set of links in the supergraph that
have one end incident with vertex i as Di . Similarly, denote the set of links
in the supergraph that have one end incident with vertex i as Di . Note that
Di  Di = .
    If loop eii is chosen, no links eji , eji  Di can be selected. The way to
express this set of conditional constraints is
                  zji + zji + zii = 1, i  V ,  eji , eji  Di .                (37)
Inferring from the constraints in (36), one can see that if team i's loop is not
chosen (zii = 0), links incident to team i must be chosen. Adding the number
of equations in (37) across all i delivers i d (i) - 2t = 2 (m - t) constraints.
To arrive at this number, we have used (1) the relation that the sum of the
degrees i d (i) across all vertices in a graph is twice the number of edges,
and (2) the observation that the constraints do not apply to the loops of the
supergraph, which explains subtracting 2t.
    If loop eii is chosen, no links eij , eij  Di can be selected. The way to
express this set of conditional constraints is
                  zij + zij + zii = 1, i  V ,  eij , eij  Di .                (38)

                                         7
Note that if team i's loop is not chosen (zii = 0), links incident to team i must be
chosen. Like before, there are 2 (m - t) of these constraints. Adding the number
of these constraints to the number in (37) and (38) gives t + 2 × 2 (m - t) =
4m - 3t constraints in total. The number of constraints is less than the number
of unknowns (i.e., the dimension of z )
    Combining steps one through six delivers the linear binary program

             minimize 1 M z
                  z
            subject to zii + zii = 1, i  V
                         zji + zji + zii = 1, i  V ,  eji , eji  Di
                         zij + zij + zii = 1, i  V ,  eij , eij  Di .

A.5     Proposition 4
Log output of firm c alone is

                                      ^c -
                                 yc = y              ij ij ij .                            (39)
                                                ij

Log output of firm c and firm x combined is
                              
              ^c+x -
       yc+x = y              yijij - xx xx (bx - bc )2 - 2             xk xk (bx - bk )2
                        ij                                        kK
                                        2
            -2        xk xk bk - bx         .                                              (40)
                 kK

Subtracting Eq. (39) from Eq. (40) and comparing the difference to zero delivers
the Ineq. (20) in the proposition.
A.6     Proposition 5
The corporate culture aggregates every employee's interpretation of the CEO's
culture. Modeling corporate cultural change thus begins at that level. Let
employee v 's interpretation of CEO k 's culture be denoted vk . The employee
interprets CEO k 's culture from her interpretation of the previous CEO's
culture, denoted vk-1 instead of her personal culture v . Applying v 's concluding
interpretation from Eq. (5) to CEO k gives

                 vk = ck + vk-1 ,ck + vk-1 (uk-1 ,ck ) + vk-1 ,uk-1 ,                      (41)




                                                8
where the terms
                            1
          vk-1 ,ck =                 1 - vk-1 ,ck vk-1 - ck ,                 (42)
                         1 + d (v )
                            1
    vk-1 (uk-1 ,ck )   =                v ,u       1 - uk-1 ,ck uk-1 - ck ,   (43)
                         1 + d (v ) uDv k-1 k-1
                            1
        vk-1 ,uk-1     =                 1 - vk-1 ,uk-1 vk-1 - ck .           (44)
                         1 + d (v ) uDv

Note that v 's neighbor u  Dv also infers CEO k 's culture through the lens of
the previous CEO.
    Equation (41) defines a recursive process of employee interpretations of
CEO cultures. Repeated substitution reveals that the sequence of corporate
cultures is expressible as in Eq. (22). To save on notation, define the following
objects:
                                 1
                     v,k-1                1 - vk-1 ,ck ,                      (45)
                              1 + d (v )
                                 1
                   v,k-1                     v ,u        1 - uk-1 ,ck ,       (46)
                              1 + d (v ) uDv k-1 k-1
                                 1
                     v,k-1                    1 - vk-1 ,uk-1 .                (47)
                              1 + d (v ) uDv

    Equations (45)-(47) define linear operators. The first subscripts of the
operators indicate the employee (v or u or r, etc.), whereas the second subscripts
indicate the perspective from which the employee infers the meaning of a CEO's
expressions about the desired corporate culture. For CEO k , that perspective is
vk-1 for employee v and uk-1 for employee u. For CEO k = 1, the perspective
is vk-2 for employee v . The operators thus shift across employees and across
CEOs. When applied to a constant, the operators map to a constant; otherwise,
they map to a summation. The operators can also be applied an arbitrary
number of times. For example, consider the application of two operators to a
constant h. It maps to

                         v,k-1 (u,k-2 (h)) = h × (v,k-1 u,k-2 ) .

Finally, provided that no communication is perfectly successful (i.e.,   (0, 1)
for all ), then v,k-1 (1) , v,k-1 (1) , v,k-1 (1)  (0, 1) .
    With these operators defined, substitute Eqs. (42)-(44) into the recursive



                                             9
process in Eq. (41) to get

             vk = ck + (v,k-1 + v,k-1 + v,k-1 ) ck-1 - ck
                 + v,k-1 vk-2 ,ck-1 + vk-2 (uk-2 ,ck-1 ) + vk-2 ,uk-2
                 + v,k-1 uk-2 ,ck-1 + uk-2 (rk-2 ,ck-1 ) + uk-2 ,rk-2
                 + v,k-1 vk-2 ,ck-1 + vk-2 (uk-2 ,ck-1 ) + vk-2 ,uk-2 ,       (48)

where the  -terms are shifted versions of those in Eqs. (42)-(44) and r  Du is
a someone that person u talks to. Define the coefficient in front of ck-1 - ck
in Eq. (48) as k-1 .
    The  -terms in Eq. (48) are functions of employee v 's, u's and r's infer-
ences of CEO k - 1's expressions, denoted vk-1 , uk-1 , and rk-1 , respectively.
Substituting these objects into (48) expands the recursion:

            vk = ck
                + (v,k-1 + v,k-1 + v,k-1 ) ck-1 - ck
                + v,k-1 (v,k-2 + v,k-2 + v,k-2 ) ck-2 - ck-1
                + v,k-1 (u,k-2 + u,k-2 + u,k-2 ) ck-2 - ck-1
                + v,k-1 (v,k-2 + v,k-2 + v,k-2 ) ck-2 - ck-1
                +  -terms                                                     (49)

    Equation (49) reveals a pattern to the recursion. The coefficients that load
on the differences in successive CEO cultures follow the branches of a weighted
trinomial tree. The root of the tree has weight one, which is the coefficient on
CEO k 's desired corporate culture. From the root, the tree springs three vertex
branches, each one having weight v,k-1 ,v,k-1 , and v,k-1 , respectively. The
sum of these three weights is the coefficient on the difference in cultures between
CEO k and k - 1; i.e., ck-1 - ck . From each of those (parent) branches springs
another three (child) branches, with each one having one of the coefficients
from Eq. (49) that loads on ck-2 - ck-1 . For example, from the parent
branch with weight v,k-1 springs one child branch with weight v,k-1 v,k-2 ,
a second with weight v,k-1 v,k-2 , and a third with weight v,k-1 v,k-2 .
    The branching continues until the culture of the initial CEO c0 is reached
at the leaves of the tree. Each child branch in the tree has either weight x,i ,
y,i , or z,i multiplied by the weight of its parent branch, where x, y, z is
someone in the firm, and i is the CEO that immediately preceded the CEO

                                         10
associated with the child's parent branch. The values t for t = 1, . . . , k - 1 in
the proposition are the sums of the weights on all branches at each generation
t of the tree. Because the tree expands at a trinomial rate, each generation as
3t branches.
     The weights of the trinomial tree also enter the  -terms in Eq. (49). These
weights reflect employee v 's, u's, r's, and q 's inferences of both CEO k - 1
and k - 2's utterances, where q  Dr is someone that employee r talks to.
Expanding the recursion until the initial CEO, the  -terms reflect employee
v 's inference of all previous CEO's implicatures, and the implicatures of all
the people that person v talks to, and the implicatures of all the people that
those people talk to, and so on, through the initial CEO. At the end, they
resemble the  -terms in Eq. (5), except multiplied by the sum of the weights
at the leaves of the trinomial tree. (Specifically, employee v 's final  -terms are
(v - c0 ) multiplied by the sum of the weights)
     The corporate culture is a weighted average across all employees of the
fully expanded version of Eq. (49). That average generates Eq. (22) in the
proposition. We label the history of employee interpretations in the equation
as k0 , and it stands for all employees' implicature interpretations across
all previous CEOs. The weights of each generation of branches shrinks over
time, but the number of terms increases. Hence, the impact that previous
CEOs have on the current corporate culture (and the t terms) might decay
over time, or might not. Nonetheless, if each person's interpretation of the
current CEO's culture closely matches the CEO's intended meaning (i.e.,
v,k-1 (1)  v,k-1 (1)  v,k-1 (1)  0), then t  0 for all t. The influence of
previous CEO cultures would vanish.




                                        11
