                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          TO POOL OR NOT TO POOL? SECURITY DESIGN IN OTC MARKETS

                                      Vincent Glode
                                     Christian C. Opp
                                     Ruslan Sverchkov

                                     Working Paper 27361
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27361


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2020




The authors thank Jason Donaldson, Thomas Eisenbach, Barney Hartman-Glaser, Rich
Kihlstrom, Chester Spatt, Basil Williams, Marius Zoican, Pavel Zryumov, and audiences at the
Bank of England, BI-Oslo, EIEF, Illinois, INSEAD, Norwegian School of Economics (NHH),
Rochester, UT-Dallas, Wharton, the Financial Intermediation Research Society conference, the
Northern Finance Association meetings, the Oxford Financial Intermediation Theory conference,
the Society of Financial Studies cavalcade, and the Western Finance Association meetings for
their helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Vincent Glode, Christian C. Opp, and Ruslan Sverchkov. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
To Pool or Not to Pool? Security Design in OTC Markets
Vincent Glode, Christian C. Opp, and Ruslan Sverchkov
NBER Working Paper No. 27361
June 2020
JEL No. D82,G32,L14

                                          ABSTRACT

We study security issuers' decision whether to pool assets when facing counterparties endowed
with market power, as is common in over-the-counter markets. Unlike in competitive markets,
pooling assets may be suboptimal in the presence of market power - both privately and socially -
in particular, when the potential gains from trade are large. In these cases, pooling assets reduces
the elasticity of trade volume in the relevant part of the payoff distribution, exacerbating
inefficient rationing associated with the exercise of market power. Our results shed light on
recently observed time-variation in the prevalence of pooling in financial markets.


Vincent Glode                                    Ruslan Sverchkov
University of Pennsylvania                       University of Pennsylvania
Wharton School                                   Wharton School
3620 Locust Walk                                 3620 Locust Walk
Phildelaphia, PA 19104                           Philadelphia, PA 19104
USA                                              USA
vglode@wharton.upenn.edu                         ruslans@wharton.upenn.edu

Christian C. Opp
Simon Business School
University of Rochester
3-110N Carol Simon Hall
Rochester, NY 14627
and NBER
opp@rochester.edu
1        Introduction

Structured products are typically originated in over-the-counter (OTC) markets, where
asymmetric information and market power have been shown to be prevalent frictions.1
In these markets, issuers may face prices that are not fully competitive, especially when
only few financial institutions are well-positioned to acquire new securities. For example,
as most institutions are subject to similar regulatory constraints, holding costs can increase
simultaneously for many market participants, leaving only few institutions well positioned
to provide liquidity.
        Motivated by these observations, we study the security design problem of a privately
informed issuer who possesses multiple assets and faces liquidity suppliers, or buyers, that
are potentially endowed with market power. Our analysis reveals how the allocation of
market power has relevant and robust implications for security design that contrast with the
takeaways from models considering only competitive environments. To isolate the effect
of market power, we consider both competitive and non-competitive markets.
        When buyers act competitively, our results echo the findings of the existing literature
(e.g., DeMarzo 2005) -- pooling all assets into one security is optimal for the issuer. As
diversification reduces an issuer's informational advantage, pooling assets helps alleviate
adverse selection problems, which is in the interest of the issuer when prices are set com-
petitively, since in this case, the issuer fully internalizes the benefits of improving the effi-
ciency of trade.
        In contrast, when an issuer receives non-competitive offers for his securities, pool-
ing assets still has the advantage of reducing adverse selection concerns, but it now also
    1
    For evidence that OTC trading often involves heterogeneously informed traders, see Green, Hollifield,
and Sch¨urhoff (2007), Jiang and Sun (2015), and Hollifield, Neklyudov, and Spatt (2017). For evidence that
OTC trading tends to be concentrated among a small set of players, see Cetorelli et al. (2007), Atkeson,
Eisfeldt, and Weill (2014), Begenau, Piazzesi, and Schneider (2015), Di Maggio, Kermani, and Song (2017),
Hendershott et al. (2017), Li and Sch¨
                                     urhoff (2019), and Siriwardane (2019).



                                                    1
comes at a cost, namely, a potential reduction in the issuer's information rents. Counter
to conventional wisdom, a privately informed issuer may prefer not to pool assets in this
case, especially when the potential gains from trade are large relative to the information
asymmetry between the issuer and prospective buyers. In fact, any pooling decision that
achieves perfect diversification is never optimal for an issuer facing market power on the
demand side. We provide explicit, sufficient conditions under which the issuer's best op-
tion is to simply sell all assets separately. Under these conditions, separate sales are not
only privately optimal but also achieve the first-best level of total trade surplus. In contrast,
when assets are pooled, both the issuer's private surplus and the total surplus from trade
are strictly lower, as diversification invites strategic buyers with market power to choose
pricing strategies that lead to inefficient rationing. As pooling affects the shape of the
distributions characterizing information asymmetries between issuers and buyers, it alters
how elastically trade volume responds to prices, which is crucial in settings with market
power. In particular, pooling would typically worsen inefficient rationing when selling as-
sets separately leads to little or no exclusion of buyer types. Diversification causes payoff
distributions to have thinner tails, which, in turn, leads to less elastic trade volume in the
right tail of the distribution and greater rationing in equilibrium.
       Our results highlight how, in recent years, liquidity shortages among major institu-
tions actively trading in OTC markets might have been an important driver of the dramatic
declines in asset-backed security (ABS) issuances, which occurred concurrently with an
increase in the volume of assets sold separately.2 Our analysis shows that, when liquidity
becomes scarce and concentrated among few market participants, the benefits of pooling
assets highlighted in the literature can be outweighed by an associated increase in the sever-
   2
     In 2015, issuance volume of ABS in the U.S. was 60% lower than it was in 2006, while the issuance
volume of CDO was 80% lower. In contrast, the total issuance volume in fixed income markets was 3%
higher in 2015 than in 2006. For more data, see the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association:
http://www.sifma.org/research/statistics.aspx.



                                                    2
ity of market power problems. In periods of scarce liquidity, the benefits from unloading
the assets are typically large for the issuer, but the few traders with excess liquidity gain
market power. These two conditions, when combined, increase the relative benefits of the
separate sale of assets versus the issuance of pooled securities. In that sense, it is during
time periods when trade is most valuable but potentially impeded by the presence of market
power that our new insights become most relevant. Relatedly, our paper sheds light on the
consequences of regulating the liquidity of financial institutions that are often on the buy
side of the structured securities market.
       Early contributions by Subrahmanyam (1991), Boot and Thakor (1993), and Gorton
and Pennacchi (1993) have emphasized the diversification benefits of pooling assets when
securities are sold in competitive/centralized markets that are subject to asymmetric infor-
mation problems. Our paper focuses on the impact of market power on the decision to
pool assets and derives novel insights that shed light on the securities issued in decentral-
ized markets. The two papers closest to ours are DeMarzo (2005) and Biais and Mariotti
(2005). Specifically, our focus on the decision to pool assets relates our analysis to De-
Marzo (2005) who builds on the signaling-through-retention framework with price-taking
buyers of DeMarzo and Duffie (1999) and shows that the pooling of assets dampens an
issuer's ability to signal individual assets' quality through retention. However, when the
number of assets is large and the issuer can sell debt on the pool of assets, this "infor-
mation destruction effect" is dominated by the above-mentioned benefits of diversifying
the risks associated with the issuer's private information about each asset's value. Issuing
debt on a large pool of assets reduces residual risks and the information sensitivity of the
security being issued.3 In contrast to DeMarzo (2005) whose setup can be thought of as
a centralized market where (price-taking) buyers compete for assets, we consider the case
   3
     See also Hartman-Glaser, Piskorski, and Tchistyi (2012) who model a moral hazard problem between
a principal and a mortgage issuer and show that the optimal contract features pooling of mortgages with
independent defaults, as it facilitates effort monitoring.


                                                  3
of an issuer who faces buyers endowed with market power, capturing a realistic feature of
many over-the-counter markets.
       Our focus on the role of market power in an issuer's security design decision relates
our analysis to Biais and Mariotti (2005) who analyze a model where the security design
stage is followed by a stage where either the issuer or the prospective buyer chooses a
trading mechanism (i.e., a price-quantity menu) for selling the designed security. When
the buyer can choose the trading mechanism, he effectively screens the issuer, trading off
higher volume with lower issuer participation. In contrast, when the issuer can choose the
mechanism, the setup becomes equivalent to one with multiple competitive buyers. Biais
and Mariotti (2005) show that issuing debt on a risky asset is optimal in both cases, since
the debt contract's low information sensitivity helps avoid market exclusion.4 However,
unlike our paper, Biais and Mariotti (2005) only consider the case of an issuer wishing to
sell one asset.
       Axelson (2007) studies an uninformed issuer's decision to design securities that are
(centrally) traded in a uniform-price auction with privately informed buyers. Axelson
(2007) finds that pooling assets and issuing debt on these assets is always optimal when
the number of assets is large, otherwise selling assets separately might be optimal if the
signal distribution is discrete and competition is high enough. Since the issuer is unin-
formed and buyers compete for assets through an auction, Axelson's (2007) analysis is
silent about how security design can be used to prevent being monopolistically screened by
liquidity providers, which is a key result of our analysis.5
   4
      Gorton and Pennacchi (1990), Dang, Gorton, and Holmstrom (2015), Farhi and Tirole (2015), and Yang
(2019) also study the optimal information sensitivity of securities issued in markets with asymmetric infor-
mation, These papers highlight the benefits of designing securities that split cash-flows into an information-
sensitive part and a risk-less part. These papers are, however, silent about how pooling imperfectly correlated
assets affects the issuer's ability to extract surplus when facing buyers with market power, which is the focus
of our paper.
    5
      See also DeMarzo, Kremer, and Skrzypacz (2005) and Inderst and Mueller (2006) who study optimal
security design problems with informed buyers and only one asset.



                                                      4
    Palfrey (1983) analyzes a firm's decision to bundle products (or assets) sold in a second-
price auction. In his model, customers have private information about their heterogenous
valuations for the products. Selling the products separately is optimal when the sum of
the expected second-highest valuation for each product is higher than the expected second-
highest valuation for the bundle of all products. This comparison depends on the number
of prospective customers and the distribution of their product-specific valuations. Unlike
Palfrey (1983), our analysis examines how the degree of competition among buyers with
identical valuations affect pooling decisions. The cross-buyer heterogeneity in valuations
that is central for Palfrey's (1983) results does not play a role for our findings.
    In the next section, we describe our model and provide an illustrative example in which
the issuer sells a pool of a continuum of assets. This example highlights that the presence of
market power on the demand side greatly affects the issuer's benefits from pooling assets.
Section 3 presents our main analysis of both a competitive market and one with market
power. Section 4 discusses the robustness of our results to various alternative specifications
of the environment. The last section concludes.



2    The Environment

Suppose an issuer has n  2 fundamental assets to sell. These assets are indexed by i
and the set of all assets is denoted by   {1, ..., n}. Each asset i produces a random
payoff Xi at the end of the period. The assets' payoffs Xi are assumed to be identically and
independently distributed according to the cumulative distribution function (CDF) G(·)
with a probability density function (PDF) g (·) that is positive everywhere on its domain
  [0, x
      ¯].

Market participants and their liquidity needs. As is common in the security design litera-



                                               5
ture, agents are risk neutral but can differ in their liquidity (or hedging) needs, which are
captured by their discount factors. In the analysis that follows, we will study and compare
two (polar) market scenarios to highlight the importance of market power in the decision
whether to pool assets.
       In the first scenario, we assume that several deep-pocketed traders are better equipped
to hold claims to future cash-flows than the issuer is (who needs liquidity today). Whereas
the issuer applies a discount factor   (0, 1) to future cash-flows, these prospective buyers
apply a discount factor of 1. Thus, the ex ante private value of each fundamental asset
is  E(Xi ) for the issuer and E(Xi ) for any of these buyers. As a result, there are gains
from transferring the issuer's assets to such a buyer in exchange for cash. Since there are
multiple buyers who value assets more than the issuer in this scenario, these buyers make
competitive bids for the securities offered by the issuer.
       In the second scenario, we assume that only one buyer is better equipped to hold claims
to future cash-flows than the issuer is; that is, only one buyer has a discount factor of one.
In this case, the one buyer with a superior liquidity position has market power; he is the
only one bidding for the issuer's securities.6 This scenario captures the idea that in some
time periods, most potential counterparties in the market face similar regulatory constraints
or liquidity needs as the issuer, potentially leading to concentration on the demand side. For
both scenarios, we will occasionally refer to the prospective buyers with a discount factor
of 1 as "liquidity suppliers" (in line with the literature; see, e.g., Biais and Mariotti 2005).

Timing and information structure. Our specification of the timeline follows the existing
literature (see, e.g., DeMarzo and Duffie 1999, Biais and Mariotti 2005). First, the issuer
designs the securities he plans to sell. Second, the issuer becomes informed about the
realizations of each asset payoff Xi . Third, the buyer(s) make(s) take-it-or-leave-it offers
   6
     Going forward, we will refer to this scenario as monopolistic demand or monopolistic liquidity supply.
In this context, the buyer can also be referred to as a monopsonist.


                                                    6
to the issuer. Fourth, the issuer decides whether or not to accept any of these offer(s) in
exchange for the securities; if multiple buyers offer an identical price that is accepted by
the issuer, the security is randomly allocated among the highest bidders. Finally, all payoffs
are realized.
   Assuming that the issuer does not have private information at the initial security design
stage increases the tractability of the analysis and shares similarities with the shelf registra-
tion process commonly used in practice (as also argued by DeMarzo and Duffie 1999, Biais
and Mariotti 2005). In that process, issuers first specify and register with the Securities and
Exchange Commision the securities they intend to issue. Then, potentially after several
months, issuers bring these securities to the market. In the meantime, the issuer has typ-
ically obtained additional private information about future cash-flows. In Section 4, we
discuss the robustness of our main insights to changes in this timeline that would introduce
signaling concerns at the security design stage.

An illustrative example. Before proceeding with our main analysis, we present a simple,
yet generic example that illustrates how the issuer's benefits from pooling assets crucially
depend on the allocation of market power. Suppose the issuer owns a continuum of assets
of measure one with i.i.d. payoffs Xi with finite mean and variance. The issuer considers
selling the pool of these assets to the prospective buyer(s).
   First, we analyze the market scenario in which multiple prospective buyers have abun-
dant liquidity (that is, they have a discount factor equal to one). In this case, they effec-
                         ` la Bertrand and offer a price that is equal to the expected security
tively compete in quotes a
payoff conditional on the issuer accepting the offer. When the issuer offers the assets as
one pool, the law of large numbers applies, that is, perfect diversification implies that the
                    1
pool's payoff is   0
                        xi di = E[Xi ] almost surely. As a result, adverse selection concerns are
completely eliminated, and the competitive buyers offer a price p
                                                                ^ = E[Xi ] for this pool.


                                                 7
The maximum total surplus from trade, E[Xi ] · (1 -  ), is attained and the issuer fully
internalizes this surplus. That is, the issuer achieves the optimal expected payoff. The fact
that pooling the continuum of assets eliminates information asymmetries is unambiguously
beneficial when facing competitive buyers, as the issuer then fully internalizes the resultant
improvements in trade efficiency (see also Theorem 5 in DeMarzo 2005).
   In contrast, consider the market scenario in which only one prospective buyer has liq-
uidity to purchase the issuer's assets (i.e., only one buyer has a discount factor of one).
Acting as a de-facto monopolist, this buyer can choose the price that maximizes his ex-
pected payoff. In this case, this optimally chosen price is the issuer's reservation price for
the pool of assets, that is, p = E[Xi ] . As in the scenario with multiple prospective buy-
ers, pooling the continuum of assets yields perfect diversification and eliminates adverse
selection concerns. Yet, now that the demand side has market power, fully eliminating
these information asymmetries has no upside for the issuer. Facing no informational dis-
advantage, the monopolistic liquidity supplier then charges a price that leaves the issuer
indifferent between trading the security and not trading at all.
   This generic result for asset pools that achieve perfect diversification strikingly high-
lights the relevance of market power for the optimality of pooling assets from the per-
spective of the issuer. In the presence of such market power, the issuer's only source of
surplus are information rents, which require retaining some private information. Thus,
any pooling that leads to perfect diversification (as was the case in this example) is never
optimal for an issuer when facing a prospective buyer with market power. Instead, the
issuer prefers to retain some private information, which requires deviating from the pool-
ing of all assets. Being at an informational disadvantage, buyers with market power then
strategically choose prices that can jeopardize the realization of gains from trade. When
deciding whether to pool assets, the issuer therefore faces an intuitive trade-off: he can
only extract rents when retaining some private information, but he still partially internal-

                                              8
izes the inefficiencies emerging from adverse selection and the exercise of market power
under asymmetric information. As a result, he may only choose to pool a subset of assets
in order to achieve partial diversification (but not perfect diversification). Understanding
these channels and how they affect the design of optimal securities is the focus of our main
analysis below.



3    Main Analysis

We now formalize our paper's main insights. The issuer decides on the pooling of the n
underlying assets and on the securities that are written on each of the pools. Formally, the
issuer chooses a partition of the set , that is, he groups the n assets into m  n disjoint
subsets denoted by j with j  {1, ..., m}. The corresponding m pools of assets then have
the payoffs:


                                      Yj            Xi , j.                                (1)
                                              ij

    The CDF Gj of Yj and the associated density gj are then defined on the compact interval
j  [0, y           ¯j 
       ¯j ], where y           ij   x
                                    ¯. Going forward, we follow the convention of using
capitalized letters for random variables and lower-case letters for their realizations. In line
with the existing literature (e.g., Myerson 1981), we assume that these distributions satisfy
a regularity condition that ensures that first-order conditions in the trading game with a
monopolistic buyer are sufficient conditions for the optimal pricing decisions.


Assumption 1. For any partition of , the elasticity functions:

                                              gj (y )
                                   ej (y )            · y, j                               (2)
                                              Gj (y )


                                                9
are weakly decreasing on their respective support j .


   Throughout our main analysis below, we will discuss examples with distributions sat-
isfying Assumption 1 (see also the Appendix for additional illustrations). When inter-
preting elasticity functions, it is helpful to note that they represent the ratio of the local
density gj (yj ) to the average density Gj (yj )/yj . These quantities will play an important
role in determining a monopolistic buyer's optimal pricing strategy. We also denote by
          g (xi )
e(xi )    G(xi )
                    · xi the elasticity function of each fundamental asset i.

   The issuer chooses for each pooled payoff Yj a security that is backed by that payoff.
Specifically, the security payoff Fj is contingent on the realized cash-flow Yj according to
the function j : j  R+ such that Fj = j (Yj ). We impose the standard limited liability
condition:

(LL) 0  j  Idj ,

where Idj is the identity function on j . In addition, as in Harris and Raviv (1989),
Nachman and Noe (1994), and Biais and Mariotti (2005), we restrict the set of admissible
securities by requiring that both the payoffs to the liquidity supplier and to the issuer be
non-decreasing in the underlying cash-flow:


(M1) j is non-decreasing on j .

(M2) Idj - j is non-decreasing on j .


The sets of admissible payoff functions for the securities is therefore given by {j : j 
R+ | (LL), (M1), and (M2) hold}.




                                                   10
3.1       Competitive Demand

In this subsection, we analyze the (benchmark) scenario in which the issuer faces multiple
liquidity suppliers that have a discount factor of one. In this case, the issuer receives com-
petitive ultimatum price quotes, a feature that is common in the literature (see, e.g., Boot
and Thakor 1993, Nachman and Noe 1994, Friewald, Hennessy, and Jankowitsch 2015)
and delivers results that are consistent with DeMarzo's (2005) seminal analysis of pooling
decisions in a competitive environment.7


3.1.1      Optimality of Pooling Assets

Echoing the existing literature, our analysis of this scenario predicts that issuing debt on
the pool of all assets is optimal for the issuer.


Proposition 1. If E[Xi ]   x
                           ¯, the issuer is indifferent between selling assets separately
and selling them as a pool. If E[Xi ] <  x
                                         ¯, the issuer optimally pools all n assets and issues
a debt security on this pool.


       To provide intuition for this result we will discuss the proof of Proposition 1 in the main
text. At the trading stage, the issuer has perfect knowledge of the realizations xi of future
cash-flows Xi . Since the payoff of any security Fj is only contingent on Yj =                      j   Xi ,
the issuer also perfectly knows the realization fj = j (yj ) of Fj . Suppose the issuer uses
a simple equity security (what DeMarzo and Duffie (1999) refer to as a "passthrough"
security). If E[Xi ]   x
                       ¯, he can sell the assets separately (as equity), each at price p =
E[Xi ], since at this price, even the highest issuer type x
                                                          ¯ finds it optimal to trade. The issuer
obtains the same total payoff when pooling the assets and selling an equity security on the
   7
     DeMarzo (2005) considers a setting in which the issuer can post price-quantity menus. In contrast, we
follow Biais and Mariotti's (2005) representation of the competitive market environment. See Section 4 for a
discussion of how retention would affect our results.

                                                    11
pool. Since the potential gains from trade are large enough ( is sufficiently low), adverse
selection does not impede the efficiency of trade even when assets are sold separately. The
first-best level of total trade surplus is achieved, and the issuer fully internalizes this surplus.
    In contrast, if E[Xi ] <  x
                              ¯, the sale of an equity security on a single asset leads to
adverse selection, since the highest issuer type x
                                                 ¯ would not accept a price equal to E[Xi ].
Similarly, the sale of an equity security on a pool of n
                                                       ~ assets leads to the exclusion of
some issuer types, since the highest issuer type y
                                                 ¯j = n
                                                      ~x¯ would not accept a price equal
to E[Yj ] = n
            ~ E [Xi ]. In this case, it is useful to recall the following result from Biais and
Mariotti's (2005) analysis of a setting with one underlying asset:


Lemma 1. Given an underlying asset with random payoff Y and E[Y ] <  y
                                                                     ¯, the issuer
optimally designs a debt security with the highest face value d such that a buyer just breaks
even when purchasing this debt security at a price p = d.

Proof. See Proposition 4 in Biais and Mariotti (2005).


    Independent of his pooling choice that determines the underlying assets with payoffs Yj ,
the issuer optimally uses a debt security when E[Xi ] <  x
                                                         ¯ and equivalently, E[Yj ] <  y
                                                                                       ¯j .
To determine the issuer's optimal pooling decision, it is useful to first consider buyers'
expected net profits. A buyer purchasing debt with face value d at a price p = d obtains
the following expected net profit:

             d                                                                          d
                 ygj (y )dy + [1 - Gj (d)]d - d =(1 -  )d - Gj (d)d -                       ygj (y )dy   (3)
         0                                                                          0
                                                                   d
                                              =(1 -  )d -              Gj (y )dy,                        (4)
                                                               0



where the last step follows from integration by parts. Next, we compare buyers' expected
net-payoff from the sales of separate debt securities to that from the sale of a debt secu-

                                                12
rity on an underlying pool of assets. Consider first that the issuer sells n
                                                                           ~ individual debt
securities with face value d. Further, suppose that each debt security is written on a sepa-
rate underlying asset and the price in each transaction is d. Then buyers' total expected
net-profit (which may be negative)8 is:

                                         d                                         n
                                                                                   ~d
                                                                                            y
                ~ · (1 -  )d -
                n                            G(x)dx            nd -
                                                      = (1 -  )~                        G     dy,       (5)
                                     0                                         0            n
                                                                                            ~

where we used a change in variables, with y = n
                                              ~ x. In contrast, consider now that the issuer
pools the n
          ~ assets and issues one debt security with face value dj = n
                                                                     ~ d and buyers purchase
this debt at price dj . In this case, buyers' total expected net-profit (which again may be
negative) is:

                                                           n
                                                           ~d
                                    (1 -  )~
                                           nd -                 Gj (y )dy.                              (6)
                                                       0



The following lemma sheds light on the relative magnitude of the profits in (5) and (6).

                                                                       n
                                                                       ~
Lemma 2. The distribution of the pooled payoff Yj =                    i=1   Xi second-order stochastically
dominates the distribution of the payoff n
                                         ~ Xi , that is,

                                         s
                                                 y
                                             G     - Gj (y ) dy  0                                      (7)
                                    0            n
                                                 ~

for any s  [0, y
               ¯j ].

Proof. See Appendix.


       Lemma 2 implies that buyers' total expected net-profit is higher in the scenario with
pooling (i.e., (6) is greater than (5)). Next, recall that, according to Lemma (1), the optimal
   8
    At this point in the proof, the considered supposition does not impose that the buyers' participation
constraint is satisfied. That is, the expected net-profit can be negative.

                                                      13
face value in each scenario would be set such that buyers break even, that is, the optimal
face values would ensure that (5) and (6) are each equal to zero. The above result implies
that if buyers break even at a face value d on separate sales (first scenario), then they make
                                                                      ~ d (second scenario). It
positive profits on the pooled sale if the face value is set equal to n
follows that the issuer can choose a face value d   ~ d on the pool while still ensuring
                                                 j  n

that the buyers can break even (as buyers' expected net-profit is a continuous function of
dj ). Finally, observe that when issuing debt with break-even face values under each of the
                                                      ~ d and (1 -  )d
two scenarios, the issuer's total profits are (1 -  ) n               j , respectively, and

the issuer extracts the full gains from trade in the competitive market. Since d   ~ d , the
                                                                                j  n

issuer obtains a higher expected net-profit when pooling the n
                                                             ~ assets and issuing debt with
face value dj.

   In sum, the argument for the optimality of pooling in this setting is intuitive. With
competitive liquidity suppliers, the issuer extracts all the gains from trade and, thus, fully
internalizes any improvements in trade efficiency. As a result, when adverse selection con-
cerns impede trade, the issuer seeks to minimize the information asymmetry between him
and his prospective buyers by pooling assets. As pooling leads to diversification, it reduces
the information asymmetry and its associated inefficiencies. In other words, the issuer does
not face a trade-off when facing competitive buyers -- reducing information asymmetry is
always weakly beneficial. We will, however, show below that the unambiguous optimality
of pooling ceases to hold when the supply of liquidity becomes imperfectly competitive.


3.2    Monopolistic Demand

In this subsection, we derive our paper's main results by considering the scenario in which
the issuer faces an imperfectly competitive demand, a feature that is relevant for our under-
standing of OTC markets in practice. In this setting, only one buyer has a discount factor



                                              14
of one, which imparts him the advantage of being a monopolistic liquidity supplier.9
    We start by examining this buyer's optimal pricing decision. Biais and Mariotti (2005)
show that for a given security offered, the optimal mechanism for the liquidity supplier
with market power can be implemented via a take-it-or-leave-it offer (see also Riley and
Zeckhauser 1983). Specifically, the prospective buyer makes an ultimatum price offer pj to
maximize his ex-ante profit from purchasing a security with payoff Fj :

                                                                     pj /
               Pr(fj  pj )(E[fj |fj  pj ] - pj ) =                          (j (y ) - pj )gj (y )dy.          (8)
                                                                 0



The optimal price pm
                   j set by this buyer identifies a marginal issuer type that is just willing

to accept this price: fjm = pm
                             j / . Issuer types with security payoffs below the threshold

value fjm participate in the trade, whereas issuer types with payoffs above fjm are excluded
(i.e., they reject the offer).


3.2.1    Optimality of Separate Equity Sales

We now establish our first main result, which identifies a sufficient condition for the strict
optimality of selling assets separately. This result also provides the necessary and sufficient
condition under which selling assets separately yields the first-best level of trade surplus.


Proposition 2. Suppose that the following condition holds:

                                                                       ¯
                                 x) 
                               e(¯          ,        or equivalently   ,                                      (9)
                                         1-
    9
      While we consider the case in which only one buyer has a discount factor of one, similar outcomes
arise when there are multiple buyers with a discount factor of one, but these buyers face position limits (see
Section 4 for additional details). The central feature of our analysis is the presence of some degree of market
power, that is, a buyer can strategically affect the prices of the securities being offered. Biais, Martimort, and
Rochet (2000) show that this type of strategic pricing behavior also arises when multiple risk averse liquidity
suppliers compete in mechanisms (see also Vives 2011).




                                                       15
where ¯      e(¯
               x)
                    .   Then the following results obtain:
            1+e(¯x)


  (i) The issuer optimally sells each asset separately to a monopolistic buyer, that is,


                              j = {j } and j (Xj ) = Xj for j = 1, ..., n.                  (10)


      The first-best level of total surplus from trade, n(1 -  )E[Xi ], is achieved and the
      issuer collects n x                            x - E[Xi ]).
                        ¯, obtaining a surplus of n (¯

 (ii) If the issuer pools any of the assets, the total surplus from trade is strictly below the
      first-best level n(1 -  )E[Xi ], and the issuer's surplus is strictly below n (¯
                                                                                     x - E[Xi ]).


   Suppose, for example, that the payoffs of the fundamental assets follow a uniform dis-
tribution, Xi  U[0, 1], then Proposition 2 states that selling each asset separately is strictly
optimal for the issuer whenever   ¯ = 0.5. To provide intuition for the central results

provided in Proposition 2, we develop the proof here in the main text. First, consider part
(i) of the proposition. Suppose that the issuer sells an equity claim on a pool j , such that,
j (Yj ) = Yj . When designing the optimal security, the issuer anticipates the buyer's op-
timal pricing response. Using equation (8), we can write the buyer's marginal benefit of
increasing the threshold type fjm = yj
                                     m
                                       for fjm  [0, y
                                                    ¯j ) as:


                                   (1 -  )fjm gj (fjm ) - Gj (fjm ).                        (11)


This last equation highlights the generic trade-off that a buyer with market power faces
when choosing the price he plans to offer. When marginally increasing the threshold type
by increasing the price, the buyer benefits from extracting the full gains to trade (1 -  )fjm
from this type, which has the local density gj (fjm ). Yet, the associate price increase of mag-
nitude  also comes at the cost of paying more when trading with all infra-marginal types,

                                                  16
which have measure Gj (fjm ). In net, the buyer benefits from increasing the marginal buyer
type if expression (11) takes a strictly positive value (for any fjm < y
                                                                       ¯j ). This condition can
be equivalently expressed as a condition applying to the above-defined elasticity function:

                                                       
                                        ej (fjm ) >      .                                  (12)
                                                      1-

                                                                                              
Now suppose the issuer simply sells all assets separately. Then the condition e(¯
                                                                                x) >         1-

together with Assumption 1 ensures that the buyer's optimal price quote for each asset is
pi =  x
      ¯, allowing the issuer to collect n x
                                          ¯. In this case, the marginal issuer type is the
highest type on the support [0, x
                                ¯] and trade occurs with probability one, ensuring that the
first-best level of surplus from trade is achieved. The issuer cannot collect a total payment
greater than n x
               ¯ from the monopolistic buyer since the best possible payoff that all assets
can deliver jointly is nx
                        ¯, and a buyer with market power would never offer a price above
nx
 ¯, even if he believed that this maximum payoff on all assets was attained.
   To address part (ii) of the proposition, we show that the issuer's surplus and the total
surplus are strictly lower when assets are pooled. First, we introduce the following result:


Lemma 3. For any set j that contains more than one element (i.e., if there is pooling),
the following condition is satisfied:

                                                        
                                     ej (¯
                                         yj ) = 0 <       .                                 (13)
                                                       1-

Proof. See Appendix.


   This lemma states that if the issuer pools assets and issues an equity security on the
pool, the elasticity for this security at the upper bound of the support y
                                                                         ¯j is zero, implying the
exclusion of a positive measure of types. The elasticity is zero at the upper bound y
                                                                                    ¯j since

                                                17
the density for the outcome that two assets simultaneously achieve their highest possible
value x
      ¯ is zero. The intuitive reason for this result is diversification: the more diversified
pool of assets is less likely to generate an extreme outcome than each idiosyncratic asset
separately. Figure 1 illustrates this result for the case where each separate asset follows a
uniform distribution. The figure compares, after rescaling the domains (see caption details),
the shapes of the PDFs of a single asset, a pool of two assets, and a pool of four assets. The
graph illustrates the familiar notion that diversification leads to a more peaked distribution
with thinner tails.
                                           
                                              

                                                 
                                           
                                              
                                                  
                (  )




                                                                              
                                     
                                                                               
                                       
                                                                               
                                         
                                          
                         
                                           
                                                                  
                                           


Figure 1: Effect of pooling on the shape of the probability density function. The graph considers
a setting with four assets (n = 4), each of which has a payoff Xi  U[0, 1]. The graph plots the
PDF of a separate asset, a pool of 2 assets, and a pool of 4 assets. To compare the PDFs' shapes
relative to their respective domains ([0, 1], [0, 2], and [0, 4]), the graph rescales the horizontal axis
to represent the interval j = [0, y
                                  ¯j ] for each PDF gj .


    These changes in the shapes of the PDFs map into corresponding changes in the elas-
ticity functions ej (yj ), which govern the pricing behavior in the trading game (see equa-
tion (12)). Figure 2 confirms that as soon as two assets are pooled, the elasticity at the
upper bound of the support y
                           ¯j shrinks to zero. A thinner right tail of the PDF implies a
lower elasticity in the right tail of the distribution (recall that the elasticity is the ratio of the
local density gj (yj ) to the average density Gj (yj )/yj ). Facing a less elastic response from


                                                     18
the issuer in that part of the domain, a monopolistic buyer has stronger incentives to offer
                                                                    ~  2 assets are pooled
lower prices, which leads to the exclusion of high issuer types. If n
in a set j , then the buyer optimally chooses a marginal issuer type strictly below y
                                                                                    ¯j = n
                                                                                         ~x¯,
                           
since ej (¯
          yj ) = 0 <      1-
                             .   Correspondingly, the price offered by the buyer is strictly below
n
~x¯ for a pool of n
                  ~ assets, and the issuer obtains an expected payoff from pooling that is
strictly below  n
                ~x¯.




                              
                                      
                                         
                 (  )




                                                                               
                                               
                                                                                
                                  
                                    
                                                                                
                                     
                                         
                                            
                                       
                                           
                                            
                                            
                                               


Figure 2: Effect of pooling on the shape of the elasticity function. The graph considers a setting
with four assets (n = 4), each of which has a payoff Xi  U[0, 1]. The graph plots the elasticity
function of a separate asset, a pool of 2 assets, and a pool of 4 assets. To compare the elasticity
functions' shapes relative to their respective domains ([0, 1], [0, 2], and [0, 4]), the graph rescales the
horizontal axis to represent the interval j = [0, y
                                                  ¯j ] for each elasticity function ej .


    To conclude the proof of part (ii) of Proposition 2, we address whether the issuer, after
pooling assets, could still obtain an equally beneficial payoff as in the case of separate sales
by designing an optimal security Fj = j (Yj ) on the pooled payoff Yj . The following
lemma characterizes the optimal security on a given underlying asset Yj when an equity
security leads to rationing.


Lemma 4. When the trading of an equity security on a payoff Yj leads to the exclusion of
                         yj ) < /(1 -  )) but sustains trade with positive probability (i.e., if
issuer types (i.e., if e(¯
e(0) > /(1 -  )), the optimal security from the perspective of the issuer is a debt security

                                                    19
with face value dm                       m           m
                 j , i.e.,  = min[Idj , dj ], where dj is the largest d such that:


           d                                                                m
                                                                           fj
               fj gj (fj )dfj + [1 - Gj (d)]d - d -                             (fj - fjm )gj (fj )dfj  0,   (14)
       0                                                               0
                  Net-payoff from offering price d                                                 m < d.
                                                                   Net-payoff from offering price fj



and where fjm solves:

                                                                    
                                                     ej (fjm ) =      .                                      (15)
                                                                   1-

That is, the optimal debt contract specifies the highest face value such that the buyer weakly
prefers offering a price d for the debt that is always accepted by the issuer over offering a
lower price that is only accepted by issuer types below the threshold type fjm .

Proof. As each of the pooled payoffs Yj satisfy the regularity condition stated in Assump-
tion 1, these results follow from Propositions 3, 4, and 5 in Biais and Mariotti's (2005)
analysis of a setting with one underlying asset.


                        ~  2 assets in a set j leads to exclusion when an equity security
   Since any pooling of n
                   yj ) < /(1 -  )), Lemma 4 implies that the best possible security written
is offered (as ej (¯
on that pool is a debt security with face value dm               m
                                                 j . Yet, since dj < y
                                                                     ¯j = n
                                                                          ~x¯, selling this
debt security will also deliver a payoff to the issuer that is strictly below the one he obtains
from selling the n
                 ~ assets separately. Thus, the effects of diversification cannot be undone
by designing a security that pays as a function of the pooled (diversified) cash-flow Yj . This
concludes our proof of Proposition 2.
   In sum, when separate sales of assets are efficient, pooling assets leads to strictly worse
outcomes, both in terms of the issuer's surplus and the total trade surplus. This result
emerges as pooling generically leads to a payoff distribution with thinner tails, and equiva-
lently, a less elastic response to price quotes in the right tail of the payoff distribution (see

                                                             20
Figure 2). A less elastic response causes a liquidity supplier with market power to opti-
mally set prices that lead to inefficient rationing, harming both the issuer and total trade
efficiency. Thus, in contrast to the previously analyzed scenario with competitive liquidity
suppliers (see Proposition 1), pooling assets may hurt the issuer when the demand side has
market power.


3.2.2   Optimality of Separate Debt Sales

Proposition 2 provided the condition under which selling assets separately, as equity, is
optimal for the issuer and attains the first-best level of trade surplus. We will now show
that even when this condition is violated, it may be optimal for the issuer to sell assets
separately. However, in those cases, the issuer will opt for separate debt securities rather
than equity securities.


Proposition 3. Suppose now that each elasticity function ej is strictly decreasing on its
respective support j (recall that Assumption 1 only required them to be weakly decreas-
                                                ¯   , it is strictly optimal to issue a
                        ¯ 1 such that for all   ,
ing). There exists a    ,
separate debt security on each asset payoff Xi .


   To prove this result, it is useful to introduce additional notation. Let ( ) denote the
issuer's profit, as a function of the parameter  , from selling one underlying asset separately,
and issuing an optimal security on that underlying asset. Further, let n
                                                                       ~ ( ) denote the

issuer's profit, also as a function of  , from pooling n
                                                       ~ assets and issuing an optimal security
on that underlying pool. The basic idea of the proof is to establish that these profits are
continuous functions of  , and to use the fact established in Proposition 2, which is that for
=¯, selling assets separately yields the issuer a strictly higher expected profit than from




                                              21
pooling assets:


                                                n
                                                ~ (¯) > n  ¯
                                                        ~ ( ).                                                 (16)


                                                                                                 ej (¯
                                                                                                     x)    e (0)
First, suppose the issuer issues equity securities. In that case, for all                       1+ej (¯
                                                                                                         , j
                                                                                                       x) 1+ej (0)
                                                                                                                     ,
the monopolistic buyer would target an interior marginal issuer type fjm satisfying:

                                                                                  
                             ej (fjm ) =          fjm ( ) = e-
                                                             j
                                                               1
                                                                                         ,                     (17)
                                              1-                                 1-

where ej is an invertible function, since it is assumed to be strictly decreasing on its support.
                          ej (¯
                              x)    e (0)
Thus, for all            1+ej (¯
                                  , j
                                x) 1+ej (0)
                                               , this marginal issuer type fjm is a continuous function
of the discount factor  . This result is useful, since as shown in Lemma 4, the optimal
                                                        ej (¯
                                                            x)
debt security, which will be issued for  >             1+ej (¯x)
                                                                 ,   is implicitly characterized as a function
of this marginal issuer type obtained when issuing an equity security. Specifically, the
optimal security from the perspective of the issuer is a debt security with face value dm
                                                                                        j ,

 = min[Idj , dm          m
              j ] where dj is the largest d such that:


               d                                                          m
                                                                         fj
                   fj gj (fj )dfj + [1 - Gj (d)]d - d -                       (fj - fjm )gj (fj )dfj  0,       (18)
           0                                                         0



where fjm = e- 1                                          m
             j ( 1- ). Note that this optimal face value dj is then also a continuous

function of  . This continuity result holds for any set j , including the case where j
includes only one asset.
   Finally, note that if all the optimal face values dm
                                                      j are continuous functions of  , then




                                                        22
the issuer's profit functions ( ) and n
                                      ~ ( ) are also continuous functions of  since:


                               dm ( )                                                   dm ( )
               m                                                 m      m
    ( ) = d ( ) -                       f g (f )df -  [1 - G(d ( ))]d ( ) =                      G(f )df,
                           0                                                        0

                                                                                                         (19)
                               dm
                                ~ ( )
                                n                                                       dm
                                                                                         ~ ( )
                                                                                         n
  n
  ~ ( ) =    dm
              ~ ( )
              n       -                 f g (f )df -  [1 -   G(dm
                                                                ~ ( ))]dn
                                                                n
                                                                        m
                                                                        ~ ( )   =                Gn
                                                                                                  ~ (f )df,
                           0                                                        0

                                                                                                         (20)


where we use integration by parts to simplify the expressions.
   Given equation (16) and the continuity of functions ( ) and n
                                                               ~ ( ), we know that there

                            ¯   ) such that when  lies in that region, we have:
is also a non-empty region (,


                                             n
                                             ~ ( ) > n
                                                     ~ ( ),                                              (21)


                 ~  2 assets separately (with debt) is strictly better for the issuer than selling
that is, selling n
                  ~ assets. The upper bound of the region,   , is implicitly defined by the
debt on a pool of n
lowest  such that n
                  ~ ( ) = n
                          ~ ( ).

   The main insight from Proposition 3 is that even when the potential gains to trade are
smaller than required by the condition stated in Proposition 2, pooling assets may still
be suboptimal for the issuer. The main difference relative to the result of Proposition 2
is that once separate equity securities do not trade fully efficiently, switching to separate
debt securities is optimal. Yet, as the design of these debt securities is still intimately
linked to the monopolistic liquidity supplier's incentives to inefficiently screen the issuer
(the marginal issuer type from equity sales enters equation (18)), the elasticity of trading
volume is still an important determinant of the issuer's net-profit. As pooling assets reduces
this elasticity in the right tail of the payoff distribution (see Figure 2), it is undesirable
to do so when the marginal issuer type from separate equity sales is sufficiently high, or


                                                     23
equivalently, when the liquidity differences between the issuer and the buyer are sufficiently
large (i.e.,  is sufficiently low).


3.2.3   Optimality of Pooling Assets when Adverse Selection is Severe

Unlike with competitive demand where it is always optimal to pool assets for the issuer,
the predictions for the scenario with monopolistic demand are more nuanced and feature a
trade-off between the benefits of diversification and the preservation of information rents.
Propositions 2 and 3 have highlighted that the optimality of separate sales emerges when
trade is particularly valuable, that is, when the prospective buyer and the issuer differ more
in terms of their liquidity. In contrast, when potential gains from trade are smaller, adverse
selection concerns and the exercise of market power lead to larger inefficiencies when as-
sets are sold separately. Lower gains from trade (i.e., higher values of  ) cause the liquidity
supplier to choose a more aggressive pricing strategy, which leads to the exclusion of a
                                                                                           e(0)
larger range of issuer types when equity securities are issued. In fact, whenever  >      1+e(0)

the trading of separate securities (whether it is equity or debt) fails completely as the elas-
ticity function e(x) then lies below /(1 -  ) everywhere on the support -- all issuer types
are excluded. Yet, as suggested by Figure 2, pooling assets increases the elasticity in the
left tail of the distribution, and thus can allow sustaining trade when separate sales would
lead to trade breakdowns. Thus, when adverse selection concerns are severe, relative to
the magnitude of the potential gains from trade, the trade-off faced by the issuer is tilted
toward favoring the pooling of assets.

                                                    
Proposition 4. Suppose that the issuer has n >     1-
                                                        assets. Then at least one of the subsets
j will optimally consist of n assets, where n >       
                                                     1-
                                                        .


    Proposition 4 highlights that for sufficiently high values of the discount factor  the
issuer optimally pools multiple assets into a security. This result is directly linked to the

                                              24
previously mentioned fact that trade breaks down completely whenever the elasticity of an
underlying asset at the lower bound of the support is lower than /(1 -  ). Let en
                                                                                ~ (0) denote

                                                                               
the elasticity function associated with a pool of n
                                                  ~ assets. If en
                                                                ~ (0) <       1-
                                                                                 ,   then trade will
break down with probability 1 for any security written on this pool. Yet, as suggested by
Figure 2, the elasticity at the lower bound increases when more assets are pooled, a fact
that is established in the following lemma.


Lemma 5. A pool of n
                   ~ assets has the elasticity en
                                                ~ (0) = n
                                                        ~ at the lower bound of the support.

Proof. See Appendix.


                                                                   
    Since trade breaks down completely whenever en
                                                 ~ (0) <          1-
                                                                     ,   the issuer can only attain
a positive expected surplus when the elasticity of an underlying asset, evaluated at the
                          
lower bound, exceeds     1-
                            .   Since, as shown in Lemma 5, this elasticity for a pool of n
                                                                                          ~
                                                                      
assets is exactly equal to n
                           ~ , the issuer will at least pool n >     1-
                                                                          assets to ensure that he
can attain an expected surplus greater than zero. At the same time, we know from our
earlier analysis that pooling an infinite number of assets is also suboptimal for the issuer,
as perfect diversification leads him to obtain zero surplus. Thus, even when the issuer has
a continuum of assets, he prefers to pool only a subset of the assets, or none at all.
    Propositions 2, 3, and 4 have highlighted that the trade-offs faced when deciding whether
to pool assets are intimately linked to the magnitude of the potential gains from trade. When
they are sufficiently large (i.e.,  is sufficiently low) it is optimal to sell assets separately. In
this case, the liquidity supplier is less worried about being adversely selected by the issuer
and is more cautious in exercising his market power. Moreover, we have shown that when
the issuer sells assets separately, the elasticity with which he responds to price changes is
larger in the right tail of the distribution than when he is pooling assets. This elasticity in
the right tail is relevant when the potential gains from trade are sufficiently large, causing

                                                25
the marginal issuer type to reside in that part of the distribution. Yet, when the potential
gains from trade are sufficiently small, adverse selection concerns and the exercise of mar-
ket power lead to complete market breakdowns when assets are sold separately. In this
case, the issuer has to reduce the amount of asymmetric information to ensure that trade
can occur at all. He thus pools assets. In particular, Lemma 5 reveals that the elasticity in
the left tail of the support rises with the number of assets that are pooled, allowing trade to
occur once sufficiently many assets have been pooled.



4    Robustness

In this section, we discuss the robustness of our main insights to various changes in the
environment.

Risk aversion. In line with the existing literature, we have assumed that agents are risk
neutral. It is worth noting that, even if we allowed for risk aversion, pooling assets would
not by itself lead to better risk sharing among traders. This is because the issuer offers
to sell all assets to the buyer(s) independent of whether he pools the assets or not. With
risk-averse agents, the main impediment to risk sharing would be the fact that the issuer's
private information may result in socially inefficient trade breakdowns, which is already a
force at play in our baseline model.

Correlated asset payoffs. In our setup, the fundamental payoffs Xi are identically and
independently distributed. The highlighted trade-off between information rents and diver-
sification that is associated with pooling assets would, however, also apply if assets' payoffs
exhibited some correlation. Pooling imperfectly correlated payoffs would still lead to quali-
tatively similar effects on the shape of the payoff distribution -- a pool's payoff distribution
would still feature thinner tails. As a result, the elasticity function of a pool's payoff would


                                              26
decrease near the upper bound of the support, increasing a monopolistic buyer's incentives
to inefficiently screen the issuer. Just like in our baseline model, this downside of pool-
ing assets could then also dominate the diversification benefits highlighted in the existing
literature, rendering it optimal for the issuer to sell assets separately.

Multiple constrained buyers. The main result of our paper, that is, pooling assets might
be suboptimal when liquidity suppliers have market power, is derived in an environment in
which only one buyer has a discount factor of one, but is deep-pocketed. Similar results
obtain in the presence of multiple buyers, provided that these buyers face position limits,
wealth constraints, or risk aversion. Consider a simple extension of our baseline model
in which the aggregate position limit across all prospective buyers (measured in units of
underlying assets) is marginally smaller than the total quantity of assets up for sale. In
this case, each buyer's price setting strategy is identical to the one derived in our baseline
model -- as the total supply always exceeds the total demand, a buyer faces a residual
supply curve that is unaffected by other buyers' pricing strategies.10 As a result, the issuer
still faces the trade-offs featured in our baseline model.

Signaling through retention. In the scenario with competing liquidity suppliers, allowing
the issuer to signal asset quality through partial retention, as in DeMarzo (2005), would
yield results that are (unsurprisingly) consistent with DeMarzo (2005) -- issuers with as-
sets of higher quality would retain a higher fraction of the issue.11 Signaling would then
allow the high issuer types to separate themselves from the low types and would resolve
the lemons problem for high values of  . In contrast, when facing a liquidity supplier with
market power, the issuer can be worse off by signaling asset quality. Since the liquidity
supplier makes a take-it-or-leave-it offer, he is able to extract all the surplus from trade
  10
      The result that capacity constraints can hamper competition is well known in the literature, see, for
example, Green (2007).
   11
      See also Williams (2019) who studies the optimality and efficiency of security retention in the presence
of search frictions.

                                                     27
when he is able to infer the issuer's type. In this case, the issuer's profit from implement-
ing fully revealing retention policies is therefore weakly lower than his profit without any
signaling through retention (see also Glode, Opp, and Zhang 2018, for related arguments).
Moreover, as mentioned earlier, Biais and Mariotti (2005) show that for a given security
offered by the issuer, the monopolistic buyer's optimal mechanism is a take-it-or-leave-it
offer for the total supply of the security, rather than a menu of price-quantity offers that
could result in the issuer using retention to signal asset quality.



5    Conclusion

This paper studies the optimality of pooling assets when security issuers face a market in
which liquidity is scarce and buyers endowed with such liquidity may have market power.
Unlike in competitive environments, we find that selling assets separately may be preferred
by issuers, in particular when liquidity differences between the buy side and the sell side
of the market are sufficiently large. While our results suggest that the dramatic decline of
the ABS market post crisis may represent an efficient response by originators to drastic
changes in liquidity and market power in OTC markets, it also highlights the potential
welfare implications of liquidity constraints imposed on financial institutions in the new
market environment.
    In future research, the principles uncovered by our analysis could also be applied to
shed light on firms' capital structure decisions, specifically, to firms' choices regarding
the maturity structure of their debt. To illustrate the mapping between this problem and
our setup, suppose a firm generates cash-flows in different time periods and is privately
informed about these future cash-flows. Each cash-flow can be viewed as one of the funda-
mental assets from our baseline setup. The firm then decides whether to pool all cash-flows
across time (e.g., by issuing an equity claim or a perpetual debt claim) or not (e.g., by is-


                                              28
suing multiple zero coupon bonds of different maturities). Our analysis suggests that when
firms face investors with market power, it is relatively more beneficial for them to issue
multiple debt securities with different maturities, a practice that is indeed quite common.




                                             29
Appendix A: Proofs Omitted from the Text

Proof of Lemma 2: Without loss of generality, suppose i = 1. We can express n
                                                                            ~ X1 as
follows:
                                          n
                                          ~                                       n
                                                                                  ~
                           n
                           ~ X1 =                   n - 1)X1 -
                                              Xi + (~                                  Xk ,                      (A1)
                                      i=1                                        k=2

                           n
                           ~
       n - 1)X1 -
where (~                   k=2   Xk has a conditional expected value of zero:

                    ~
                    n           n
                                ~                                           ~
                                                                            n             n
                                                                                          ~           n
                                                                                                      ~
                                                                                                                 a.s.
   n - 1)X1 -
E (~                     Xk          Xi          n - 1) E X1
                                              = (~                               Xi -          E Xk         Xi   = 0.
                   k=2         i=1                                         i=1           k=2          i=1
                                                                                                                 (A2)
It directly follows that n
                         ~ X1 is a mean-preserving spread of Yj , and the distribution of Yj
thus second-order stochastically dominates the distribution of n
                                                               ~ X1 .



                                                                                 n
                                                                                 ~
Proof of Lemma 3: Consider the convolution of Yn
                                               ~ =                               i=1   Xi and Xk where k > n
                                                                                                           ~ , that

     ~ +1  Yn
is, Yn      ~ + Xk , . Since these Yn
                                    ~ and Xk are independent, we can write:


                                                             x
                                                             ¯
                              gn
                               ~ +1 (yn
                                      ~ +1 ) =                   gn   ~ +1 - x)g (x)dx.
                                                                  ~ (yn                                          (A3)
                                                         0



   Now evaluate gn
                 ~ +1 at the upper bound of the support y
                                                        ¯n~ +1 = (~
                                                                  n + 1)¯
                                                                        x:

                                                     x
                                                     ¯
                    gn
                     ~ +1 ((~
                            n + 1)¯
                                  x) =                    ~ ((~
                                                         gn         x - x)g (x)dx = 0,
                                                              n + 1)¯                                            (A4)
                                                 0



since the density gn
                   ~ is equal to zero for any outcome above n
                                                            ~x¯. As a result, the elasticity
en     yn
 ~ +1 (¯~ +1 ) = gn
                  ~ +1 (¯~ +1 )¯
                        yn      ~ +1 /G(¯
                                        yn
                               yn                                    ~  1, that is, as soon as at
                                         ~ +1 ) is also zero for all n

                                       ~ + 1  2, the elasticity of the pool will be zero at
least two assets are pooled, such that n
the upper bound y
                ¯n~ +1 .




                                                                 30
Proof of Lemma 5: First, suppose that g (0) > 0 and g (0) is finite. By L'H^
                                                                           opital's rule,
the elasticity is:

                         g (y )y       g (y )y + g (y )   g (0)0 + g (0)
                     lim         = lim                  =                = 1.                  (A5)
                     y 0 G(y )     y 0       g (y )            g (0)

Next, suppose that g (0) = 0, g (0) > 0, and g (0) is finite. Then the elasticity is:

                    g (y )y       g (y )y + g (y )       g (y )y + 2g (y )
                lim         = lim                  = lim                   = 2.                (A6)
                y 0 G(y )     y 0       g (y )       y 0       g (y )

Then, suppose that g (0) = 0, g (0) = 0, g (0) > 0, and g (0) is finite. The elasticity is:

        g (y )y        g (y )y + g (y )        g (y )y + 2g (y )        g (y )y + 3g (y )
  lim           = lim                   = lim                    = lim                    = 3.
  y 0   G(y )     y  0       g (y )       y  0       g (y )        y  0       g (y )
                                                                                               (A7)


More generally, if the n-th derivative of the density function g is the first derivative to be
positive and finite, then the elasticity is (n + 1).
    It remains to be shown that if the density function of one underlying asset is positive at
the lower bound (i.e., g (0) > 0), then if we construct a pool of n
                                                                  ~ assets, the first derivative
                                                                             n - 1)-th derivative.
of the density function of this pool that is positive (and non-zero) is the (~
                                                       n
                                                       ~
    Consider the convolution of Yn
                                 ~ =                   i=1   Xi and Xk where k > n             ~ +1 
                                                                                 ~ , that is, Yn
Yn
 ~ + Xk . Since these Yn
                       ~ and Xk are independent, we can write:


                                                       x
                                                       ¯
                            gn
                             ~ +1 (yn
                                    ~ +1 ) =               gn   ~ +1 - x)g (x)dx,
                                                            ~ (yn                              (A8)
                                                   0



and for 0  yn
            ~ +1  x
                  ¯ we can write:

                                                   yn
                                                    ~ +1
                           gn
                            ~ +1 (yn
                                   ~ +1 ) =                 gn   ~ +1 - x)g (x)dx.
                                                             ~ (yn                             (A9)
                                               0



                                                           31
Thus, the derivatives become:

                                         yn
                                          ~ +1

 ~ +1 (yn
gn      ~ +1 ) =gn
                 ~ (0)g (yn
                          ~ +1 ) +               gn   ~ +1 - x)g (x)dx,
                                                  ~ (yn                                                       (A10)
                                     0
                                                                 yn
                                                                  ~ +1
gn
 ~ +1 (yn
        ~ +1 ) =gn
                 ~ (0)g (yn
                          ~ +1 ) + gn        ~ +1 ) +
                                    ~ (0)g (yn                                ~ +1 - x)g (x)dx,
                                                                         g1 (yn                               (A11)
                                                             0
                                                                                         yn
                                                                                          ~ +1

 ~ +1 (yn
gn      ~ +1 ) =gn
                 ~ (0)g (yn
                          ~ +1 ) + gn        ~ +1 ) + gn
                                    ~ (0)g (yn                  ~ +1 ) +
                                                       ~ (0)g (yn                                gn   ~ +1 - x)g (x)dx.
                                                                                                  ~ (yn
                                                                                     0

                                                                                                              (A12)


Hence, when evaluated at yn
                          ~ +1 = 0, we obtain the following derivatives:




                        gn
                         ~ +1 (0) =gn
                                    ~ (0)g (0),                                                               (A13)

                        gn
                         ~ +1 (0) =gn
                                    ~ (0)g (0) + gn
                                                  ~ (0)g (0),                                                 (A14)

                        gn
                         ~ +1 (0) =gn
                                    ~ (0)g (0) + gn
                                                  ~ (0)g (0) + gn
                                                                ~ (0)g (0).                                   (A15)


Next consider the following iteration:

    · Suppose we have n
                      ~ = 1. Then g1 (0) = g (0) > 0 and adding an asset yields g2 (0) = 0
       (see above integral), and g2 (0) = g1 (0)g (0) = g (0)2 > 0.

    · Suppose we have n
                      ~ = 2. Then, as just shown, g2 (0) = 0 and g2 (0) > 0. Now if we
       add an asset, then it yields g3 (0) = 0 (integral equation), and g3 (0) = g2 (0)g (0) = 0.
       Now consider g3 (0) = g2 (0)g (0) + g2 (0)g (0) = g2 (0)g (0) > 0.

    · Suppose we have n
                      ~ = 3. Then, as just shown, g3 (0) = 0, g3 (0) = 0, and g3 (0) >
       0. Now if we add an asset, then it yields g4 (0) = 0 (integral equation), g4 (0) =
       g3 (0)g (0) = 0, and g4 (0) = g3 (0)g (0) + g3 (0)g (0) = 0. Now consider g4 (0) =
       g3 (0)g (0) + g3 (0)g (0) + g3 (0)g (0) = g3 (0)g (0) > 0.

    · ...


                                                        32
More generally, every time we add an asset to the pool, the next-higher derivative of the
density function turns to zero, while leaving the derivatives thereafter positive.



Appendix B: Additional Examples of Distributions

In this Appendix, we provide additional examples of distributions satisfying the assump-
tions of our setup (including Assumption 1). The figures below show the effects of pooling
on the shapes of the PDF and the elasticity function.

                                         
                                          
                                             

                                    
                                   
                (  )




                                    
                                     
                                                                          
                                    
                                                                           
                                      
                                      
                                       
                                                                           
                             
                                        
                                          
                             
                                         
                                           
                         
                         
                            
                                              
                                                              
                                         


Figure 3: Effect of pooling on the shape of the probability density function. The graph considers
a setting with four assets (n = 4), each of which has a payoff Xi that follows a beta distribution,
with shape parameters  = 4 and  = 4, that is truncated on the interval [0.001, 0.999]. The graph
plots the PDF of a separate asset, a pool of 2 assets, and a pool of 4 assets. To compare the PDFs'
shapes relative to their respective domains, the graph rescales the horizontal axis to represent the
interval j = [0, y¯j ] for each PDF gj .




                                                33
                       
                          
                             
                                
                                   
                                      
                                         
                                            
                                               
                                                  
                          
                (  )                                                            
                           
                            
                             
                                                                                 
                        
                               
                         
                             
                       
                        
                                                                                 
                                
                                 
                                   
                                    
                                       
                                                                         
                                                                 


Figure 4: Effect of pooling on the shape of the elasticity function. The graph considers a setting
with four assets (n = 4), each of which has a payoff Xi that follows a beta distribution, with shape
parameters  = 4 and  = 4, that is truncated on the interval [0.001, 0.999]. The graph plots the
elasticity function of a separate asset, a pool of 2 assets, and a pool of 4 assets. To compare the
elasticity functions' shapes relative to their respective domains, the graph rescales the horizontal
axis to represent the interval j = [0, y¯j ] for each elasticity function ej .



                                                        
                                                           
                                                     
                                                              
                                                  
                                
                              
                                
                (  )




                                                                                
                                  
                                
                                                                                 
                                   
                                    
                                                                                 
                                       
                                      
                                         
                         
                                         
                        
                                              
                                                                         
                                                                 


Figure 5: Effect of pooling on the shape of the probability density function. The graph considers
a setting with four assets (n = 4), each of which has a payoff Xi that follows a beta distribution,
with shape parameters  = 2 and  = 3, that is truncated on the interval [0.001, 0.999]. The graph
plots the PDF of a separate asset, a pool of 2 assets, and a pool of 4 assets. To compare the PDFs'
shapes relative to their respective domains, the graph rescales the horizontal axis to represent the
interval j = [0, y¯j ] for each PDF gj .




                                                                    34
                       
                          
                             
                                
                                   
                                      
                                         
                                            
                                               
                         
                (  )   
                          
                           
                                                                          
                       
                            
                                                                           
                         
                           
                                                                           
                               
                        
                                
                                 
                                  
                                   
                                    
                                     
                                                              
                                                  


Figure 6: Effect of pooling on the shape of the elasticity function. The graph considers a setting
with four assets (n = 4), each of which has a payoff Xi that follows a beta distribution, with shape
parameters  = 2 and  = 3, that is truncated on the interval [0.001, 0.999]. The graph plots the
elasticity function of a separate asset, a pool of 2 assets, and a pool of 4 assets. To compare the
elasticity functions' shapes relative to their respective domains, the graph rescales the horizontal
axis to represent the interval j = [0, y¯j ] for each elasticity function ej .




                                                     35
References

Atkeson, Andrew G., Andrea L. Eisfeldt, and Pierre-Olivier Weill. 2014. "The Market
  for OTC Credit Derivatives." Working Paper, UCLA.

Axelson, Ulf. 2007. "Security Design with Investor Private Information." Journal of Fi-
  nance 62: 2587-2632.

Begenau, Juliane, Monika Piazzesi, and Martin Schneider. 2015. "Banks' Risk Expo-
  sures." Working Paper, Stanford University.

Biais, Bruno and Thomas Mariotti. 2005. "Strategic Liquidity Supply and Security De-
  sign." Review of Economic Studies 72: 615-649.

Biais, Bruno, David Martimort, and Jean-Charles Rochet. 2000. "Competing Mecha-
  nisms in a Common Value Environment." Econometrica 68: 799-837.

Boot, Arnoud W.A. and Anjan V. Thakor. 1993. "Security Design." Journal of Finance
  48: 1349-1378.

Cetorelli, Nicola, Beverly Hirtle, Donald P. Morgan, Stavros Peristiani, and Joao A.C.
  Santos. 2007. "Trends in Financial Market Concentration and their Implications for
  Market Stability." Economic Policy Review 13: 33-51.

Dang, Tri Vi, Gary Gorton, and Bengt Holmstrom. 2015. "The Information Sensitivity
  of a Security." Working Paper, MIT.

DeMarzo, Peter M. 2005. "The Pooling and Tranching of Securities: A Model of Informed
  Intermediation." Review of Financial Studies 18: 1-35.

DeMarzo, Peter M. and Darrell Duffie. 1999. "A Liquidity-Based Model of Security
  Design." Econometrica 67: 65-99.

                                          36
DeMarzo, Peter M., Ilan Kremer and Andrzej Skrzypacz 2005. "Bidding with Securi-
  ties: Auctions and Security Design." American Economic Review 95: 936-959.

Di Maggio, Marco, Amir Kermani, and Zhaogang Song. 2017. "The Value of Trading
  Relations in Turbulent Times." Journal of Financial Economics 124: 266-284.

Farhi, Emmanuel and Jean Tirole. 2015. "Liquid Bundles." Journal of Economic Theory
  158: 634-655.

Friewald, Nils, Christopher A. Hennessy, and Rainer Jankowitsch. 2015. `Secondary
  Market Liquidity and Security Design: Theory and Evidence from ABS Markets." Re-
  view of Financial Studies 29: 1254-1290.

Glode, Vincent, Christian C. Opp, and Xingtan Zhang. 2018. "Voluntary Disclosure in
  Bilateral Transactions." Journal of Economic Theory 175: 652-688.

Gorton, Gary B. and George G. Pennacchi. 1990. "Financial Intermediaries and Liquid-
  ity Creation." Journal of Finance 45: 49-71.

Gorton, Gary B. and George G. Pennacchi. 1993. "Security Baskets and Index-Linked
  Securities." Journal of Business 66: 1-27.

Green, Richard C. 2007. "Presidential Address: Issuers, Underwriter Syndicates, and
  Aftermarket Transparency." Journal of Finance 62: 1529-1550.

                                                    ¨
Green, Richard C., Burton Hollifield, and Norman Schurhoff. 2007. "Financial Inter-
  mediation and the Costs of Trading in an Opaque Market." Review of Financial Studies
  20: 275-314.

Harris, Milton and Artur Raviv. 1989. "The Design of Securities." Journal of Financial
  Economics 24: 255­287.


                                           37
Hartman-Glaser, Barney. 2017. "Reputation and Signaling in Asset Sales." Journal of
  Financial Economics 125: 245-265.

Hartman-Glaser, Barney, Tomasz Piskorski, and Alexei Tchistyi. 2012. "Optimal Se-
  curitization with Moral Hazard." Journal of Financial Economics 104: 186-202.

                                                            ¨
Hendershott, Terrence, Dan Li, Dmitry Livdan, and Norman Schurhoff. 2017. "Rela-
  tionship Trading in OTC Markets." Working Paper, Swiss Finance Institute.

Hollifield, Burton, Artem Neklyudov, and Chester Spatt. 2017. "Bid-Ask Spreads,
  Trading Networks, and the Pricing of Securitizations." Review of Financial Studies 30:
  3048-3085.

Inderst, Roman and Holger Mueller. 2006. "Informed Lending and Security Design."
  Journal of Finance 61: 2137-2162.

Jiang, Hao and Zheng Sun. 2015. "News and Corporate Bond Liquidity." Working paper,
  UC Irvine.

                      ¨
Li, Dan and Norman Schurhoff. 2019. "Dealer Networks." Journal of Finance 74: 91-
  144.

Myerson, Roger B. 1981. "Optimal Auction Design." Mathematics of Operations Re-
  search 6: 58-73.

Nachman, David and Thomas Noe. 1994. "Optimal Design of Securities under Asym-
  metric Information." Review of Financial Studies 7: 1-44.

Palfrey, Thomas R. 1983. "Bundling Decisions by a Multiproduct Monopolist with In-
  complete Infromation." Econometrica 51: 463-483.




                                          38
Riley, John and Richard Zeckhauser. 1983. "Optimal Selling Strategies: When to Hag-
  gle, When to Hold Firm." Quarterly Journal of Economics 118: 267-289.

Siriwardane, Emil. 2019. "Limited Investment Capital and Credit Spreads." Journal of
  Finance 74: 2302-2347.

Subrahmanyam, Avanidhar. 1991. "A Theory of Trading in Stock Index Futures." Review
  of Financial Studies 4: 17-51.

Vives, Xavier. 2011. "Strategic Supply Function Competition with Private Information."
  Econometrica 79: 1919-1966.

Williams, Basil. 2019. "Search, Liquidity, and Retention: Signaling Multidimensional Pri-
  vate Information." Working Paper, New York University.

Yang, Ming. 2019. "Optimality of Debt under Flexible Information Acquisition." Review
  of Economic Studies, forthcoming.




                                           39
