                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               TAX POLICY AND ABNORMAL INVESTMENT BEHAVIOR

                                           Qiping Xu
                                           Eric Zwick

                                      Working Paper 27363
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27363


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2020




The views expressed here are ours and do not necessarily reflect those of the U.S. Treasury
Office of Tax Analysis, nor the IRS Office of Research, Analysis and Statistics. We thank Andy
Abel, Heitor Almeida, Jediphi Cabal, Mike Devereux, Martin Feldstein, John Guyton, Jim Hines,
Martin Jacob, Justin Murfin, Tom Neubig, Mitchell Petersen, Annette Portz, Jim Poterba, Josh
Rauh, Lisa Rupert, Joel Slemrod, Michael Smolyansky, Amir Sufi, Toni Whited, and seminar and
conference participants for comments, ideas, and help with data. We thank Thomas Winberry and
Irina Telyukova for sharing code. We thank Tianfang (Tom) Cui, Laurence O'Brien, Iris Song,
Caleb Wroblewski, and especially thank Francesco Ruggieri for excellent research assistance. Xu
thanks the Mendoza College of Business at the University of Notre Dame and Gies College of
Business at University of Illinois Urbana Champaign for financial support. Zwick gratefully
acknowledges financial support from the Neubauer Family Foundation, the Initiative on Global
Markets, and the Booth School of Business at the University of Chicago. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Qiping Xu and Eric Zwick. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Tax Policy and Abnormal Investment Behavior
Qiping Xu and Eric Zwick
NBER Working Paper No. 27363
June 2020
JEL No. D21,D22,D92,G31,H25,H32

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper documents tax-minimizing investment, in which firms tilt capital purchases toward
fiscal year-end to reduce taxes. Between 1984 and 2013, average investment in fiscal Q4 exceeds
the average of fiscal Q1 through Q3 by 37%. Q4 spikes occur in the U.S. and internationally.
Research designs using variation in firm tax positions and the 1986 Tax Reform Act show that
tax minimization causes spikes. Spikes increase when firms face financial constraints or higher
option values of waiting until fiscal year-end. We develop an investment model with tax
asymmetries to rationalize these patterns. Models without purchase-year, tax-minimization
motives are unlikely to fit the data.


Qiping Xu
University of Illinois Urbana Champaign
qipingxu@illinois.edu

Eric Zwick
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
ezwick@chicagobooth.edu
   How do taxes affect business investment? The importance of this question is widely recog-
nized, as policymakers often invoke the contribution of investment to economic growth when
proposing tax reforms. Such proposals presume a model of corporate behavior, usually based
on the user cost framework of Hall and Jorgenson (1967). Yet recent studies have raised ques-
tions that the benchmark user cost model of a representative firm struggles to answer. Why do
some tax instruments have large effects on investment, while others do not? What drives the
heterogeneity across firms in responsiveness to tax changes? Reconciling these findings and
revealing the underlying mechanisms remain goals of ongoing research.
   This paper documents tax-minimizing investment, in which firms tilt capital purchases to-
ward fiscal year-end to reduce taxes. We develop a new measure of investment behavior, which
is simple, transparent, and orthogonal to low- and medium-frequency policy and firm-by-time
shocks. This approach removes time-varying omitted factors coinciding with the identifying
variation we exploit, thus addressing a key concern with existing empirical work. We demon-
strate the importance of taxes for corporate investment behavior and further illustrate that
tax asymmetry--in particular, the immediacy of the tax incentive--matters critically for un-
derstanding how firms respond. We conclude that models most likely to fit the data feature a
purchase-year, tax-minimization motive.
   The paper begins with a robust stylized fact about investment behavior among American
public companies. Firms frequently tilt their investment toward fiscal year-end, leading to
quantitatively significant spikes in capital expenditures (CAPEX) in the fourth fiscal quarter
(Q4). This pattern is pronounced among firms across the size distribution and present in
nearly every year between 1984 and 2013. Over the full sample period, fiscal Q4 CAPEX is on
average 37% higher than the average of the first three fiscal quarters. The pattern is robust
to non-December fiscal year-end, to changes in fiscal year-end, and to within-year seasonality
of sales and cash flows. Moreover, fiscal Q4 investment spikes exist internationally. In data
from 33 countries, fiscal Q4 spikes appear nearly universal during the period between 2004
and 2014. Although the magnitude of spikes varies across countries, the general pattern of Q4
spikes is robust.
   We interpret Q4 investment spikes as the result of tax-minimizing behavior consisting of two
connected motives. First, depreciation allowances are deducted from firms' pre-tax income and
hence reduce their tax bill. Deduction conventions usually allow firms to deduct depreciation
for year-end purchases as if the capital had been deployed halfway through the year. This


                                              2
feature creates a "depreciation motive" for firms to increase investment toward the end of the
fiscal year and especially in the last quarter. Because purchases made later in the year face a
lower effective after-tax price, firms making a fixed amount of investment are better off tilting
that investment toward fiscal year-end than uniformly investing throughout the year.
   Second, because tax positions can be better estimated close to fiscal year-end when most
revenues and expenses for the year have been recorded, investing near the fiscal year-end
allows firms to maximize the tax benefit of depreciation. We refer to this feature as the "option
value motive" because firms have an incentive to wait and see how their tax position evolves
during the fiscal year. If the year goes well, then they can increase investment at year-end to
minimize their remaining tax burden. If the year goes poorly and the firm's taxable income
is already close to zero, then they will have less reason to invest in the current fiscal year to
reduce taxes. The sharp nature of Q4 spikes allows us to show that these tax motives are driving
an important part of this investment behavior. Both motives are necessary to rationalize our
findings.
   We use two research strategies to identify the link between tax minimization and Q4 invest-
ment spikes. The first strategy exploits the budget kink created by the asymmetry in corporate
tax positions: when a firm moves from positive to negative tax position, the firm must defer
the tax benefits of investment from the current year until some future year. To pursue this
strategy, we combine Q4 CAPEX spike data from Compustat with tax position data from corpo-
rate tax returns for the years 1993 through 2010. Fiscal Q4 investment spikes are substantially
higher when firms have an immediate incentive to offset taxable income with new investment
rather than having to carry forward tax benefits to future years. Regression estimates show
that within firm, a positive-taxable-income fiscal year has a spike between 6% and 11% higher
than a negative-taxable-income fiscal year, which is large compared to the sample average of
37%. Additionally, taxable firms with large stocks of net operating loss carryforwards, which
serve as an alternative tax shield, show significantly smaller Q4 spikes.
   In the second research strategy, we study the effect of tax policy changes on investment
spikes using the Tax Reform Act of 1986 (TRA86) in the U.S. Three components of TRA86 re-
duced firms' tax-minimization incentive and as a result the potential size of fiscal Q4 investment
spikes. First, the Investment Tax Credit (ITC), through which firms could receive reductions
in tax liabilities as a percentage of the price of purchased assets, was repealed. Second, the
top corporate income tax rate decreased significantly. Third, the Modified Accelerated Cost


                                                3
Recovery System (MACRS) was introduced as the new depreciation system, under which new
investment gets a lower depreciation amount per year.1 Each change leads to lower tax benefits
from new corporate investment and hence reduces the incentive for firms to tilt investment to-
ward year-end. Consistent with a tax-minimization motive, regression estimates confirm that
after 1987, fiscal Q4 investment spikes are 5 to 10 percentage points lower than before.
       What type of firm is more inclined to employ a tax-minimizing investment strategy? Be-
cause firms relying heavily on internal funds to finance investment face higher effective dis-
count rates, such firms should retime spending more strategically to save taxes and retain
cash. We test this prediction by studying the effects of tax changes on investment spikes, while
sorting firms based on different proxies for financial constraints. Regression estimates show
that financially constrained firms conduct more tax-minimizing investment. Using a decom-
position of the widely studied correlation between investment and cash flows, we show that
tax-minimizing investment likely confounds the interpretation of the investment-cash flow sen-
sitivity as a measure of financial constraints.
       Firms facing higher option values for waiting until fiscal year-end to make investment
decisions--those with longer average investment durations, those with positive earnings on av-
erage and less downside earnings volatility, and those that beat their analyst earnings forecasts--
also show higher investment spikes. The analyst-forecast finding suggests that earnings man-
agement and tax planning are interconnected decisions. We also find supportive evidence that
spikes are related to "Use it or lose it" budgeting incentives thought to characterize internal
capital markets, though such incentives cannot explain differential behavior based on tax in-
centives.
       To address whether Q4 spikes have longer-lasting effects, we study the cumulative impact
of investment spikes on the level of investment. In other words, do Q4 investment spikes
immediately reverse in the next quarter or two, such that the higher investment would not
be detectable if aggregated over a slightly longer time frame? We follow average quarterly
investment levels up to eight quarters after spikes in different fiscal quarters and confirm that
investment spikes in Q3 and Q4 do not fully reverse in the immediate subsequent quarters.
Firm-years with Q3 or Q4 spikes in year t show investment rates (relative to t ­1 capital) that
are 6% higher in year t and 12 to 17% higher in the next three years. Thus, we do not find
   1
   MACRS also directly targets spikes by applying a lower depreciation allowance for property placed in service
when Q4 investment exceeds 40% of investment for the whole tax year.



                                                      4
evidence of immediate reversal of investment after spikes.
   To isolate the impact of tax motives from underlying productivity shocks, we compare early-
year (Q1­Q2) spikers to late-year (Q3­Q4) spikers under the assumption that the latter show
higher investment for more tax-motivated reasons. Such late-year spikers show substantially
more persistence of cumulative investment than early-year spikers, which implies that late-
year spike persistence cannot be explained by productivity persistence alone. In addition, Q4
spikes are negatively autocorrelated over longer horizons, which further suggests a process
with medium-term mean reversion rather than mechanical repetition of spikes each year with
only short-term implications.
   Taken together with the results on firms' characteristics--that we see higher spikes for firms
in taxable position, for firms with higher profitability and lower downside volatility, and for
firms more likely to face financial constraints--the cumulative persistence of investment fol-
lowing spikes likely reflects time-varying opportunities for firms to offset tax bills associated
with positive earnings shocks. We examine this idea through the lens of a quantitative invest-
ment model that embeds a tax-minimization motive. The model helps clarify the intuition for
the persistence of investment following spikes. Part of the persistence reflects the underly-
ing persistence of productivity shocks. However, productivity cannot account for the stronger
persistence in versions with tax asymmetries and the possibility of tax losses. A version of the
model with a depreciation motive but no tax losses shows lower persistence than the full model,
which reflects the increased option value of retiming investment when firms face a non-trivial
risk of tax losses in future years.
   In the last part of the paper, we trace through the implications of investment spikes for cap-
ital goods suppliers and lenders. In Census survey data from domestic manufacturers, spikes
in aggregate capital goods shipments coincide with the months during which firms commonly
have fiscal year-ends. These spikes propagate through production chains by inducing suppliers
to accumulate inventories in advance of purchase spikes, a fact we confirm in both aggregate
data and for suppliers linked to customers in the Compustat Segments Customer database. In
commercial lending data from 2005 through 2014, the month of December sees significantly
higher new business volume than other months, which validates firms' reported fiscal year-end
investment spikes from the lending side of the market. In corporate financial statements, fiscal
Q4 investment spikes are also associated with new debt issuance spikes. In contrast to these
strong quantity effects, we find no effects on equipment prices or interest rates.


                                               5
       Research going back to Hall and Jorgenson (1967) has made much progress in character-
izing the model of corporate investment behavior and estimating the effect of taxes on invest-
ment. Relative to this literature, which often focuses on measuring policy parameters, our goal
is to help understand the underlying mechanism. In addition, because most research relies on
quasi-experiments based on non-random tax changes, the extent to which estimated tax effects
reflect unobservable firm or macroeconomic factors remains unclear. Our approach comple-
ments this work by focusing on a new measure of investment behavior that is orthogonal to
low- and medium-frequency firm-by-time shocks.2
       Prior research has also uncovered several anomalies with respect to the benchmark user
cost framework. Studies of different tax instruments yield ostensibly conflicting results: Ya-
gan (2015) finds dividend taxes do not affect corporate investment; Suárez Serrato and Zidar
(2016), Ohrn (2018), and Giroud and Rauh (2019) find meaningful effects of tax rate changes
on firm location, investment, and employment; and House and Shapiro (2008) and Zwick and
Mahon (2017) find "bonus" and Section 179 depreciation incentives have a significant effect on
investment. The response in Zwick and Mahon (2017) is more pronounced for small firms than
for large firms, with investment decisions showing more sensitivity to immediate tax benefits
than the standard model predicts. Edgerton (2010) uses financial accounting data to study the
role of corporate tax asymmetries and finds less evidence that immediacy matters for public
firms, while acknowledging measurement limitations may drive these results because financial
accounts do not directly reveal public firms' tax positions.
       Our findings contribute to this literature by confirming the importance of immediacy for tax
effects and by highlighting how policy instruments that directly target investment behavior--
such as depreciation incentives or investment tax credits--influence corporate decision-making.
We use the permanent incentive caused by the half-year convention and the change in incen-
tives following TRA86 to document these effects among large public companies. We propose a
simple modification of the workhorse dynamic problem of the firm and show how this model
can qualitatively and quantitatively account for the patterns in the data.3 Promoting intertem-
   2
     The literature relying on policy-induced variation includes Cummins, Hassett and Hubbard (1996), Goolsbee
(1998), Chirinko, Fazzari and Meyer (1999), Desai and Goolsbee (2004), House and Shapiro (2008), Edgerton
(2010), Becker, Jacob and Jacob (2013), Yagan (2015), Ljungqvist and Smolyansky (2014), Zwick and Mahon
(2017), Ohrn (2018), and Giroud and Rauh (2019). Hassett and Hubbard (2002) survey the early research and
offer a consensus view, which is mostly consistent with subsequent findings.
   3
     Key studies that propose models of how firms make investment decisions include Summers (1981), Hayashi
(1982), Abel and Eberly (1994), Caballero and Engel (1999), Cooper and Haltiwanger (2006), and Winberry
(Forthcoming). In a recent paper, Chen et al. (2019) use a lumpy investment model to study the relative efficacy


                                                       6
poral substitution of investment into the present from the future several years is a central
motivation for many fiscal stimulus policies. Our results help explain why some firms are more
responsive to stimulus and suggest that regimes in which the option value motive is stronger
are likely to display greater responsiveness to such policies.
    The outline of the paper is as follows. Section 1 explains the tax policies related to corporate
investment and describes our data. Section 2 describes the fiscal Q4 CAPEX spikes both in the
U.S. and other countries and examines the robustness of spikes to possible confounds. Section
3 establishes the link between tax minimization and fiscal Q4 spikes by exploiting firms' tax
position and policy reforms in the U.S. Section 4 studies cross-sectional and dynamic drivers
of tax-minimizing investment. Section 5 presents the model. Section 6 discusses additional
implications of tax-minimizing investment behavior. Section 7 concludes.



1     Policy Background and Data

1.1     Policy Background

When making an investment, a firm is permitted a sequence of tax deductions for deprecia-
tion over a period of time approximating the investment's useful life. Allowable depreciation
deductions offset the firm's taxable income, reducing its tax bill. The current U.S. tax code's
schedule of depreciation deductions is specified by the Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery
System (MACRS). MACRS assigns a recovery period and depreciation method for each type of
property. The recovery period refers to the number of years it takes to completely depreciate
the investment, while the depreciation method refers to the speed of depreciation.4
    Averaging conventions establish when the recovery period begins and ends. The convention
determines the number of months for which firms can claim depreciation in the year they place
property in service. The most common convention for equipment investment is the half-year
convention, where firms treat all property placed in service during a tax year as placed at the
midpoint of the year. This means that a half-year's worth of depreciation is allowed for the year
of policies that target fixed costs, such as investment tax credits, versus those that target marginal costs, such as
corporate tax cuts.
   4
     The common recovery periods for equipment investment are 3-, 5-, 7-, 10-, 15-, and 20-year. Structures
are typically depreciated over 27.5 or 39 years. The most common depreciation methods for equipment are
200-percent declining balance and 150-percent declining balance, switching to straight-line. For structures, the
depreciation method is straight-line. More detail is available in IRS publication 946.



                                                         7
the property is placed in service. Because the half-year convention applies even to investments
made at the end of the year, the code creates an incentive for firms to accelerate the timing
of investment purchases at the end of the fiscal year in order to realize the deductions a year
earlier. In other words, the schedule creates a nonlinearity in the marginal incentive to invest
near the end of the fiscal year because of discounting applied to the tax savings from future
deductions. Our research design exploits this feature and the sharp behavior it induces to
separate investment responses driven by the tax code from other confounding factors.
    Our focus is primarily on tax policy that affects the incentive for large firms to invest during
our sample period of 1984 to 2013 in the U.S., though we also study investment behavior in
a sample of developed and developing countries. The U.S. passed the Tax Reform Act of 1986
(TRA86, enacted October 22, 1986) to simplify the income tax code and broaden the corporate
tax base. Three key changes affected corporate incentives regarding CAPEX spending.
    First, TRA86 abolished the Investment Tax Credit (ITC).5 The ITC generates reductions in
tax liability as a percentage of the purchase price of investments and reduces tax liabilities
dollar-for-dollar. The ITC is not refundable, and thus is valuable for a firm only if there is a
tax liability.6 Between 1979 and 1985, the ITC was set at 10 percent for spending on business
capital equipment and special purpose structures, which was considerably more generous than
first-year deductions for most investments. By targeting investment directly, the ITC creates a
strong incentive for firms to retime investment as a tax planning strategy. Thus, removal of the
ITC reduced the incentive to wait to fiscal year-end to make tax-minimizing investments.
    Second, the corporate income tax rate for the top bracket decreased significantly after 1987:
the top rate dropped from 46% in 1984-1986 to 40% in 1987, to 34% in 1988-1992, and
then remained at 35% in 1993-2013.7 The decrease in the corporate income tax rate further
reduced the tax-minimization incentive of CAPEX spending, as for a given amount of CAPEX,
the reduction in tax liability is lower when the tax rate is lower.
    Third, the depreciation system switched from the Accelerated Cost Recovery System (ACRS)
to the Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery System (MACRS) after 1987. In general, MACRS
lengthens the recovery periods for property. For example, automobiles and trucks had a de-
preciation schedule of 3 years under ACRS, but 5 years under MACRS; non-technical office
   5
     Starting with the Revenue Act of 1962, the ITC went through many rounds of major changes, including being
suspended, reinstated, and eventually repealed in 1986.
   6
     The safe-harbor leasing provision in the Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981 allowed the sale of unused tax
credits to firms with current tax liabilities, but it was eliminated at the end of 1983.
   7
     Appendix Table A.1 provides detail of corporate income tax changes during 1984­2013.


                                                      8
equipment had a depreciation schedule of 5 years under ACRS, but 7 years under MACRS.8
In addition, MACRS requires firms to use the mid-quarter convention if the total depreciable
bases of MACRS property placed in service during the last 3 months of the tax year are more
than 40% of the total MACRS property during the entire year.9 For property placed in ser-
vice during Q4, only 1.5 months of depreciation is allowed under the mid-quarter convention
instead of 6 months of depreciation under the half-year convention.10 The lengthening of de-
preciation periods and the mid-quarter convention requirement further reduced the incentive
for tax-minimizing investment, as the same amount of investment leads to a smaller first-year
depreciation deduction and lower initial tax savings after TRA86.
       Table 1 illustrates the tax incentives for a $100 investment in computers, comparing a
scenario in which the firm places the investment on the first day of fiscal Q1 versus the last day
of the previous fiscal Q4. All calculations assume a 7% discount rate and depreciate investment
using the 200% declining balance method and half-year convention. In the post-TRA86 regime,
accelerating the purchase accelerates the depreciation schedule by one year, yielding $2.04 in
net present value tax savings; in other words, the firm saves 2% by making the investment one
day earlier. If firms use higher effective discount rates, the incentive to accelerate investment
to fiscal Q4 will be even larger. The higher tax rate and shortened recovery periods in the pre-
TRA86 period raises this benefit by 38% to $2.82. The investment tax credit has a larger effect,
raising the benefit by an additional $0.66 to $3.48. Thus, the overall benefit to accelerating
the investment increases by 70% with pre-TRA86 parameters.
       Other tax policy parameters can also interact with investment to affect firms' tax liabilities.
For example, if investments are financed through equity, then dividend taxes will have a similar
though more indirect effect through changing the cost of capital.11 In addition, during the past
   8
     IRS publication 534. ACRS set up a series of useful lives based on 3 years for technical equipment, 5 years
for non-technical office equipment, 10 years for industrial equipment, and 15 years for real property. MACRS
lengthens the lives of property further for taxpayers covered by the alternative minimum tax (AMT).
   9
     Excluding nonresidential real property, residential rental property, any railroad grading or tunnel bore, prop-
erty placed in service and disposed of in the same year, and property that is being depreciated under a method
other than MACRS. In our data, 16% of firm-years have Q4 CAPEX in excess of 40% of total annual CAPEX.
  10
     A few factors make this 40% threshold less salient in the data. First, the threshold does not apply to structures
or other property that is depreciated under a non-MACRS method, all of which are included in the CAPEX numbers
in the financial statement. Second, the threshold does not apply to investments made by incorporated foreign
subsidiaries, if the depreciation is instead taken overseas. The consolidated CAPEX in financial accounts includes
both categories and may therefore overstate the investment spike relevant for domestic tax purposes. Third, the
40% threshold does not restrict "bonus" depreciation allowed under IRC Section 168(k), which will offset the lost
depreciation from switching to mid-quarter for the residual, non-bonus investment basis.
  11
     King (1977), Auerbach (1979), and Bradford (1981) theoretically analyze the difference in incentives for
equity-financed and internally financed investments on the margin. In an empirical analysis of payout taxes,


                                                          9
two recessions, U.S. policymakers have introduced additional first-year (or "bonus") deprecia-
tion to stimulate investment and have expanded the Section 179 provision, which allows small
and medium-sized businesses to fully deduct the cost of eligible purchases during the year of
purchase. The 2% effective subsidy across quarters in Table 1 is similar in magnitude to the
subsidy from 50% bonus depreciation.12


1.2     Data

Our primary sample includes Compustat U.S. firms spanning the years from 1984 through
2013. The sample excludes financial firms and utilities, as well as firm-years without quarterly
capital expenditure (CAPEX) information. Firms with asset amounts less than $10 million are
also excluded from the sample. The full U.S. sample includes 119,386 firm-year observations
for 15,437 unique firms. On average, our sample represents 87% of the aggregate annual
CAPEX of all Compustat firms.
    Firms report year-to-date CAPEX in their quarterly 10-Q filings. To produce our primary
measure of investment behavior, we first use this year-to-date data to back out CAPEX in each
quarter. For example, in fiscal year 2012, U.S. Airways reports quarterly year-to-date CAPEX
as: Q1 $87 million, Q2 $191 million, Q3 $428 million, and Q4 $775 million. Thus CAPEX
for each quarter is: Q1 $87 million, Q2 $104 million, Q3 $237 million, and Q4 $348 million.
The year-to-date format makes within-year changes in CAPEX less salient, though this example
indicates strong bunching of investment in the last quarter of the year. We use the Q4 spike as
our key measure of tax-driven investment behavior, defined as the ratio of Q4 CAPEX to the
average of Q1 through Q3, which equals 243% in this case.13
    Table 2 presents summary statistics for the sample of U.S. and international firms. For the
U.S. sample, the average firm-year has $2.7 billion in assets and $172 million in CAPEX. The
average Q4 spike is 137% (with median 119%), which indicates that Q4 CAPEX is 37% higher
Yagan (2015) finds that investment did not respond to the 2003 dividend tax cut in the U.S.; Alstadsæter, Jacob
and Michaely (2015) find that investment responds for cash-constrained firms following a dividend tax cut in
Sweden.
  12
     See, e.g., Zwick and Mahon (2017), Table 1. House and Shapiro (2008) and Zwick and Mahon (2017) study
these programs in detail. Relative to the pre-TRA86 versus post-TRA86 comparison in Table 1, bonus depreciation
only modestly raises the incentive to accelerate investment into fiscal Q4.
  13
     This example suggests U.S. Airways may have crossed the 40% threshold at which point depreciation con-
ventions switch from half-year to mid-quarter. This would be the case if all CAPEX included here were subject to
the threshold, as a spike of 243% corresponds to a fourth quarter share of 45%. See discussion in Section 1.1.




                                                      10
than the average of CAPEX for the first three fiscal quarters.14 In firm-quarter-level regressions
of CAPEX with firm and calendar-quarter fixed effects, Q4 CAPEX exceeds Q1 CAPEX by 23%.
In a simple investment model, the elasticity of investment with respect to the net of tax rate,
1 - z , equals the price elasticity. Interpreting spikes as a response to the tax incentives in the
system suggests elasticities in the range of 8 to 15.15 As these estimates reflect a large degree
of intertemporal substitution, it is not surprising the implied elasticities exceed conventional
estimates from other settings.
       Sales also display some Q4 periodicity due perhaps to the holiday season with a Q4 sales
spike yielding a mean value of 112%. In Section 2, we demonstrate the robustness of the Q4
CAPEX spike to this seasonality in addition to a host of other potential confounds. Similar sum-
mary statistics are documented for international firms. Appendix Table A.2 provides detailed
definitions for other firm characteristics.
       For some analyses, we supplement the Compustat U.S. data with corporate tax returns
from the Statistics of Income (SOI) division of the IRS Research, Analysis, and Statistics unit.
Each year the SOI produces a stratified sample of approximately 100,000 unaudited corporate
tax returns that includes all the largest U.S. firms.16 We use these data to design sharp tests of
whether the Q4 CAPEX spike depends on a firm's tax position as measured using tax accounting
data.
       We draw international evidence of Q4 CAPEX spikes from the Compustat Global database.
Starting from 2004, Compustat Global collects quarterly CAPEX information systematically. We
focus on countries with sufficiently available quarterly CAPEX information during the period
of 2004­2014. Table 2(b) presents summary statistics for the sample of international firms. In
total, 15,764 firms and 88,067 firm-year observations from 33 countries (excluding the U.S.)
are included in our international sample.
       We also draw from Compustat Segment data, which provide detailed information on seg-
ment structures and financial characteristics of each segment. We use these data to measure
  14
      Throughout the paper, Q4 CAPEX spikes are censored at 500 to ensure outliers are not driving our results. In
addition, our graphical analysis focuses on medians to demonstrate representativeness and robustness of spike
patterns.
   15
      The 2.0% subsidy for five-year investments in Table 1 implies a net of tax rate subsidy (i.e., the change in the
net of tax rate, or change in the tax term) of 2.9%. The subsidy is lower for longer-lived items because of the delay
in their baseline depreciation schedules. Because we do not observe the asset mix of investment for Compustat
firms, we cannot provide a more precise estimate and instead provide a range based on a 23% response and
implied subsidies between 1.5% and 2.9%.
   16
      Please refer to Zwick and Mahon (2017) for a detailed description of the data. We link these data using the
EIN reported in publicly available corporate financial statements.


                                                         11
the corporate or budgetary complexity of firms.17 In addition, we use Compustat Customer
Segments data to identify corporate supplier and customer links for our sample of U.S. firms.
       Finally, we draw data on equipment lending from the Equipment Leasing and Finance As-
sociation's (ELFA) Monthly Leasing and Finance Index (MLFI-25), aggregate investment from
the Manufacturers' Shipments, Inventories, and Orders (M3) survey data from the Census Bu-
reau, the Producer Price Index (PPI) from the Bureau of Labor Statistics, and interest rate data
from RateWatch (part of S&P Global Market Intelligence). The MLFI-25 measures monthly
commercial equipment lease and loan activity reported by participating ELFA member compa-
nies, which represents a cross-section of the equipment finance sector. The M3 survey provides
monthly statistical data on economic conditions in the domestic manufacturing sector. The PPI
program measures the average change over time in the selling prices received by domestic pro-
ducers for their output. The RateWatch database provides detailed interest rate information
for commercial equipment loans, commercial real estate loans, and personal loans.



2       Investment Spikes in Fiscal Q4
In this section, we document the size and persistence of Q4 CAPEX spikes and assess their
robustness to potential measurement and reporting issues. Figure 1(a) presents the time series
of fiscal Q4 investment spikes for U.S. firms in Compustat between 1984 and 2013. We plot the
median ratio of quarterly CAPEX to the average CAPEX within a firm's fiscal year. The fourth
quarters, indicated by red dots, consistently display higher CAPEX compared to the first three
quarters. The fiscal Q4 spikes are relatively lower during the 2001 and the 2008 recession
periods but remain above 100%.18
       We conduct several robustness checks to confirm this behavior is both present and real.
First, we show that steady growth cannot mechanically explain the magnitude of Q4 spikes.
To account for the average fiscal Q4 spike of 137%, investment would have to grow 17.5% per
quarter on average, implying a counterfactual amount of annual growth in investment. Figure
1(b) plots the quarterly median CAPEX level instead of the ratio, revealing a clear spike pattern
  17
     Following convention in the literature, we only keep segment information for firms whose segment data add
up to more than 80% of the sales and CAPEX at the consolidated level.
  18
     Figure 1(a) and other time series figures use the average within a firm's fiscal year as the denominator to
demonstrate the robustness of this pattern at the aggregate level. In subsequent analysis, we use the average of
the first three quarters as the denominator to permit an easier interpretation of investment effects, such as the
effect of taxes on Q4 CAPEX.


                                                      12
inconsistent with a steady growth explanation.19
       Second, fiscal year-end investment spikes are not driven by calendar-year seasonality and
are still present for firms that do not display seasonality in cash flows or sales. In the U.S.
sample, 57.1% of firms have fiscal year-ends in December, 10.4% in June, 8.2% in September,
7.4% in March, with the remaining 16.9% distributed across the other eight months. Figure
1(c) plots the time series of Q4 CAPEX spikes for firm-years with non-December fiscal year-ends.
Fiscal Q4 CAPEX spikes still hold for the non-December subsample, alleviating the concern that
calendar-time patterns drive year-end spikes. Figure 1(d) plots Q4 CAPEX spikes for firm-years
with smooth cash flows, defined as having fiscal Q4 cash flows lower than the average of the
first three fiscal quarters. Though partly attenuated, fiscal Q4 investment spikes remain robust
after controlling for seasonality in cash flows.20
       Third, Figure 1(e) isolates firms that move their fiscal year-end to six months later. The
y-axis measures the ratio of quarterly CAPEX to average CAPEX in a firm-year. White bars
indicate the fiscal year-end quarter according to the old regime, and orange bars indicate the
fiscal year-end quarter after switching. CAPEX spikes transition to the new fiscal Q4 after
the switch. The consistency of this pattern before and after the fiscal year-end change clearly
demonstrates that CAPEX spikes are indeed related to the fiscal year-end.
       Investment expenditures are not the only cost that firms can manage near fiscal year-end for
tax purposes. The IRS allows firms to deduct R&D expenditures in the tax year when incurred.
Firms may also claim the R&D credit against tax for certain qualified R&D expenditures and
combine the credit as one component of the general business credit. Appendix Figure B.2
presents the time series of fiscal Q4 R&D spikes for U.S. firms in Compustat between 1989 and
2013.21 The fourth quarters, indicated by red dots, consistently display higher R&D compared
to the first three quarters, and the first fiscal quarter displays the lowest R&D within a year.22
  19
     In Appendix Figure B.1(a), we use the average of lagged-two-period to forward-two-period quarterly CAPEX
as the denominator to calculate the spike ratio. This method is immune to discrete jumps in the denominator
when moving across years. Fiscal Q4 spikes remain clear and large. Appendix Figure B.1(b) plots spikes with the
average of Q4 and the next fiscal Q1 in the numerator of the spike measure. The graph reveals that, on average,
the drop in fiscal Q1 investment only partially offsets the prior Q4 spike. We further explore the relationship
between spikes and the level of investment in Section 4.3. We thank Mitchell Petersen for comments on how to
address this concern.
  20
     Appendix Figure B.1(c) shows the same pattern holds for firms with smooth sales.
  21
     R&D is net of R&D related salary and benefit expenses, which is calculated at industry average according
to the Business Research and Development and Innovation Survey (BRDIS) conducted by the National Science
Foundation. We assume salary and benefit expenses are flat over four quarters in the same fiscal years. Fiscal Q4
R&D spikes remain robust when we include salary and benefit expenses.
  22
     R&D spikes are smaller after 2001. We have confirmed this change in R&D spikes is not due to adjustment of


                                                      13
    Last, we move to an international sample to show that fiscal Q4 CAPEX spikes occur nearly
universally. For the period from 2004 to 2014, Figure 2 plots the time series of fiscal Q4
investment spikes for countries with at least nine years of data. In each plot, fiscal Q4s are
indicated by red dots. We sort countries according to their average corporate income tax rate
during the period--Switzerland has the lowest average corporate income tax rate (about 8%),
while Pakistan has the highest (about 35%).
    Across the 24 countries listed in Figure 2, we observe fiscal Q4 CAPEX spikes throughout.
Countries such as Indonesia, China, and Mexico show the highest spikes, while the United
Kingdom, Australia, New Zealand, and France show much lower spikes than average. Aus-
tralia, New Zealand, and France use the effective life for property depreciation. For example,
for property placed in service in the last month of a fiscal year, a firm only gets to depreciate
1/12 of the first year depreciation amount for the current tax year. The effective life method
significantly reduces the tax savings from fiscal year-end investment. As a whole, the evidence
from international data are remarkably consistent with the pattern prevailing in U.S. data. This
suggests that factors more general than the specific U.S. institutional setting are responsible
for Q4 CAPEX spikes.



3     Investment Spikes and Tax Policy
In this section, we present direct evidence that Q4 CAPEX spikes are driven by a tax-minimization
motive. We pursue two complementary strategies. First and most direct, we show that firms
consistently spike only when they are in the position to use depreciation deductions during
the current tax year. Second, we show that the Tax Reform Act of 1986, which considerably
reduced the marginal incentive to tilt investment to year-end, caused Q4 spikes to fall. Overall,
the results reveal a clear role for tax motives in driving investment spikes.


3.1     Investment Spikes and Tax Position

We combine Q4 CAPEX spike data from Compustat with tax position data from corporate tax
returns for the years 1993 through 2010. We follow Zwick and Mahon (2017) and define
salary and benefit expenses in R&D calculation, reporting frequency, or outsourcing and firms' foreign sales. We
leave further investigation of R&D spikes to future research.




                                                      14
D(taxable) as an indicator for whether a firm has positive income before depreciation expense
and thus an immediate incentive to offset taxable income with additional investment.
       Figure 3(a) plots the relationship between Q4 spikes and firm tax position. We divide firm-
years into $1,000 bins based on their taxable income before depreciation expense is taken into
account and plot for each bin the median Q4 CAPEX spike. The results starkly confirm the
hypothesis that immediate tax position is a first-order driver of Q4 spikes. To the right of zero,
the median Q4 spike is approximately 120% and considerably above 100% for all bins. To
the left of zero, the median spikes are centered around 100% with no clear pattern above or
below.23
       Table 3 presents firm-level regressions designed to measure the size and robustness of the
tax position result.24 All regressions include firm and year fixed effects. Thus, the regres-
sions measure spike responsiveness while only exploiting variation in a firm's tax position over
time. Unlike regressions with the level of investment on the left-hand side, these regressions
are considerably less subject to the concern that tax position and investment are jointly corre-
lated with growth opportunities. Column (1) shows that a positive tax position leads firms to
exhibit a spike that is 7.6% higher than for nontaxable firms, which equals 25% of the within-
sample spike of 31% (relative to 100%, or no Q4 spike). Column (2) adds the following con-
trols: ln(assets), Market-to-Book, Cash/Assets, CAPEX/PPE, and Sales 4/3. Even controlling
for the level of investment does not materially alter the coefficient on tax position. Columns
(4) through (7) show that the results are similar in the pre-2000 and post-2000 samples.
       Column (3) adds a measure of cash flow (EBITDA/Assets) as an additional control, which
reduces the coefficient to 2.9%. As cash flows may serve as a measure of the intensity of a firm's
tax position, this regression likely "overcontrols" for confounding factors, causing a downward
bias in the tax position coefficient. We include the regression because it suggests an alternative
interpretation of the sensitivity between investment and cash flows, which has been used in
countless studies going back to Fazzari, Hubbard and Petersen (1988) to measure financial
constraints. Such a sensitivity may instead reflect a tax-minimization motive. We return to this
idea in Section 4.1.
       When filing tax returns, firms can deduct net operating loss carryforwards if they enter
  23
      The density of firm-year observations is relatively thin at levels below -$50M, which accounts for the wider
variance in within-bin medians. In addition, the density exhibits bunching around $0, which precludes a regres-
sion discontinuity analysis at this point.
   24
      Appendix Table B.2 presents regression estimates with alternative Q4 spike measures and delivers similar
results.


                                                       15
the tax year with past losses (see IRS publication 536). Because loss carryforwards serve as
an alternative tax shield, a firm with a large stock of carryforwards has a weaker incentive to
accelerate investment for tax reduction. We examine this prediction in Figure 3(b) by plotting
median Q4 CAPEX spikes for groups of firms sorted according to the ratio of lagged loss carry-
forward stock to current year net income before depreciation, while excluding firms in current
tax loss position. The figure shows a strong negative relationship between the presence of this
alternative tax shield and the size of Q4 spikes.25


3.2       Investment Spikes and the Tax Reform Act of 1986 (TRA86)

In the second research strategy, we study the effect of tax policy changes on investment spikes
using TRA86. TRA86 repealed the Investment Tax Credit (ITC), decreased the top corporate
income tax rate, and introduced the less generous Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery System
(MACRS) for depreciation deductions. Each of these changes reduces the taxes saved given an
amount of investment. The tax-minimization hypothesis thus predicts a weaker incentive to
accelerate investment around the fiscal year-end and lower fiscal year-end spikes as a conse-
quence.
       We formally test this prediction in regression form and present estimates in Table 4.The co-
efficients of interest are on the dummy variable D(1984-1987), which indicates the correspond-
ing years for the pre-TRA86 period in our sample and the phase-in year for the rate changes and
ITC phase-out. Firm fixed effects are included in order to control for time-invariant firm char-
acteristics. We also include firm financial characteristics such as the level of CAPEX/PPE, Sales
4/3, ln(assets), Market-to-Book, and Cash/Assets to control for the effect of contemporaneous
non-tax shocks.
       In general, analyses of tax regimes and investment suffer endogeneity issues, as tax reforms
often respond to macroeconomic factors that could also affect investment. However, these
endogeneity issues are more likely to concern the level of investment. Since we focus on the
timing of investment within the same fiscal year, rather than investment levels, it is unlikely
  25
    Note that firms with loss carryforwards may still have an incentive to accelerate investment and thereby save
carryforwards for the future. Our point is only that this incentive is weaker for these firms than for firms for which
accelerating investment affects current taxes as well. Empirically, firms in all groups in Figure 3(b) have observed
NOL deductions below their potential deductions, leaving positive taxable income to be offset by depreciation
deductions. Thus, most of these firms are likely in the position to trade off the tax consequences of additional
investment against taking larger NOL deductions.



                                                         16
that shocks affecting the level of investment would also systematically shift investment toward
one part of the fiscal year. In particular, the identifying assumption is that in the absence of
a change in tax motives to retime investment, we would not observe a difference before and
after TRA86 in the share of investment taking place in fiscal Q4. This assumption is weaker
than a common trends assumption, as it permits firm-by-time shocks that do not consistently
coincide with the firm's fiscal year. Moreover, as shown in Section 2, two of the most likely
alternative explanations--seasonality of cash flows and relabeling of investment purchases--
cannot account for observed spike behavior.
      We run regressions for different time periods for robustness. Columns (1) and (2) show
regression estimates for the period of 1984 to 1992, as the corporate income tax rates after
1992 are slightly higher. Columns (3) and (4) show regression estimates for the period of 1984
to 2000. Columns (5) and (6) present regression estimates for the whole period of 1984 to
2013. In all six specifications, D(1984-1987) shows significantly higher fiscal Q4 spikes. On
average, Q4 spikes drop by between 5.0 and 10.6 percentage points after TRA86, a large change
relative to the mean Q4 spike of 37%. Columns (7) and (8) present regression estimates with
the left-hand-side variable being a dummy variable indicating whether Q4 CAPEX is over the
40% threshold, which may trigger the mid-quarter convention requirement. The probability
of firms passing the 40% threshold drops by between 1.6 and 4.3 percentage points, a modest
but meaningful decrease relative to the 20.7% average before 1987.26
      Figure 3(c) presents the dynamic response of Q4 spikes around TRA86 for the years be-
tween 1984 and 2000. We estimate regressions using the same sample and controls as Table 4,
columns (3) and (4), and plot the year effects and confidence bands. The year 2000 is omitted
as the benchmark year. The plot reveals a sharp decrease in average Q4 spikes beginning in
1987 and continuing to fall through the transition period in 1988 and 1989. During the tran-
sition, the corporate tax rate was higher for some firms with fiscal years ending in 1988 and
the ITC was still available for some asset classes through 1989. In addition, Maydew (1997)
documents income shifting immediately following TRA86 for public firms seeking to maximize
net operating loss carrybacks, which may produce some post-TRA86 investment spikes. In the
decade following the transition period, within-firm Q4 spikes are consistently lower than prior
to TRA86.
 26
      Appendix Table B.3 shows that our TRA86 results are robust to alternative spike measures.




                                                       17
4       Cross-Sectional and Dynamic Drivers of Investment Spikes
This section explores how different factors influence the magnitude of fiscal year-end invest-
ment spikes across firms and within firms over time. We focus on factors likely to influence
intertemporal decision-making either via the discount rate firms use to evaluate investment
decisions or via the incentive to retime investment from the short- and medium-term future.
We investigate whether investment spikes only reflect high frequency retiming of investment
across fiscal quarters or instead combine high frequency and lower frequency adjustments in
the capital stock. We also explore the interaction between tax-minimizing investment and other
patterns of corporate behavior, asking what role earnings management and capital budgeting
play in determining Q4 spikes.


4.1      Investment Spikes and Financial Constraints

Firms that face costly external finance should place a higher value on the tax savings associated
with retiming investment, as they apply higher effective discount rates when trading off taxes
paid this year versus in the future (Zwick and Mahon, 2017). We follow past literature and
test this prediction by studying how tax-induced Q4 spikes vary among firms sorted according
to five proxies for financial constraints: (1) ln(assets) where small firms are more constrained;
(2) a non-dividend payer dummy; (3) a speculative grade bond rating dummy; and, following
Faulkender and Petersen (2012), (4) a dummy variable indicating CAPEX exceeding internal
cash flow, and (5) a dummy variable indicating CAPEX exceeding internal cash flow and not
having an S&P rating.
      Rather than studying the direct correlation between financial constraint measures and fiscal
Q4 CAPEX spikes, which might be confounded by omitted factors, we interact the financial
constraint measures with the time-series variation in Q4 spike incentives induced by TRA86.
The high discount rate prediction suggests that the decrease in Q4 spikes following the tax
change should be larger for financially constrained firms. Table 5, columns (1) through (5)
confirm this prediction: firms that are more constrained experience a larger drop in their Q4
spikes after 1987. The estimate in column (1) implies that firms in the top quartile of ln(assets)
reduced Q4 spikes by 1.4 percentage points, whereas firms in the bottom quartile reduced Q4
spikes by 8.9 percentage points.27 In columns (2) through (5), the effects are consistently at
 27
      The top and bottom quartiles have mean ln(assets) equal to 8.25 and 3.42, respectively. Implied effects equal


                                                        18
least fifty percent larger for firms more likely to face financial constraints based on alternative
proxies.
    One implication of the tax-minimization incentive of firms' CAPEX spending for the study of
financial constraints concerns the investment-cash flow sensitivity. A large literature in macroe-
conomics and finance studies how firm investment responds to changes in cash flow. The idea
is that if firms rely more on internal funding for investment and hence are more financially con-
strained, their investment should display larger sensitivities to cash flow. Our paper provides
an alternative explanation for investment-cash flow sensitivities--firms experiencing higher
cash flows, which tend to correspond to higher taxable incomes, might invest more due to tax
minimization. This argument resonates especially in the case of one-time or low-persistence
shocks to cash flows and would hold even if cash flow shocks were uncorrelated with other
drivers of investment, as long as those shocks come in pre-tax dollars.
    To explore this idea, we decompose the conventional investment-cash flow sensitivity into
different fiscal quarters and present the results in Table 6. To enable comparison to past work,
in column (1) we replicate the annual investment-cash flow sensitivity analysis by showing a
firm's CAPEX is positively related to its cash flow after controlling for Tobin's Q. As is standard,
both firm fixed effects and year fixed effects are included to show the within-firm sensitivity. In
columns (2) and (3), we decompose annual CAPEX into four quarters and run the same regres-
sions but with cash flow interacted with dummy variables indicating different fiscal quarters.
Column (2) interacts a fiscal Q4 dummy with Cash Flow/Assets. Column (3) interacts dum-
mies for each fiscal quarter with Cash Flow/Assets. While the investment-cash flow sensitivity
remains positive with a smaller magnitude, the fourth fiscal quarter displays sensitivities about
twice as large as that of the first three quarters. A financial constraint hypothesis alone cannot
account for the sudden spike in sensitivity--is the fourth quarter more financially constrained
than the first three? The tax-minimization hypothesis offers a natural explanation.


4.2     Investment Duration, Earnings Volatility, and Earnings Management

This section considers dynamic factors that influence a firm's decision to accelerate investment.
We study firm characteristics that tend to increase the option value associated with accelerating
investment to minimize taxes and ask whether these factors indeed contribute to higher Q4
14.24 - 1.56 × 8.25 = 1.37 and 14.24 - 1.56 × 3.42 = 8.90, respectively.



                                                      19
spikes on average.
   Figure 4(a) presents a binned scatterplot of Q4 spikes for firms sorted by the average du-
ration of equipment investment for a firm's respective industry. The measure is derived from
the reciprocal of the present value of depreciation deductions (via Zwick and Mahon (2017)
at the NAICS four-digit level) with higher values representing longer equipment investment
duration. The intertemporal demand elasticity for longer lived items is higher when benefits
of shifting investment are temporary (House and Shapiro, 2008). Consistent with this idea,
median Q4 spikes are 10% to 20% higher for firms in long duration industries versus firms in
short duration industries.
   Figure 4(b) provides further supporting evidence of the idea that spikes represent a firm's
decision to realize a tax-minimizing option in response to a temporary positive earnings shock.
We estimate local projections at the firm-year level, regressing an indicator for a Q4 spike in
a future year on an indicator for a Q4 spike in the current year. We include firm and year
fixed effects to estimate the autocorrelation of spikes within-firm over time. The plot presents
coeffients and standard errors from regressions for leads between one and ten years. In the year
following a spike, the probability of spiking falls by 8 percentage points, which corresponds to
a 20% reduction in the probability that a firm spikes in the next year. This decline weakens to
approximately zero over time but remains low for several additional years. This fact suggests
that spikes do not reflect a fully planned, repetitive budgeting process, instead they reflect a
process with mean reversion and time variation in the value of spiking.
   The option value motive suggests that investment spikes cluster in fiscal Q4 because tax
positions can be better estimated close to fiscal year-end when most revenues and expenses
for the year have been recorded. Figures 4(c) and 4(d) present binned scatterplots for firms
sorted by the mean and volatility of earnings, measured by the within-firm mean and standard
deviation of EBITDA/Assets. Firms with higher average profitability display higher Q4 spikes,
with the relationship strongest nearer the loss region of the distribution. Interestingly, firms
with higher volatility show lower Q4 spikes. This pattern can be reconciled by the fact that
earnings variance tends to come from large negative shocks to earnings. Tax code asymmetries
imply that only positive surprises should be correlated with investment spikes.
   Given that expensing and depreciation affect book earnings, the effect of Q4 spikes on
book earnings would provide incentives or disincentives for corporate investment depending
on a firm's book earnings position. Figure 5 presents a binned scatterplot of firm Q4 CAPEX


                                              20
spikes against Q4 earnings surprises. The vertical line with earnings surprise equal to zero
indicates that firms exactly meet the median analyst forecast.28 Firms clearly tend to beat the
analyst earnings forecasts, and firms that meet or beat their analyst forecasts conduct more
tax-minimizing investment. More generally, we see a positive relationship between earnings
and Q4 spikes, consistent with the within-firm analysis above. When we regress the magnitude
of spikes on an indicator for whether the firm beats or meets its earnings forecast, the effect
size is approximately 5 percentage points. The result suggests that earnings management and
tax planning are connected decisions, with an active trade-off margin operating between them.


4.3       The Cumulative Effect of Investment Spikes

To what extent do these spikes reflect only high-frequency retiming of investment versus a
longer-lasting cumulative change in the level of investment? Answering this question serves
two purposes. The first is to address whether year-end spikes have medium- or long-term
implications beyond the quarter after a spike occurs. The second is to provide more evidence
that spikes reflect time-varying opportunities for firms to offset tax bills associated with positive
earnings shocks. As we move from looking at the timing of investment to looking at its level,
it is important to keep in mind the possibility that certain omitted variables affecting the firm's
investment opportunity set might still be at play. We take several approaches below to address
this potential concern.
       Figure 6 plots in event time the ratio of average quarterly CAPEX from the beginning of the
spike year to the current quarter relative to a baseline, which we define as the average quarterly
CAPEX in the year before the spike year. We plot this cumulative investment series separately
for firms with large spikes in fiscal Q1, Q2, Q3, and Q4, respectively. Large spikes are defined
as CAPEX Q/Ave(Q1­Q4) exceeding 113.65%, the sample median Q4 spike level.29 The dotted
lines indicate 95% confidence intervals. We follow average quarterly CAPEX relative to baseline
up to two years after the spike year. For fiscal Q1 and Q2 spikers, the ratio reverses within 1
or 2 quarters and becomes statistically indistinguishable from 100%. In contrast, fiscal Q3 and
Q4 spikers show a persistent and statistically significant increase in investment after the spike
quarter, with the average investment level remaining at approximately 200% relative to the
  28
    Using the mean or median analyst forecasts generates very similar results.
  29
    Though early-year spikes are less common than late-year spikes, the early-year spike sample is not pro-
hibitively small. Fiscal Q1, Q2, Q3, and Q4 spikers account for 22%, 26%, 28%, and 50% of observations within
their respective quarters.


                                                     21
baseline by the end of the post period.30
       Figure 6 suggests that high-frequency intertemporal shifting cannot fully account for the
higher level of investment in end-of-year CAPEX spikes. Table 7 presents firm-level regression
estimates to measure the differential increase in investment level between Q1­2 and Q3­4
spikers. We examine the CAPEX level from one year before to three years after large spikes,
normalized by total capital (PPENT) in the year before spikes. All regressions include event
fixed effects and year fixed effects. Thus, the regressions compare within-event investment
levels around large spikes, with the year before large spikes serving as the omitted benchmark.
We examine the level for each year for fiscal Q1­2 spikers in columns (1) and (2) and Q3­
4 spikers in columns (3) and (4), and then estimate the difference in a pooled regression
in columns (5) and (6). Columns (2), (4), and (6) add Market-to-Book, Cash/Assets, and
EBITDA/Assets as additional controls to absorb the impact of time-varying firm characteristics
and investment opportunity shocks on investment levels.
       Firm-years with large CAPEX spikes indeed experience higher investment levels compared
to pre-spike years, and the increases in investment level are persistent and do not reverse even
after three years. Interestingly, Q3­4 spikers display a much stronger increase in investment
level compared to Q1­2 spikers. We formally investigate the statistical difference across these
two subgroups in columns (5) and (6) of Table 7. The coefficient estimates of the interaction
terms Q34 Spiker remain statistically positive and quantitatively significant from the spiking
year until three years after, confirming the higher investment levels by Q3­4 spikers after large
spikes. Adding additional firm controls does not alter this conclusion. Figure 6(e) plots the
coefficient estimates with 95% confidence intervals for these two subgroups to demonstrate
this difference graphically.
       The differential responses in investment level are consistent with the tax-minimization hy-
pothesis in the following sense. While potential confounding shocks such as large investment
opportunities are likely evenly distributed across fiscal quarters, Q3­4 spikers face a stronger
tax-minimization motive relative to Q1­2 spikers, resulting in higher investment levels that do
not immediately reverse in the subsequent few fiscal years. This effect operates in addition to
the likely effect of persistent productivity shocks, which can account for the weaker but pos-
itive persistence of investment for Q1­2 spikers but not for the differential persistence when
  30
    Appendix Figure B.3 plots each quarter's CAPEX relative to the average quarterly CAPEX in the year before
spikes, confirming that averaging CAPEX does not drive the observed investment persistence following large
spikes.


                                                     22
comparing Q1­2 spikers to Q3­4 spikers.
   We interpret this fact as reflecting both the depreciation and option value motives. Firms
that face a temporary opportunity to invest and reduce their tax burden will increase invest-
ment this year. Because investment is a long-lived asset, they may substitute investment from
several years in the future, which results in persistent investment levels when cumulated over
subsequent years. House and Shapiro (2008) apply this logic to understand the response of
long-lived investment to temporary investment incentives. In our setting, it helps us under-
stand why corporate investment appears to respond to time-varying tax incentives arising from
the interaction of the low after-tax price and time-varying firm profitability. We explore this
logic further in the context of the model in Section 5.


4.4   Investment Spikes and Internal Capital Markets

An alternative explanation for the Q4 CAPEX spikes is related to firm budget cycles. Many
firms have budgets expiring at the end of fiscal years, where accounts will be set lower subse-
quently if budgets are not spent. Those firms face a "Use it or lose it" dilemma. Moreover, in
some firms, evaluation of employee or manager performance might also be linked to budget
spending, where more spending can be interpreted as better performance. These factors create
an incentive for firms to rush to spend budgets near the fiscal year-end. Oyer (1998) connects
seasonal sales patterns to year-end incentive contracts among salespeople and executives. Shin
and Kim (2002) show that large, cash-rich and diversified firms spend more CAPEX in Q4, sug-
gesting agency costs in investment decisions. Similar year-end "rush to spend" behavior has
been observed in other organizations. Liebman and Mahoney (2017) study spikes in year-end
procurement spending for the U.S. federal government and show that expiring budgets lead
to wasteful year-end spending, while an agency that has the ability to roll over the unfinished
budget does not exhibit year-end spending spikes.
   Due to the lack of firms' budget data, a direct test of the budget hypothesis is not viable.
As an alternative, we study different measures of budgetary complexity. If the rush in fiscal
year-end CAPEX spending is true, then we would expect it to be more pronounced in firms
with more complex budgetary structures where budgets across different divisions cannot be
uniformly managed. We test this idea and present the results in Table 8.
   We use two different measures to capture the complexity of a firm's budgetary structure:



                                              23
the number of segments and the number of two-digit SIC codes in the corporate segment.
The variation explored in Table 8 is mainly cross-sectional and all measures are standardized
for easy interpretation. Because complexity is increasing in firm size, we condition on size
to measure the impact of complexity within firm-size groups. Table 8 shows that firms with
more complex budgetary structures indeed display higher Q4 spikes--a one standard deviation
increase in the complexity measures leads to a 1.6% to 2.6% increase in fiscal Q4 CAPEX spikes.
The economic magnitudes of the effects shown in Table 8 are somewhat smaller than our
estimated tax effects, but this finding may reflect our inability to measure budget incentives
directly. We therefore interpret this result as suggesting that "Use it or lose it" incentives are
likely contributing to Q4 spikes, though such incentives cannot explain the responsiveness of
spikes to tax changes.31



5       A Dynamic Model of Tax-Minimizing Investment
This section develops a dynamic model of investment in the presence of a tax motivation to
accelerate investment. We examine how different factors influence the magnitude of fiscal
year-end investment spikes and use the model to understand the persistence of cumulative
investment following spikes.
       Beginning with a discrete time, neoclassical investment model with adjustment costs (Abel,
1982; Hayashi, 1982; Winberry, Forthcoming), we introduce predictable time variation in the
value of the investment tax shield. We calibrate the model to match partial equilibrium invest-
ment moments quantitatively. We then apply the model to answer two questions. First, can
a standard calibration deliver investment spikes that are quantitatively comparable to those
observed in the data? Second, what is the relative importance of the depreciation motive and
option value motive in accounting for the evidence, especially the persistence of cumulative
investment following spikes?
  31
    We investigated whether the tax status results are either mitigated or amplified by "use it or lose it" motives.
To do this, we estimated regressions like in Table 3 but interacting tax status with proxies for firm complexity. We
do not find the tax position effects are meaningfully different for more complex firms. While consistent with the
idea that strong tax incentives appear more important than firm complexity effects for spike behavior, exploring
these forces with better measurement of "use it or lose it" incentives would be an interesting avenue for future
research.




                                                        24
5.1      Model

The model follows Winberry (Forthcoming), modified to include a tax asymmetry, the half-year
convention for depreciating current year investment, and four sub-periods within the fiscal
year. Firms choose labor n and capital k to maximize profits. The labor choice is static, given
by:
                                                                       1

                                                 e k
                                                                      1-
                                              
                    n(k, ) = argmax e k n - wn =                           ,    +<1
                                n                 w

where is a productivity shock and  , , and w are parameters. Productivity evolves according
to the AR(1) process:
                                              =     -1   + ,

where           (0, 2 ), | | < 1.
      Investment, i , yields capital for next period according to the law of motion, k = (1 - )k + i .
                                                               i 2
Adjustment costs follow the standard convex form, - 2          k     k. The model abstracts from fixed
costs to focus on the dynamics from a richer tax environment, which is sufficient to match most
of the empirical results.
      Profitability depends on productivity and an additional random term, , that provides a
simple way to generate both a left-skewed distribution of profitability to fit the Compustat data
and a significant mass of firms in tax loss position to fit the tax data.  can be thought of as
either a random overhead fixed cost or accounting adjustment, which creates the possibility
the firm experiences operating losses. Define the firm's gross operating surplus (GOS) prior to
depreciation deductions as:


                            GOS (k, , ) = e k n(k, ) - wn(k, ) + .


The firm's tax bill equals a linear tax  on taxable income, defined as GOS less depreciation
deductions, if taxable income is positive and zero otherwise: T B =  max T I , 0 . Tax asym-
metries interact with the left-skewed profitability process, jointly determined by          and , to
generate rich investment dynamics across firms and within firms over time.
      Each fiscal year has four quarters: Q1, Q2, Q3, and Q4. For tax purposes, the firm accu-
mulates quarterly realizations of gross operating surplus and investment expenditures, which
jointly determine the firm's end-of-year tax position and reset after Q4. The current stock of
gross operating surplus, g , evolves as g = g + GOS (k, , ) in Q1 through Q3 and g = 0 in

                                                  25
Q4.
       In the first three quarters, the firm faces no tax obligations, so its choice of investment only
affects deductions made at the end of the year. Taxable income in all quarters is given by:


             (Q1­Q3) T I  0                   (Q4) T I  ( g + GOS ) - 4^¯
                                                                        k - 2^ ^
                                                                               k-¯
                                                                                 k + pi ,


where ^ is the rate of tax depreciation, p is the constant market price of investment, ^
                                                                                       k is the
current depreciation stock, and ¯
                                k is the start-of-year depreciation stock carried over from last
fiscal year. Both depreciation stock variables are necessary because of the half-year convention,
which treats depreciation stocks accumulated in the current year differently from those carried
over from past years. The depreciation stock evolves based on the rules for deductibility during
the fiscal year:32


              (Q1­Q3) ^
                      k =^
                         k + pi                     (Q4) ^
                                                         k = (1 - 4^)¯
                                                                     k + (1 - 2^)(^
                                                                                  k-¯
                                                                                    k + pi ).


       We can now write the recursive firm problem for each quarter. The firm's state variables
are the capital stock k, start-of-year and current stock of depreciation deductions ¯
                                                                                    k and ^
                                                                                          k,
productivity , profitability shifter , and cumulative gross operating surplus g . The value
functions in the first three quarters are defined by the Bellman equation:


            V N (k, ^
                    k, ¯
                       k, g , , ) = GOS (k, , )
                                             i 2
                               + max - pi -        k+                      | ,   V C (k , ^
                                                                                          k ,¯
                                                                                             k , g , , )
                                   i        2 k                                                                     (1)
                        s.t. ^
                             k =^k + pi   k = (1 -  ) k + i                   ¯
                                                                              k =¯
                                                                                 k

                               g = g + GOS (k, , )               i  0,

where V C (·) = V N (·) for Q1 and Q2 and V C (·) = V T (·) for Q3, marking the transition to when
taxes are determined and paid. The value function in the last quarter is defined by the Bellman
  32
     For tractability, we do not model tax loss carryforwards or carrybacks across fiscal years, so deductions unused
in a particular year are lost. As long as loss offsets are partial or occur with a delay, the incentive to use investment
to reduce taxes will be stronger if the firm is currently taxable.




                                                          26
equation:


  V T (k , ^
           k ,¯
              k, g , ,  ) = GOS (k , ,  )

                         + max -  max g + GOS (k , ,  ) - 4^^
                                                            k - 2^ ^
                                                                   k -¯
                                                                      k + pi , 0
                             i
                                                     2
                                           i
                                   - pi -        k +  | , V N (k , ^
                                                                   k ,¯
                                                                      k ,g ,               , )
                                           k2
                s.t. ^
                     k = (1 - 4^)¯
                                 k + (1 - 2 ^)(^
                                               k -¯ k + pi )

                      k = (1 -  ) k + i         ¯
                                                k =^
                                                   k        g =0          i  0.
                                                                                                  (2)
   We note two differences between the Q1-to-Q3 value functions (1) and the Q4 value func-
tion (2). First, the investment decision affects current taxes in (2), but only affects future taxes
in (1). As a result, the after-tax price of investment is effectively higher in (1). Second, the
continuation values deterministically alternate between (1) in Q3 and (2) in Q4, such that
firms know which problem they face in the next period and thus how uncertainty over their
profitability will be resolved. These features combine to create an incentive to tilt investment
toward the end of the fiscal year and especially into the last quarter.
   We compare this full model to a baseline model in which depreciation deductions start
whenever the investment is made, and in which even firms with losses receive tax credits
for depreciation. In this case the firm's problem is identical each quarter and defined by the
Bellman equation:


V (k, ^
      k, , ) = GOS (k, , )
                                                                      2
                                     ^(^                  i
            + max -  GOS (k, , ) -      k + pi ) - pi -                   k+      | ,   V (k , ^
                                                                                               k , , )
               i                                         2 k
       s.t. ^
            k = (1 - ^)(^
                        k + pi ) k = (1 -  ) k + i     i  0.
                                                                                                  (3)
The baseline model removes all "depreciation motives" driving spike behavior, including the
tax asymmetry, the half-year convention, and the disconnect between when taxes net of depre-
ciation deductions are due and when investment expenditures occur.
   The value functions for the full model show how the incentive to use investment to minimize
taxes is stronger at year-end because there is no uncertainty about the firm's tax position as
a function of investment. We refer to this feature as the "option value" motive because firms
have an incentive to wait and see how their tax position evolves during the fiscal year. If the


                                                27
year goes well, then they can increase investment at year-end to minimize their remaining tax
burden. If the year goes poorly and the firm's taxable income is already close to zero, then they
will have less reason to increase investment in the current fiscal year to reduce taxes.
       The option value motive is not relevant when firms are always taxable. In this case, they
face a similar problem every year. In the model with  = 0 and under the standard calibration,
firms rarely find themselves in tax loss position. We therefore use an  = 0 version to measure
the relative importance of the option value motive versus the depreciation motive for spike
levels and persistence.


5.2       Solution and Calibration

We solve the model by value function iteration and then simulate investment and capital paths
for 10,000 firms with different productivity shock paths over T = 500. We use the following
parameters from Winberry (Forthcoming): output elasticities  = 0.64 and  = 0.21, discount
rate  = 0.975, productivity persistence  = 0.9, the standard deviation of productivity  =
0.08, and convex adjustment costs  = 2.95. We parametrize  as a scaled Bernoulli variable
with arrival probability of 0.17 and scale upon arrival of -0.5, jointly chosen to match (1)
the share of firms with negative gross operating surplus to the distribution of profitability in
our Compustat data and (2) the share of firms with negative taxable income in Q4 to the
distribution of tax losses in our tax data. In the Compustat data, the coefficient of variation for
this variable is 1.8, while its simulated analogue (GOS/Assets) has coefficient of variation of
1.7. The simulation generates a nontaxable share of 30%, compared to 31% for our matched
analysis sample.33 Notably, when we simulate the model with  = 0, the nontaxable share is
approximately zero. Thus, our calibrated productivity process matches the underlying variance
of earnings and taxable income better than the standard model in the literature.
       We also follow Winberry (Forthcoming) and set economic depreciation  = 0.025 per quar-
ter and tax depreciation ^ = 0.119 to match a 10% aggregate CAPEX/Assets ratio in the data

and the statutory depreciation schedule, respectively. The standard deviation of annual invest-
ment relative to assets is 0.06 in the simulation compared to 0.13 in the data, likely reflecting
the fact that the model does not feature the mix of long and short duration investment present
in the data. The tax rate is  = 0.35, the top statutory rate at the end of our sample.
  33
    Relative to the 36% net operating loss share in Zwick (Forthcoming), the empirical nontaxable share is lower
here because (1) it is computed before depreciation deductions and (2) it only includes public companies.


                                                      28
5.3    Results

Figure 7 plots the ratio of average investment in each quarter to average investment in the
whole year, indicating that the model is able to match the data's quantitatively large spikes
at the end of the fiscal year. We plot results for three versions of the model following the
parameterization above, a "Baseline" version without depreciation motives (as in (3)), a "De-
preciation" version that adds depreciation motives but removes the profitability shifter from
the model, and a "Full" version that reintroduces the profitability shifter and thereby the option
value motive for spikes.
   The Depreciation model yields larger spikes than the Full model because of differences
across the model in simulated tax positions. In particular,  = 0 firm-years almost never expe-
rience tax losses, as they are able to adjust variable inputs to offset the effect of negative pro-
ductivity shocks. In contrast, approximately thirty percent of Full model firm-years experience
tax losses, which attenuate the tax-minimization motive. Consistent with tax policy-induced
spikes, the Baseline model shows no systematic spike patterns.
   We compute tax-policy-relevant comparative statics using model simulations after solving
the model for different parameter values (Appendix Table B.4). The results confirm the basic
intuition that spikes depend on the value of investment as a tax shield. This intuition emerges
clearly upon comparing the firm problems between the first three quarters (1) and the last
quarter (2). As the tax rate approaches zero, the decision problems converge. Thus, spikes are
increasing in the tax rate and approach zero when the tax rate is low. Investment spikes are
also increasing in the speed of tax depreciation for investment purchases. Third, investment
spikes are larger in a version of the model that adds a non-refundable, 10% investment tax
credit on top of accelerated depreciation.
   Figure 8(a) uses the three versions of the model to decompose the persistence of investment
spikes into contributions from the depreciation versus option value motives. For each model
version, we first sample ten spike events per simulated firm sequence and then order the data in
event time relative to the spike. Spikes are defined as investment ratios (Q4 investment divided
by Q1­Q4 average) greater than the sample median. For each event, we compute cumulative
average investment beginning in Q1 of the spike year and scale this cumulative series by the
average investment rate across all simulated quarters in that event's respective model version,
which serves as a measure of benchmark investment within the model. We then regress scaled
cumulative investment on event time dummies and control for productivity with indicators for

                                                29
each level of productivity. These controls remove the effect of productivity persistence from
the model simulations. We also control for the size of the initial spike interacted with event
time dummies to control for different mean spikes across model versions.
   Figure 8(a) plots the coefficients from these regressions for the Baseline, Depreciation, and
Full models for a sample of simulated firm events. For the Depreciation and Full models, co-
efficients remain above zero and only partly reverse after the spike quarter. For the Baseline
model, the coefficients decline quickly after the spike event and indicate short-run mean rever-
sion. This pattern reflects the fact that spikes in the Baseline model, while rare, occur when the
firm experiences a string of positive and increasing productivity shocks, which tend to reverse
in subsequent periods. In contrast to this pattern, both model versions with tax motives dis-
play cumulative investment effects in excess of that predicted by the underlying productivity
process.
   The Full model displays larger persistence of spike-year investment with a coefficient in pe-
riod 12 of 23% compared to 10% for the Depreciation model and -16% for the Baseline model.
The graph displays these results for one particular sample of firm events, so to demonstrate
their robustness, we generate a distribution of cumulative effects by bootstrapping these coef-
ficients over 1,000 iterations. The mean period-12 effect in the Full model is 29.4% (s.d.=4.1),
which considerably exceeds the effect in the Depreciation model of 4.9% (s.d.=3.4) and in the
Baseline model of -14.7% (s.d.=2.3). The Depreciation model delivers persistence of spike-
level investment approximately halfway between the Baseline and Full models. The model
therefore implies the depreciation and option value motives each account for half of the post-
spike persistence in investment in excess of that accounted for by underlying productivity per-
sistence.
   Figure 8(b) plots an alternative approach to demonstrating the importance of tax motives
for the persistence of investment following spikes. We use simulations from the Full model to
construct analogous regression coefficients to Table 7, column (5) for investment levels follow-
ing Q3­Q4 and Q1­Q2 spikes. We then plot the cumulative difference in investment levels for
late-year spikers less that for early-year spikers. Consistent with the empirical evidence, the
plot shows the simulated model generates more investment persistence when spikes happen at
the end of the year--which are more likely to be driven by tax motives--than when they hap-
pen at the start of the year--which are more likely to be driven by the evolution of productivity
shocks.


                                               30
    The model helps clarify the intuition for the persistence of investment following spikes doc-
umented in both the data and model simulations. Part of the persistence reflects the underlying
persistence of productivity shocks. However, productivity cannot account for the stronger per-
sistence in the Full model versus the Baseline and Depreciation models. This fact reflects the
increased option value of retiming investment when firms face a nontrivial risk of tax losses in
future years. Baseline and Depreciation model firms do not face this risk, so investment spikes
only reflect productivity shocks in the Baseline model and how productivity interacts with the
time-varying, after-tax price of investment in the Depreciation model. In other words, invest-
ment spikes persist because the fiscal year-end is a "good time" to invest when the returns to
investment are high--in the Depreciation model, it is a good time because the price is low; in
the Full model, it is a good time because the price is low and there is a nontrivial chance the
price will be higher in the coming years.
    Figures 8(c) and 8(d) compare the three models in terms of the mean and variance of
profitability. The Full model successfully matches the relationship in the data for both the
within-firm earnings mean and variance. In the Depreciation model, these relationships are
weaker or absent in the case of earnings volatility and of the wrong sign in the case of earnings
means. Importantly, the Baseline model cannot match these relationships, which underscores
the likely importance of tax asymmetries and immediate tax benefits in generating the empirical
patterns we observe.



6     Implications of Tax-Minimizing Investment Behavior

6.1    Supply Effects via Inventories and Capital Goods Prices

In Figure 9 we study the within-year spiking patterns for aggregate capital goods shipments, to-
tal inventories, and prices. Data is obtained from the manufacturer shipments, inventories, and
orders (M3) survey from the Census Bureau (1958­2016) and the Producer Price Index (PPI)
from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (1998­2016). Panel (a) presents the comparisons between
non-defense capital goods shipments and consumer goods shipments. For non-defense capital
goods, the month of January consistently has the lowest shipment value, approximately 85%
of the level for the year on average. March, June, September, and December, commonly used
as fiscal year-ends, display significantly higher shipment values compared to other months.


                                               31
The largest spikes occur in December at 112% and June at 110%, which correspond to the
most common fiscal year-ends among firms in the Compustat sample. Importantly, we do not
observe similar patterns for consumer goods, where tax incentives do not play a role.
       In Figure 9(b), we examine whether capital goods suppliers build up inventories in an-
ticipation of higher demand in Q4 by tracing the comovement between shipments and total
inventories. The plot shows modest evidence of inventory buildup leading shipment spikes
by approximately one month. Taking Q4 as an example, total inventories start to increase in
October and peak in November in anticipation of the December shipment spike, then return to
the average level in December. Overall within-year variation of inventories is smaller than for
shipments, with the largest spikes shown in November at 102.3%. As for shipments, invento-
ries are also lower in Q1, with January consistently displaying the lowest inventory value at
97.4%.
       Figure 9(c) presents the within-year seasonality of shipments and capital goods prices mea-
sured by the PPI. The PPI records the selling prices received by domestic producers for their
output and is linked to M3 using M3/NAICS-6 industry composition from the US Census.34
We aggregate PPI ratios across all 15 M3 categories weighted by the shipment value of each
category.35 While shipments spike in March, June, September, and December, price indexes
remain stable throughout the year. Thus, the spikes in sales and shipments are not associated
with price fluctuations for capital goods.
       Table 9 presents formal tests of the within-year seasonality captured in Figure 9 and the
relation between capital goods shipments and prices. For each variable, we compute the ratio
of the monthly value to the average monthly value within that month's calendar year to focus on
within-year variation. In columns (1) and (2), the coefficient estimates on quarter-end months
are above 20%, consistent with the large spikes in March, June, September, and December from
Figure 9(a). Inventories show spikes one month earlier with smaller magnitudes (around 2%)
in columns (3) and (4). In contrast, in columns (5) and (6), quarter-end months do not show
significantly different price index levels. In column (7), we directly relate prices to shipment
value and do not find shipment spikes to be associated with major price movements. Overall,
the regression estimate from column (7) confirms the lack of correlation between aggregate
  34
     M3 non-defense capital goods include 27 categories, 15 of which can be matched to the PPI. This match
corresponds to 40 NAICS-6 industries in total. PPI is set to be 100% in January 1998 as the baseline for each
industry.
  35
     Using the average without weighting by the shipment value generates similar results.



                                                     32
shipments and prices in Figure 9. The result is also consistent with previous findings, such
as in House and Shapiro (2008), that tax-induced capital investment does not change market
prices.36
       We develop complementary evidence from firm-level data that suppliers build up invento-
ries in anticipation of Q4 sales spikes. The Compustat Customer Segments database records all
customers that represent 10% or more of a supplier's total sales with the names of the customers
and sales figures on a quarterly basis. To focus on depreciation-related capital investment, we
narrow the suppliers to be within the manufacturing and business equipment industries (based
on the Fama French 12 industry classification). Figure 10 plots corporate customer Q4 CAPEX
spikes against supplier Q4 sales and inventory spikes. Customer Q4 CAPEX spikes are positively
associated with supplier Q4 sales spikes in panel (a), validating the major customer and sup-
plier links. In panel (b), we relate customer Q4 CAPEX spikes to supplier inventory movement.
Suppliers who witness Q4 sales spikes increase inventory stocks in fiscal Q4 correspondingly.
The documented firm-level pattern provides micro-level support for the aggregate-level corre-
lation in Figure 9 and Table 9, where inventories anticipate shipment spikes.


6.2       Supply Effects via Corporate Borrowing

To further trace the impact of investment spikes in adjacent markets and confirm that invest-
ment spikes reflect real activity, we explore implications of Q4 spikes for lending and borrow-
ing behavior. Figure 11(a) plots monthly overall new business volume based on the Equipment
Leasing and Financing Association's Monthly Leasing and Finance Index (MLFI-25). This busi-
ness primarily covers loans and leases to small businesses, which typically have fiscal year-ends
in December. Each year the month of December experiences significantly higher new business
volume than previous months. For example, in 2014 new business volume ranges from $6 to 9
billion per month before December, and in December 2014 it increases sharply to around $13
billion. Similar December spikes can be seen throughout the whole decade of the sample.37
       One might be concerned that lending-side unobservables are driving December spikes in
  36
    See Goolsbee (1998) for a setting in which prices do respond to investment tax credit changes.
  37
    Appendix Table B.1 confirms that Q4 investment spikes coincide with new debt issuance in our sample. Ap-
pendix Figure B.1(d) shows higher book depreciation in the fourth quarter, indicating these patterns reflect real
investment expenditures from the perspective of the firm's financial accounts. Financial accounting applies eco-
nomic depreciation for new investment, rather than the half-year convention that applies for tax depreciation.
Spikes in book depreciation thus indicate the spike expenditures are not just made on the last day of the fiscal
year.


                                                      33
new business volume. If for some reason lenders offer cheaper loans in December, then Decem-
ber lending spikes may not be surprising. To address this concern, we acquire RateWatch data
(part of S&P Global Market Intelligence), which tracks branch-level rates for banks with more
than $100 million in assets on a monthly basis. Over 100,000 branch locations are covered
in RateWatch, accounting for more than 75% of banks and credit unions in the United States.
RateWatch is designed for financial institutions to access regional and national pricing trends.
We focus on commercial equipment loans (below $250,000) and also include commercial real
estate (at $1 million) and personal loans for comparison. For each loan type, the most popu-
lated maturity is kept: 36 months for commercial equipment loans, 60 months for commercial
real estate loans, and 36 months for personal loans.
   Figure 11(b) presents within-year movements of loan interest rates (net of Treasury yields
of like maturity) for commercial equipment, commercial real estate, and personal loans, re-
spectively. Across these three different loan types, late spring and early summer (June and
July) show the lowest interest rates within a year, whereas November and December show
higher interest rates. On average, within-year movement is relatively modest: both the low
and high ends are approximately half a standard deviation of the corresponding series (7.7%
for commercial equipment, 7.9% for commercial real estate, and 3.5% for personal loans).
   Although Ratewatch provides comprehensive coverage for U.S. lenders, one drawback is the
lack of loan- and borrower-specific characteristics. In a related study of the seasonal variation of
syndicated loans, Murfin and Petersen (2016) show late spring and fall to be the "sales" seasons
for these loans after controlling for firm and loan characteristics. Firms borrowing during sales
season issue at 19 basis points cheaper than winter and summer borrowers (January/February
and August). In particular, November and December do not belong to either sales season.
In summary, both the survey evidence provided by the RateWatch data and the contract-level
characteristics from Murfin and Petersen (2016) rule out lower interest rates attracting higher
lending volume near the year end.


6.3    Interactions with Fiscal Stimulus Policy

Promoting intertemporal substitution of investment into the present from the future several
years is a central motivation for many fiscal stimulus policies. Our results suggest that regimes
in which the option value motive is stronger are likely to display greater responsiveness to such



                                                34
policies. Such a mechanism can help us understand the observed responses to fiscal stimulus
documented in House and Shapiro (2008) and Zwick and Mahon (2017), which study a tem-
porary switch from a slower depreciation baseline to more accelerated expensing of investment
purchases. In addition, the option value motive can help account for the higher responses both
for firms likely to face liquidity constraints and only for firms with sufficient taxable income to
immediately draw deductions.
       Our results have implications for the design of temporary fiscal stimulus policies. First,
policy stimulus usually comes in weak economic times when firms may have insufficient taxable
income or sufficient alternative tax shields in the form of net operating loss (NOL) deductions.
In the 2001 recession, policymakers introduced temporary bonus depreciation, which allowed
firms to take additional deductions for eligible investment from 2001 to 2004. In our sample at
the time, only 60% of firms had sufficient taxable income to benefit immediately from the policy
change.38 Thus, to the extent such stimulus policies do not provide purchase-year benefits,
their impact will be mitigated by the tax-minimization motives we document.
       Second, firms subject to the bonus depreciation policy in the early 2000s accumulated large
NOL stocks to be used in future years. Thus, by the time the policy was reintroduced in 2008
to combat the next recession, nearly 50% of firms had sufficient NOLs to zero out their taxable
income before taking depreciation into account. Policymakers therefore face trade-offs when
deploying temporary investment incentives to target corporate investment. Such incentives
may face "crowding out" by the impact of similar policies implemented in the past.
       We note one important caveat to the foregoing discussion. The Q4 spikes we document
may partly be the result of careful planning by firms. For example, perhaps many firms have
adopted a policy of buying equipment primarily in Q4 for the reasons we have proposed. In this
case, our results would not say much about investment responses to unanticipated government
stimulus programs. However, even in this case, the importance of purchase-year incentives
would carry over to thinking about the design of fiscal stimulus.
  38
   Appendix Figure B.4 plots the share of firms in our matched Compustat-SOI sample who have potential to
immediately benefit from depreciation deductions, given their net income and stock of potential NOL deductions.




                                                     35
7       Conclusion
This paper studies a new channel, tax-minimization, through which taxes affect corporate in-
vestment behavior. First, firms face a depreciation motive--because purchases made later in
the year face a lower effective after-tax price, firms making a fixed amount of investment are
better off tilting that investment toward fiscal year-end than uniformly investing throughout
the year. Second, firms face an option value motive--because tax positions can be better es-
timated close to fiscal year-end, investing near the fiscal year-end allows firms to maximize
the tax benefit of depreciation. Tax-minimizing investment leads to robust and quantitatively
significant spikes in fiscal Q4 CAPEX. Similar behavior occurs in many countries.
    The analysis in this paper offers a rich portrait of the mechanism underlying tax-minimizing
investment behavior. It is true that any model with an oscillating after-tax price of investment
will produce investment spikes. However, the model we have presented further accounts for
the additional cross-sectional and dynamic features of the data, and points to a specific way
in which volatility matters for corporate investment. Tax asymmetry, time-varying shocks,
and the structure of depreciation deductions jointly contribute to produce investment spikes
that are larger for financially constrained firms and for firms more likely to find themselves
in taxable position. Our analysis suggests that financially constrained firms and those that
value immediate liquidity may be particularly sensitive to tax policy changes. The results are
consistent with models in which firms use high effective discount rates to evaluate investment
decisions, in particular the after-tax costs of those investments. Models of corporate behavior
without a first-year, tax-minimization motive are unlikely to fit the patterns revealed in the
data.
    Tax asymmetry can also help account for the fact that the additional investment does not
just substitute for investment the firm would have made in the next period, but represents
a cumulative increase in investment persisting for several periods. This persistence weakens
considerably in a model in which firms are always taxable, even though productivity shocks
are autocorrelated. The option to reduce the firm's tax bill in good times through intertem-
poral substitution thus improves the loss offset feature of the tax code, enabling the firm to
use potential losses incurred from future investments to reduce current tax liabilities. At the
same time, such a mechanism may induce procyclical investment behavior, as tax positions are
strongly correlated with the macroeconomy.



                                              36
    Our findings show that tax incentives that directly target investment expenditures have
pronounced effects on investment planning decisions for even the largest firms in the economy.
These effects are driven especially by how the code treats expenditures in the year of purchase.
Policymakers may want to consider these factors as they debate the relative merits of proposals
that lower corporate tax rates while slowing depreciation deductions versus proposals that
accelerate depreciation deductions, such as in the cash flow tax proposal of Auerbach (2010).39
However, because we focus on the timing of investment at a relatively high frequency, caution
is warranted in drawing conclusions about the effect of taxes on aggregate investment.
    While this paper proposes a modification that improves the explanatory power of the bench-
mark microeconomic model of firm behavior, we only briefly address the macroeconomic ef-
fects of tax-minimizing investment. Perhaps such behavior can provide a concrete microfoun-
dation for the accelerator model of aggregate investment. Another natural question is whether
fiscal Q4 spikes help account for the patterns of lumpy investment highlighted by Caballero
and Engel (1999) and Cooper and Haltiwanger (2006). We hope to explore these ideas in
future work.




  39
     Batchelder (2017) discusses in detail how behavioral factors and financial frictions should enter into cost-
benefit analysis of these sorts of proposals.


                                                      37
References
Abel, Andrew B. 1982. "Dynamic Effects of Permanent and Temporary Tax Policies in a q Model
  of Investment." Journal of Monetary Economics, 9: 353­373.

Abel, Andrew B., and Janice C. Eberly. 1994. "A Unified Model of Investment Under Uncer-
  tainty." American Economic Review, 84(5): 1369­1384.

Alstadsæter, Annette, Martin Jacob, and Roni Michaely. 2015. "Do dividend taxes affect
  corporate investment?" Journal of Public Economics, 151: 74­83.

Auerbach, Alan J. 1979. "Wealth maximization and the cost of capital." Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 93(3): 433­446.

Auerbach, Alan J. 2010. A Modern Corporate Tax. Center for American Progress.

Batchelder, Lily. 2017. "Accounting for Behavioral Considerations in Business Tax Reform: The
  Case of Expensing." NYU Working Paper.

Becker, Bo, Marcus Jacob, and Martin Jacob. 2013. "Payout taxes and the allocation of
  investment." Journal of Financial Economics, 107(1): 1­24.

Bradford, David F. 1981. "The incidence and allocation effects of a tax on corporate distribu-
  tions." Journal of Public Economics, 15(1): 1­22.

Caballero, Ricardo J., and Eduardo MRA Engel. 1999. "Explaining Investment Dynamics in
  US Manufacturing: A Generalized (S, s) Approach." Econometrica, 67(4): 783­826.

Chen, Zhao, Xian Jiang, Zhikuo Liu, Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato, and Daniel Xu. 2019. "Tax
  Policy and Lumpy Investment Behavior: Evidence from China's VAT Reform." NBER Working
  Paper No. 26336.

Chirinko, Robert S., Steven M. Fazzari, and Andrew P   . Meyer. 1999. "How Responsive is
  Business Capital Formation to its User Cost? An Exploration with Micro Data." Journal of
  Public Economics, 74: 53­80.

Cooper, Russell, and John Haltiwanger. 2006. "On the Nature of Capital Adjustment Costs."
  Review of Economic Studies, 73(3): 611­633.

Cummins, Jason G., Kevin A. Hassett, and R. Glenn Hubbard. 1996. "Tax Reforms and
  Investment: A Cross-Country Comparison." Journal of Public Economics, 62(1-2): 237­273.

Desai, Mihir A., and Austan D. Goolsbee. 2004. "Investment, Overhang, and Tax Policy."
  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 35(2): 285­355.

Edgerton, Jesse. 2010. "Investment Incentives and Corporate Tax Asymmetries." Journal of
  Public Economics, 94(11-12): 936­952.




                                             38
Faulkender, Michael, and Mitchell Petersen. 2012. "Investment and capital constraints: repa-
  triations under the American Jobs Creation Act." Review of Financial Studies, 25(11): 3351­
  3388.

Fazzari, Steven M., R. Glenn Hubbard, and Bruce C. Petersen. 1988. "Financing Constraints
  and Corporate Investment." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1988(1): 141­195.

Giroud, Xavier, and Joshua Rauh. 2019. "State taxation and the reallocation of business ac-
  tivity: Evidence from establishment-level data." Journal of Political Economy, 127(3): 1262­
  1316.

Goolsbee, Austan. 1998. "Investment Tax Incentives, Prices, and the Supply of Capital Goods."
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(1): 121­148.

Hall, Robert E., and Dale W. Jorgenson. 1967. "Tax Policy and Investment Behavior." Ameri-
 can Economic Review, 57(3): 391­414.

Hassett, Kevin A., and R. Glenn Hubbard. 2002. "Tax Policy and Business Investment." Hand-
 book of Public Economics, 3: 1293­1343.

Hayashi, Fumio. 1982. "Tobin's Marginal q and Average q: A Neoclassical Interpretation."
 Econometrica, 50(1): 213­224.

House, Christopher, and Matthew Shapiro. 2008. "Temporary Investment Tax Incentives:
 Theory with Evidence from Bonus Depreciation." American Economic Review, 98(3): 737­
 68.

King, Mervyn A. 1977. Public policy and the corporation. Chapman and Hall; New York: Wiley.

Liebman, Jeffrey B., and Neale Mahoney. 2017. "Do Expiring Budgets Lead to Waste-
  ful Year-End Spending? Evidence from Federal Procurement." American Economic Review,
  107(11): 3510­49.

Ljungqvist, Alexander, and Michael Smolyansky. 2014. "To Cut or Not to Cut? On the Impact
  of Corporate Taxes on Employment and Income." NBER Working Paper No. 20753.

Maydew, Edward L. 1997. "Tax-induced earnings management by firms with net operating
 losses." Journal of Accounting Research, 35(1): 83­96.

Murfin, Justin, and Mitchell Petersen. 2016. "Loans on sale: Credit market seasonality, bor-
 rower need, and lender rents." Journal of Financial Economics, 121(2): 300­326.

Ohrn, Eric. 2018. "The Effect of Corporate Taxation on Investment and Financial Policy: Evi-
 dence from the DPAD." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 10(2): 272­301.

Oyer, Paul. 1998. "Fiscal year ends and nonlinear incentive contracts: The effect on business
 seasonality." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(1): 149­185.




                                             39
Shin, Hyun-Han, and Yong H Kim. 2002. "Agency costs and efficiency of business capital
  investment: evidence from quarterly capital expenditures." Journal of Corporate Finance,
  8(2): 139­158.

Suárez Serrato, Juan Carlos, and Owen Zidar. 2016. "Who benefits from state corporate tax
  cuts? A local labor markets approach with heterogeneous firms." American Economic Review,
  106(9): 2582­2624.

Summers, Lawrence H. 1981. "Taxation and Corporate Investment: A q-Theory Approach."
  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1981(1): 67­140.

Winberry, Thomas. Forthcoming. "Lumpy Investment, Business Cycles, and Stimulus Policy."
 American Economic Review.

Yagan, Danny. 2015. "Capital tax reform and the real economy: The effects of the 2003 divi-
  dend tax cut." American Economic Review, 105(12): 3531­3563.

Zwick, Eric. Forthcoming. "The Costs of Corporate Tax Complexity." American Economic Jour-
  nal: Economic Policy.

Zwick, Eric, and James Mahon. 2017. "Tax Policy and Heterogeneous Investment Behavior."
  American Economic Review, 107(1): 217­248.




                                            40
                                                                               Figure 1: Time Series of Fiscal Q4 Investment Spikes (1984-2013)
                                                                                                              (a) Fiscal Q4 Investment Spikes
                                          Quarterly CAPEX/Average CAPEX (%)
                                                90     100 80  110    120




                                                                              1984q4                                 1993q4                                                                     2002q4                             2011q4
                                                                                                                                       Fiscal Quarter

                                                                              (b) Quarterly CAPEX Level                                                             (c) Non-December Fiscal Year-Ends
                               6




                                                                                                                                              Ratio of Quarterly CAPEX to Average CAPEX %
                                                                                                                                                                                     120
          Median Quarterly CAPEX ($ Mils)
                                     5




                                                                                                                                                                               110
                             4




                                                                                                                                                                      100
                   3




                                                                                                                                                               90
          2




                                                                                                                                                     80
                               1




                                                     1984q4                            1993q4               2002q4            2011q4                                                        1984q4       1993q4               2002q4        2011q4
                                                                                                Fiscal Quarter                                                                                                    Fiscal Quarter



           (d) Stable Fiscal Year-End Cash Flows                                                                                                                                                 (e) Fiscal Year-end Change
                                                                                                                                                                      130
       Ratio of Quarterly CAPEX to Average CAPEX %
                                              120




                                                                                                                                                 CAPEXQ/Ave(CAPEXQ) %
                               100      110




                                                                                                                                                         100
              80        90




                                                                                                                                                                      70




                                                     1984q4                            1993q4               2002q4            2011q4                                                             -12      -8             -4            0             4
                                                                                                Fiscal Quarter                                                                                                       Quarter


Notes: This figure documents fiscal fourth quarter (Q4) capital expenditure (CAPEX) spikes for U.S. firms in
Compustat. Panel (a) plots the median ratio of quarterly CAPEX to the average CAPEX within a firm's fiscal year.
Red dots indicate Q4. Panel (b) plots the median quarterly CAPEX level ($M). Panel (c) plots the time series
pattern of Q4 CAPEX spikes for firms with non-December fiscal year-ends. Panel (d) plots the time series of Q4
CAPEX spikes for firms with stable fiscal year-end cash flows, defined as firm-years for which fiscal Q4 cash flows
are lower than the average of the first three fiscal quarters. Panel (e) plots the time series of CAPEX for 76 sample
firms that switched their fiscal year ends to six months later. White bars indicate the old regime, and orange bars
indicate the new regime.                                  41
                                                                Figure 2: International Evidence of Fiscal Q4 Spikes (2004-2014)

                                      Switzerland                                                                             Singapore                                                                                        Chile                                                                                Poland
                   140




                                                                                                         140




                                                                                                                                                                                                140




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        140
  Quarterly CAPEX/Average CAPEX (%)




                                                                                        Quarterly CAPEX/Average CAPEX (%)




                                                                                                                                                                               Quarterly CAPEX/Average CAPEX (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Quarterly CAPEX/Average CAPEX (%)
                            120




                                                                                                                  120




                                                                                                                                                                                                         120




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 120
                 100




                                                                                                       100




                                                                                                                                                                                              100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      100
       80




                                                                                             80




                                                                                                                                                                                    80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            80
                            2004q1    2006q1    2008q1       2010q1   2012q1   2014q1                             2004q1    2006q1    2008q1       2010q1   2012q1   2014q1                              2004q1      2006q1    2008q1       2010q1   2012q1   2014q1                             2004q1    2006q1   2008q1       2010q1   2012q1   2014q1
                                                     Fiscal Quarter                                                                        Fiscal Quarter                                                                           Fiscal Quarter                                                                       Fiscal Quarter




                                          Germany                                                                                    Greece                                                                                   Finland                                                                          Malaysia
                   140




                                                                                                         140




                                                                                                                                                                                                140




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        140
  Quarterly CAPEX/Average CAPEX (%)




                                                                                        Quarterly CAPEX/Average CAPEX (%)




                                                                                                                                                                               Quarterly CAPEX/Average CAPEX (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Quarterly CAPEX/Average CAPEX (%)
                            120




                                                                                                                  120




                                                                                                                                                                                                         120




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 120
                 100




                                                                                                       100




                                                                                                                                                                                              100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      100
       80




                                                                                             80




                                                                                                                                                                                    80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            80
                            2004q1    2006q1    2008q1       2010q1   2012q1   2014q1                             2004q1    2006q1    2008q1       2010q1   2012q1   2014q1                              2004q1      2006q1    2008q1       2010q1   2012q1   2014q1                             2004q1    2006q1   2008q1       2010q1   2012q1   2014q1
                                                     Fiscal Quarter                                                                        Fiscal Quarter                                                                           Fiscal Quarter                                                                       Fiscal Quarter




                                               Sweden                                                                       Netherlands                                                                            United Kingdom                                                                             Indonesia
                   140




                                                                                                         140




                                                                                                                                                                                                140




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        140
  Quarterly CAPEX/Average CAPEX (%)




                                                                                        Quarterly CAPEX/Average CAPEX (%)




                                                                                                                                                                               Quarterly CAPEX/Average CAPEX (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Quarterly CAPEX/Average CAPEX (%)
                            120




                                                                                                                  120




                                                                                                                                                                                                         120




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 120
                 100




                                                                                                       100




                                                                                                                                                                                              100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      100
       80




                                                                                             80




                                                                                                                                                                                    80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            80
                            2004q1    2006q1    2008q1       2010q1   2012q1   2014q1                             2004q1    2006q1    2008q1       2010q1   2012q1   2014q1                              2004q1      2006q1    2008q1       2010q1   2012q1   2014q1                             2004q1    2006q1   2008q1       2010q1   2012q1   2014q1
                                                     Fiscal Quarter                                                                        Fiscal Quarter                                                                           Fiscal Quarter                                                                       Fiscal Quarter




                                          Thailand                                                                                   Norway                                                                                   China                                                                                  Italy
                   140




                                                                                                         140




                                                                                                                                                                                                140




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        140
  Quarterly CAPEX/Average CAPEX (%)




                                                                                        Quarterly CAPEX/Average CAPEX (%)




                                                                                                                                                                               Quarterly CAPEX/Average CAPEX (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Quarterly CAPEX/Average CAPEX (%)
                            120




                                                                                                                  120




                                                                                                                                                                                                         120




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 120
                 100




                                                                                                       100




                                                                                                                                                                                              100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      100
       80




                                                                                             80




                                                                                                                                                                                    80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            80




                            2004q1    2006q1    2008q1       2010q1   2012q1   2014q1                             2004q1    2006q1    2008q1       2010q1   2012q1   2014q1                              2004q1      2006q1    2008q1       2010q1   2012q1   2014q1                             2004q1    2006q1   2008q1       2010q1   2012q1   2014q1
                                                     Fiscal Quarter                                                                        Fiscal Quarter                                                                           Fiscal Quarter                                                                       Fiscal Quarter




                                               Mexico                                                                           Australia                                                                                      Peru                                                                        New Zealand
                   140




                                                                                                         140




                                                                                                                                                                                                140




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        140
  Quarterly CAPEX/Average CAPEX (%)




                                                                                        Quarterly CAPEX/Average CAPEX (%)




                                                                                                                                                                               Quarterly CAPEX/Average CAPEX (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Quarterly CAPEX/Average CAPEX (%)
                            120




                                                                                                                  120




                                                                                                                                                                                                         120




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 120
                 100




                                                                                                       100




                                                                                                                                                                                              100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      100
       80




                                                                                             80




                                                                                                                                                                                    80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            80




                            2004q1    2006q1    2008q1       2010q1   2012q1   2014q1                             2004q1    2006q1    2008q1       2010q1   2012q1   2014q1                              2004q1      2006q1    2008q1       2010q1   2012q1   2014q1                             2004q1    2006q1   2008q1       2010q1   2012q1   2014q1
                                                     Fiscal Quarter                                                                        Fiscal Quarter                                                                           Fiscal Quarter                                                                       Fiscal Quarter




                                       Philippines                                                                                   Brazil                                                                                   France                                                                            Pakistan
                                                                                                         140




                                                                                                                                                                                                140




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        140
                   140
  Quarterly CAPEX/Average CAPEX (%)




                                                                                        Quarterly CAPEX/Average CAPEX (%)




                                                                                                                                                                               Quarterly CAPEX/Average CAPEX (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Quarterly CAPEX/Average CAPEX (%)
                                                                                                                  120




                                                                                                                                                                                                         120




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 120
                           120




                                                                                                       100




                                                                                                                                                                                              100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      100
                 100




                                                                                             80




                                                                                                                                                                                    80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            80
      80




                            2004q1    2006q1    2008q1       2010q1   2012q1   2014q1                             2004q1    2006q1    2008q1       2010q1   2012q1   2014q1                              2004q1      2006q1    2008q1       2010q1   2012q1   2014q1                             2004q1    2006q1   2008q1       2010q1   2012q1   2014q1
                                                     Fiscal Quarter                                                                        Fiscal Quarter                                                                           Fiscal Quarter                                                                       Fiscal Quarter




Notes: This figure shows fourth quarter CAPEX spikes across country. Countries are sorted according to their
average corporate income tax rate during the sample period: Switzerland has the lowest average corporate income
tax rate (8%) while Pakistan has the highest (35%).


                                                                                                                                                                          42
                                                                     Figure 3: Fiscal Q4 Spikes and Tax Incentives

                (a) Firm-Years Sorted by Tax Position                                                                        (b) Firm-Years Grouped by NOL Stock




                                                                                                                         130
            140




                                                                                                                               125
                 120
    Median CAPX 4/3




                                                                                                               Median CAPX 4/3
                                                                                                                     120
        100




                                                                                                                         115
            80
            60




                                                                                                                         110
              -100000                            -50000               0               50000      100000
                                                Taxable Income Before Depreciation Bin ($000s)                                       0         5                 10                 15        20
                                                                                                                                               Bin of Loss Carryforward to Net Income




                                                                       (c) Spikes and the Tax Reform Act of 1986
                              20
                  Yearly Regression Estimate
                      0               10




                                                Pre-TRA86                        Transition                                          Post-TRA86
                              -10




                                               84     85        86       87        88       89   90       91  92                         93   94     95        96        97        98    99
                                                                                                           Year


Notes: This figure shows the relationship between fourth quarter capital expenditure (CAPEX) spikes and firm-
level incentives to use investment as a tax shield. Both figures identify a firm's tax position by combining CAPEX
spike data from Compustat with tax position data from corporate tax returns for the years 1993 through 2010.
In Panel (a), we divide firms into $1,000 bins based on their taxable income before depreciation expense is taken
into account and plot for each bin the median ratio of fourth fiscal quarter CAPEX to the average CAPEX of the first
three fiscal quarters. In Panel (b), we focus only on firms with positive tax position and group firms by the ratio
of the stock of net operating loss carryforwards to net income before depreciation. In Panel (c), we plot the year-
to-year regression estimates of Q4 investment spikes (%) with 95% confidence intervals for the period of 1984
to 2000, with 2000 as the omitted benchmark year. The regression includes the following controls: ln(assets),
Market-to-Book, Cash/Assets, CAPEX/PPE, and Sales 4/3. Firm fixed effects are included and standard errors are
clustered at the firm level. The transition period following TRA86 includes a phase-in of the new lower corporate
tax rate and a phase-out of investment tax credit eligibility for certain asset classes.
                                                                                                          43
                                Figure 4: Cross-Sectional and Dynamic Determinants of Q4 Spikes

                               (a) Investment Duration                                                                         (b) Autocorrelation of Spikes
              140




                                                                                                    0
                                                                                   P(Future Spike | Spike in Year 0)
                     130




                                                                                                            -.02
    Median CAPEX 4/3




                                                                                                -.04
           120




                                                                                      -.06
              110




                                                                                                    -.08
              100




                           0     20       40             60        80   100                                                0     1     2   3       4      5     6         7   8    9   10
                                      Bin of Investment Duration                                                                                  Years from Spike



                                  (c) Earnings Mean                                                                                  (d) Earnings Volatility
              140




                                                                                                    140
                     130




                                                                                                    130
    Median CAPEX 4/3




                                                                                   Median CAPEX 4/3
           120




                                                                                          120
              110




                                                                                                    110
              100




                                                                                                    100




                           0     20      40            60          80   100                                            0              20          40            60            80        100
                                        Bin of EBITDA Mean                                                                                     Bin of EBITDA Volatility



Notes: This figure documents the cross-sectional relationship between Q4 CAPEX spikes and investment duration
and earnings volatility, and measures the average autocorrelation of spikes. In Panel (a), investment duration is
derived from the inverse of the present value of depreciation deductions (via Zwick and Mahon (2017) at the
NAICS four-digit level) with higher values representing longer equipment investment duration. In Panel (b), we
estimate local projections at the firm-year level, regressing an indicator for a Q4 spike in a future year on an
indicator for a Q4 spike in the current year. We include firm and year fixed effects to estimate the autocorrelation
of spikes within firm over time. Panels (c) and (d) plot median Q4 spikes against the mean and variance of
EBITDA/Assets, respectively.




                                                                              44
                                   Figure 5: Q4 Spikes and Earnings Management
                 140    130
       Median CAPEX 4/3
              120110
                 100




                              -1         -.5                 0                 .5                      1
                                               Bin of Q4 Earnings Surprise ($)

Notes: This figure presents binned scatterplots of median sample firm Q4 CAPEX spikes against earnings surprises.
The gray line with earnings surprise equal to zero indicates that firms exactly meet the median analyst forecast.




                                                         45
                                                                                   Figure 6: Cumulative Investment after Spikes
                                                            (a) Fiscal Q1 Spikers                                                                                                       (b) Fiscal Q2 Spikers
                                                 250




                                                                                                                                                                       250
  Cumulative Average CAPEX Relative to Baseline (%)




                                                                                                                        Cumulative Average CAPEX Relative to Baseline (%)
                                   200




                                                                                                                                                         200
                       150




                                                                                                                                             150
             100




                                                                                                                                   100
  50




                                                                                                                        50
                                                       -3     1       2        3   4    5       9                                                                            -3             1    2   3   4    5    9
                                                                                   Quarter                                                                                                               Quarter



                                                            (c) Fiscal Q3 Spikers                                                                                                       (d) Fiscal Q4 Spikers
  Cumulative Average CAPEX Relative to Baseline (%)




                                                                                                                        Cumulative Average CAPEX Relative to Baseline (%)
                                                                                                                                                                     250
                                           250




                                                                                                                                                        200
                               200




                                                                                                                                             150
                      150




                                                                                                                                   100
  50        100




                                                                                                                        50




                                                       -3     1       2        3   4    5       9                                                                            -3             1    2   3   4    5    9
                                                                                   Quarter                                                                                                               Quarter



                                                                                    (e) Investment level for Q1-2 and Q3-4 Spikers
                                                                      .2
                                                                      .15
                                                                  CAPX/PPENT
                                                                      .1
                                                                      .05
                                                                      0




                                                                                        t-1         t0              t+1                                                               t+2                t+3
                                                                                                                 Event Year

                                                                                                         Q3-4 Spikers                                                             Q1-2 Spikers


Notes: This figure presents the cumulative level of investment after large spikes in Q1, Q2, Q3, and Q4 in panels
(a)-(d), respectively. Large spikes are defined as event quarter spikes CAPEX Q/Ave(Q1-Q4) exceeding 113.65%
(the sample median Q4 spike level). The baseline (denominator) is average quarterly CAPEX in the year before
spikes (t from -3 to 0). The numerator is calculated as the average quarterly CAPEX starting from quarter 1 of the
spiking year: CAPEX Q1 for quarter 1 ( t = 1), CAPEX Q1+  2
                                                            Q2
                                                               for quarter 2 ( t = 2), CAPEX Q1+Q3
                                                                                                  2+Q3
                                                                                                       for quarter 3
( t = 3), and so on. The dotted lines are 95% confidence intervals. Panel (e) presents investment levels for Q1-2
versus Q3-4 spikers by plotting coefficient estimates and 95% confidence intervals based on the specifications in
columns (2) and (4) of Table 7.
                                                                                                               46
                                       Figure 7: Fiscal Q4 Spikes in Model Simulated Data
                  110
      Aggregate Investment Ratio
       95      10090     105




                                   0         5            10             15             20                 25
                                                                Period

                                        Full Model             Depreciation Motive               Baseline


Notes: This figure plots aggregate fiscal Q4 investment spikes for simulated firm data based on the model in Section
5. We plot the ratio of average investment across all simulated firms in a given quarter to average investment
across firms in the fiscal year. For the Depreciation Motive version of the model, we set the profitability shifter to
zero. We compare the Full and Depreciation Motive models to a Baseline model in which depreciation deductions
start whenever the investment is made, and in which even firms with losses receive tax credits for depreciation.




                                                               47
                                                                  Figure 8: Depreciation versus Option Value Motives in Model Simulations

                                                              (a) Cumulative across Models                                                                                     (b) Q1-2 vs. Q3-4 Spikes, Full model
    Cumulative Avg. Investment Relative to Baseline (%)
                                                30




                                                                                                                                                                .04
                              10       20




                                                                                                                                                                        .03
                                                                                                                                                      Investment/Capital
                       0




                                                                                                                                                            .02
             -10




                                                                                                                                                                .01
     -20




                                                          1       2        3       4     5     6     7      8      9      10     11       12
                                                                                               Quarter




                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                   Full Model                  Depreciation Motive                    Baseline                                    t-1                t0            t+1            t+2           t+3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Event Year



                                                          (c) Earnings Mean across Models                                                                                      (d) Earnings Volatility across Models
                         140




                                                                                                                                                                  115
                        130
  Mean Investment Ratio




                                                                                                                                                       Mean Investment Ratio
                                                                                                                                                                       110
          110   120




                                                                                                                                                          105
   100                   90




                                                                                                                                                                  100
                         80




                                                          -0.17    -0.02       0.06    0.11   0.16   0.21   0.26       0.33    0.45     0.75                                     0.18     0.19        0.20     0.21    0.22     0.23    0.24    0.26
                                                                                         GOS / Mean Assets                                                                                                   SD(GOS / Assets)
                                                                      Full Model               Depreciation Motive                    Baseline                                          Full Model               Depreciation Motive           Baseline



Notes: This figure presents analysis of simulated data based on the the model in Section 5. Panel (a) evaluates
the cumulative investment effect following spikes, while controlling for underlying productivity persistence. For
each model version, we first sample ten spike events per simulated firm sequence and then order the data in event
time relative to the spike. Spikes are defined as investment ratios (Q4 investment divided by Q1­Q4 average)
greater than the sample median. For each event, we compute cumulative average investment beginning in Q1
of the spike year and scale this cumulative series by the average investment rate across all simulated quarters,
which serves as a measure of benchmark investment within the model. We then regress scaled cumulative in-
vestment on event time dummies and plot the dummies, while controlling for productivity and the initial spike
size (to account for differences in spike means across models). Panel (b) uses simulations from the Full model
to construct analogous series to Table 7, column (5) for investment levels following Q3­Q4 versus Q1­Q2 spikes,
defined as CAPEX Q/Ave(Q1-Q4) greater than the sample median. We run a regression with year and event fixed
effects where the left-hand-side variable is annual investment divided by total capital in the year before the spike,
and the right-hand-side variables are dummy variables for each year interacted with an indicator for the spike
happening in Q3 or Q4. We then plot the coefficient estimates on these interactions. Panels (c) and (d) plot
model analogues to Figures 4(c) and 4(d). For each model version, we sort firm-quarters using either GOS/Mean
Assets or SD(GOS/Assets). We then calculate the deciles of GOS/Mean Assets and SD(GOS/Assets) for the Full
version, and plot the mean investment ratio of firm-years within these deciles against average values of these GOS
variables within the deciles.




                                                                                                                                                 48
              Figure 9: Spikes in Capital Goods Shipments, Inventories, and Prices

                                                                    (a) Spikes in Capital Goods Shipments (1958­2016)




                                                             120
                       Monthly Shipments/Average Shipments (%)
                     80        90        100       110




                                                                    1    2       3          4        5        6       7          8         9        10         11                                  12
                                                                                                            Calendar Month

                                                                                Capital Goods Shipment Value                 Consumer Goods Shipment Value



              (b) Spikes in Capital Goods Shipments and Inventories (1958­2016)
                                                              120




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   120
                     Monthly Shipment Value to Average Value (%)




                                                                                                                                                                          Monthly Inventory to Average Inventory (%)
                                                   110




                                                                                                                                                                                                        110
                                        100




                                                                                                                                                                                              100
                              90




                                                                                                                                                                                   90
                     80




                                                                                                                                                                         80
                                                                    1    2      3       4        5         6       7         8        9        10        11         12
                                                                                                         Calendar Month

                                                                               Capital Goods Shipment Value                  Capital Goods Total Inventory



                  (c) Spikes in Capital Goods Shipments and Prices (1998­2016)
                                                              120




                                                                                                                                                                         120
                     Monthly Shipment Value to Average Value (%)




                                                                                                                                                                         Monthly PPI to Averge PPI (%)
                                                   110




                                                                                                                                                                                                110
                                        100




                                                                                                                                                                                      100
                              90




                                                                                                                                                                           90
                     80




                                                                                                                                                                         80




                                                                    1    2      3       4        5         6       7         8        9        10        11         12
                                                                                                         Calendar Month

                                                                             Capital Goods Shipment Value                 Capital Goods Producer Price Index


Notes: This figure presents within-year seasonality of aggregate non-defense capital goods shipments, total in-
ventories, and prices. Shipment and inventory data come from the Census Bureau's manufacturer shipments,
inventories, and orders (M3) survey of the domestic manufacturing sector. Capital goods price is measured by the
Producer Price Index (PPI) provided by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, which records the selling prices received
by domestic producers for their output at the NAICS6 level. PPI is linked to M3 using M3/NAICS-6 industry
composition from the Census. Panel (a) presents shipments of non-defense capital goods and consumer goods.
Panel (b) presents shipments and total inventories and Panel (c) presents shipments and prices for non-defense
capital goods. For each variable, we compute the ratio of monthly value to the average monthly value within that
month's calendar year.                                 49
                                                         Figure 10: Supplier Q4 Inventory and Sales Spikes

                                        (a) Supplier Q4 Sales Spikes                                                                     (b) Supplier Q4 Inventory Spikes
                120




                                                                                                               110
                                                                                               Supplier Inventory Q4/Ave(Q1-Q3) %
  Supplier Sales Q4/Ave(Q1-Q3) %
                           115




                                                                                                                       105
                 110




                                                                                                         100
    105




                                                                                                               95
                100




                                   50       100               150             200   250                                             50         100               150             200   250
                                                  Customer CAPEX Q4/Ave(Q1-Q3) %                                                                     Customer CAPEX Q4/Ave(Q1-Q3) %



Notes: This figure shows the relationship between corporate customer Q4 CAPEX spikes and supplier Q4 sales
and inventory spikes. Corporate customer information comes from the Compustat Segments Customer database,
which records all customers that represent 10% or more of a firm's total sales with the names of the customers
and their sales figures. We only keep suppliers in manufacturing and business equipment industries in this figure.




                                                                                          50
                Figure 11: Capital Lending Volume and Interest Rate (2005­2014)

                                                                                                 (a) Capital Lending Volume
                                                                         14
                          New Business Volume (Loans & Leases, $ Billions)
                            4       6        8       10       12




                                                                                  2005m12           2007m12          2009m12             2011m12         2013m12
                                                                                                                       Month


                                                                                                 (b) Interest Rate Seasonality
                     90 92 94 96 98 100 102 104 106 108 110
                         Monthly Rate to Average Rate (%)




                                                                              1     2        3       4         5     6       7       8         9   10        11         12
                                                                                                                   Calendar Month

                                                                                        Commercial Equipment          Commercial Real Estate            Personal Loan


Notes: This figure presents within-year seasonality of capital financing volume and rates. Panel (a) plots monthly
overall new business volume from the Equipment Leasing and Finance Association's (ELFA) Monthly Leasing and
Finance Index (MLFI-25, available at http://www.elfaonline.org/data/MLFI ). The MLFI-25 measures
monthly commercial equipment lease and loan activity reported by participating ELFA member companies, which
represent a cross section of the equipment finance sector. Red dots indicate the month of December. Panel (b)
presents the within-year seasonality of interest rates for commercial equipment (60 months), commercial real
estate (60 months), and personal loans (36 months), respectively. The data comes from RateWatch (part of S&P
Global Market Intelligence) and tracks branch-level rates for over 75% of banks and credit unions in the United
States. For each category, the interest rate is net of the treasury rate of the same maturity. For each month, we
take the median rate across all lenders, and then compute the ratio of monthly rate to the average monthly rate
within that month's calendar year.




                                                                                                                    51
                Table 1: Tax Benefits of Accelerating Investment for Five-Year Items
                                     (a) Scenarios with Post-TRA86 Tax Rate
               Year                        0       1        2        3          4          5        6    Total
               Expenditure in Year 1
               Depreciation                0       20       32      19.2       11.5     11.5    5.8       100
               Tax Savings ( = 35%)        0        7      11.2     6.72       4.03     4.03    2.02       35
               NPV of Tax Savings                                                                        29.10
               Expenditure Accelerated to Year 0
               Depreciation           20     32            19.2     11.5       11.5     5.8         0     100
               Tax Savings ( = 35%)    7    11.2           6.72     4.03       4.03     2.02        0      35
               NPV of Tax Savings                                                                        31.14
               Benefit to Accelerating                                                                   2.04

                        (b) Scenarios with Pre-TRA86 Tax Rate and Investment Tax Credit
                 Year                                  0        1          2           3        4       Total
                 Expenditure in Year 1
                 Depreciation                          0    33.33        44.45        14.81    7.41      100
                 Tax Savings ( = 46%)                  0    15.33        20.45         6.81    3.41       46
                 Investment Tax Credit (ITC)           0     10            0            0        0        10
                 NPV of Tax Savings, No ITC                                                             40.35
                 NPV of Tax Savings, ITC                                                                49.70
                 Expenditure Accelerated to Year 0
                 Depreciation                33.33          44.45        14.81        7.41               100
                 Tax Savings ( = 46%)        15.33          20.45         6.81        3.41                46
                 Investment Tax Credit (ITC)   10             0            0            0                 10
                 NPV of Tax Savings, No ITC                                                             43.17
                 NPV of Tax Savings, ITC                                                                53.17
                 Benefit to Accelerating, No ITC                                                        2.82
                 Benefit to Accelerating, ITC                                                           3.48

Notes: This table displays year-by-year deductions and tax benefits for a $100 investment in computers, a five-year
item, depreciable according to the Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery System (MACRS). Panel (a) considers the
tax rate prevailing during the time period after the Tax Reform Act of 1986, which covers the bulk of our sample.
Panel (b) considers the tax rate and Investment Tax Credit regime in effect prior to the 1986 reform. Each panel
compares an investment put in place on December 31st (Year 0) to one put in place on January 1st (Year 1). This
comparison illustrates the incentive to accelerate purchases into the fourth fiscal quarter from subsequent years.
NPV calculations apply a 7 percent discount rate. See IRS publication 946 for the recovery periods and schedules
applying to other class lives.




                                                           52
                                       Table 2: Summary Statistics
                                          (a) U.S. Sample (1984-2013)
                                      N         Mean      Median        SD         P10          P90
            Assets ($M)          119,386      2,701.59      219.00   15,697.69    27.51    3,875.80
            Depreciation ($M)    119,194       126.15        9.03      708.88      0.78     177.78
            CAPEX ($M)           119,372       171.85        10.97    1,080.88     0.78     232.54
            PPE ($M)             119,323       939.52        50.52    5,534.65     3.45    1,326.50
            Sales ($M)           119,379      2,318.03      212.47   12,055.00    17.13    3,646.90
            M/B                  114,357        1.88          1.42       1.39      0.88      3.37
            Cash Flow/Assets     115,896        0.05          0.09      0.23      -0.13      0.22
            Cash/Assets          119,307        0.17          0.08      0.21       0.01      0.47
            EBITDA/Assets        119,146        0.09          0.12      0.16      -0.08      0.23
            CAPEX/PPE            117,581        0.40          0.23      0.59       0.07      0.83
            CAPEX 4/3 (%)        119,386       136.97       119.07      85.46     47.76     248.63
            Sales 4/3 (%)        115,915       111.70       107.05      27.86     84.90     143.44



                                     (b) International Sample (2004-2014)
                                          N      Mean       Median     SD        P10      P90
                  M/B                  52,788     1.89       1.29     2.08    0.75        3.28
                  Cash Flow/Assets     79,310     0.04       0.07    0.21    -0.12        0.20
                  Cash/Assets          80,303     0.18       0.12    0.18     0.02        0.42
                  EBITDA/Assets        79,812     0.06       0.09    0.22    -0.10        0.23
                  CAPEX/PPE            79,556     0.46       0.19    1.12     0.04        0.81
                  CAPEX 4/3 (%)        80,303    134.58     114.80   89.57   40.13       256.53
                  Sales 4/3 (%)        77,281    113.24     106.09   37.67   80.19       151.58

Notes: Panel (a) presents summary statistics for the sample of U.S. firms. There are 17,527 firms with 158,859
firm-years during the period 1984-2013. Panel (b) presents summary statistics for the sample of international
firms from 33 countries during the period of 2004-2013. 15,764 unique firms and 88,067 firm-years are included
in the international sample. CAPEX 4/3 and Sales 4/3 are censored at 500%, which excludes approximately 2%
of the data. Financial ratios are winsorized at the top and bottom 1% level.




                                                       53
                           Table 3: Fiscal Q4 CAPEX Spikes and Tax Status

                            (1)       (2)       (3)        (4)         (5)          (6)         (7)
        D(taxable)        7.6***    6.3***    2.9**      10.8***      6.7**       6.8***      6.3***
                           (1.4)     (1.4)     (1.5)      (3.1)       (3.1)        (1.7)       (1.8)
        CAPEX/PPE                   4.7***    4.5***                  4.4**                   5.0***
                                     (1.2)     (1.2)                  (2.2)                    (1.8)
        EBITDA/Assets                        34.4***
                                               (5.6)
        Observations      49178    47582      47524      19429       18744       29749        28838
        R2                0.0779   0.0981    0.0996      0.103       0.127       0.0832       0.0972
        Controls            No        1          2         No           1          No            1
        Firm FE             Yes      Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
        Year FE             Yes      Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
        Period                                          Pre-2000    Pre-2000    Post-2000    Post-2000

Notes: This table presents regression estimates of firm Q4 CAPEX spikes on firm tax position by combining CAPEX
spike data from Compustat with tax position data from corporate tax returns for the years 1993 through 2010.
We follow Zwick and Mahon (2017) and define D(taxable) as an indicator for whether a firm has positive income
before depreciation expense and thus an immediate incentive to offset taxable income with additional invest-
ment. All columns include firm and year fixed effects. Columns (2), (5), and (7) include the following controls:
ln(assets), Market-to-Book, Cash/Assets, CAPEX/PPE, and Sales 4/3. Column (3) adds EBITDA/Assets as an ad-
ditional control. Columns (4) and (5) are run using just the years 1993 through 2000, and columns (6) and (7)
use the years from 2001 to 2010. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level.




                                                       54
                 Table 4: Fiscal Q4 CAPEX Spikes and the Tax Reform Act of 1986

                           (1)       (2)        (3)      (4)        (5)        (6)       (7)        (8)
       D(1984-1987)     10.2***    5.0***    10.0***   5.4***    10.6***    6.0***    4.3***     1.6***
                          (1.3)     (1.5)      (1.2)    (1.3)     (1.2)      (1.2)     (0.5)      (0.5)
       Observations      24744     22886      61262    56986     117155     107924    117155     107924
       Adjusted R2        0.07      0.08       0.06     0.08       0.06       0.08      0.06       0.07
       Controls            No        Yes        No       Yes        No         Yes       No         Yes
       Firm FE             Yes       Yes        Yes      Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes
       Period            84-92     84-92      84-00    84-00      84-13      84-13     84-13      84-13

Notes: This table presents regression estimates of firm Q4 CAPEX spikes around the Tax Reform Act of 1986. The
top corporate tax rate was 46% in 1984-1986, 40% in 1987, 34% in 1988-1992 and 35% in 1993-2013. The
Tax Reform Act of 1986 also repealed the Investment Tax Credit and lengthened the depreciation periods for
property. In addition, it required the mid-quarter convention if property placed in service during Q4 is over 40%
of the whole tax year. D(84-87) is a dummy variable equal to 1 for the years 1984-1987. The dependent variable
is Q4 CAPEX spike measure in columns (1)-(6), and is a dummy variable indicating Q4 investment is over the
40% threshold in columns (7) and (8). Columns (1) and (2) include the period from 1984 to 1992, columns
(3) and (4) include the period from 1984 to 2000, and columns (5) and (6) include the period from 1984 to
2013. Columns (1), (3), (5), and (7) only include firm fixed effects, while columns (2), (4), (6) and (8) include
the following controls: ln(assets), Market-to-Book, Cash/Assets, CAPEX/PPE, and Sales 4/3. Standard errors are
clustered at the firm level.




                                                       55
                       Table 5: Investment Spikes and Financial Constraints

                                                (1)        (2)         (3)      (4)       (5)
               D(84-87)                     14.13***    4.24***       0.16    3.87**   4.30***
                                              (3.81)     (1.45)      (2.12)   (1.58)    (1.40)
               D(1984-1987)*ln(assets)       -1.55**
                                              (0.61)
               D(1984-1987)*nodiv                           4.50*
                                                            (2.38)
               D(1984-1987)*junkrating                               7.68*
                                                                     (4.18)
               D(1984-1987)*fp                                                4.82**
                                                                              (2.18)
               D(1984-1987)*fp2                                                        5.14**
                                                                                        (2.32)
               Observations                  107924     107924       27368    106764   106764
               Adjusted R2                    0.08       0.08         0.15     0.08      0.08
               Controls                        Yes        Yes          Yes      Yes       Yes
               Year FE                         No         No           No       No        No
               Firm FE                         Yes        Yes          Yes      Yes       Yes

Notes: This table presents regression estimates relating the magnitude of firm Q4 investment spikes to vari-
ous proxies for financial constraints used in prior work: log(assets) where small firms are more constrained, a
non-dividend payer dummy, a speculative grade dummy, a dummy variable indicating CAPEX exceeding internal
cash flow, and a dummy variable indicating CAPEX exceeding internal cash flow and not having an S&P rating
(Faulkender and Petersen (2012)). Columns (1) through (5) interact financial constraint proxies with tax policy
changes around the Tax Reform Act of 1986. Control variables include ln(assets), Market-to-Book, Cash/Assets,
CAPEX/PPE, and Sales 4/3. Firm fixed effects are included. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level.




                                                       56
                    Table 6: Decomposing the Investment-Cash Flow Sensitivity

                                                     (1)         (2)          (3)
                               C ashF low
                                  Asset           0.035***    0.025***     0.011***
                                                   (0.004)     (0.002)      (0.002)
                               C ashF low
                                  Asset      Q2                            0.013***
                                                                            (0.002)
                               C ashF low
                                  Asset      Q3                            0.024***
                                                                            (0.002)
                               C ashF low
                                  Asset      Q4               0.020***     0.034***
                                                               (0.002)      (0.002)
                              Tobin's Q           0.011***    0.003***     0.003***
                                                   (0.000)     (0.000)      (0.000)
                              Observations         129286      482301       482301
                              Adj R-Squared         0.530       0.444        0.445
                              Firm FE                Yes         Yes          Yes
                              Year FE                Yes
                              Year-Quarter FE                    Yes          Yes

Notes: This table presents regression estimates of investment-cash flow sensitivity using either annual or quarterly
investment measures. To enable comparison to past work, column (1) presents estimates at an annual frequency
with CAPEX/Assets as the left hand side variable and annual Cash Flow/Assets and Tobin's Q as key right-hand-
side variables, and includes firm and year fixed effects. Columns (2) and (3) use quarterly CAPEX/Assets as the
left-hand-side variable and include firm and year-by-quarter fixed effects. Column (2) interacts a fiscal Q4 dummy
with Cash Flow/Assets. Column (3) interacts dummies for each fiscal quarter with Cash Flow/Assets. Standard
errors are clustered at the firm level.




                                                        57
                           Table 7: Cumulative Effect of Q4 CAPEX Spikes

                                       Q1-2 Spikers             Q3-4 Spikers                  All
                                     (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)           (6)
    D(Spike Y)                    0.011*** 0.012***        0.061*** 0.061***       0.011***     0.012***
                                   (0.002)     (0.002)      (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)       (0.002)
    D(Forward 1Y)                 0.026*** 0.028***        0.118*** 0.116***       0.027***     0.029***
                                   (0.002)     (0.002)      (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)       (0.002)
    D(Forward 2Y)                 0.074*** 0.077***        0.146*** 0.144***       0.076***     0.078***
                                   (0.003)     (0.003)      (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)       (0.003)
    D(Forward 3Y)                 0.111*** 0.113***        0.175*** 0.173***       0.113***     0.115***
                                   (0.004)     (0.004)      (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.004)       (0.004)
    D(Spike Y)*Q34 Spiker                                                          0.049***     0.048***
                                                                                    (0.002)       (0.002)
    D(Forward 1Y)*Q34 Spiker                                                       0.091***     0.087***
                                                                                    (0.002)       (0.002)
    D(Forward 2Y)*Q34 Spiker                                                       0.070***     0.066***
                                                                                    (0.003)       (0.003)
    D(Forward 3Y)*Q34 Spiker                                                       0.061***     0.057***
                                                                                    (0.003)       (0.003)
    M/B                                        -0.006**                -0.015***                -0.011***
                                                (0.003)                  (0.003)                  (0.003)
    Cash/Assets                               -0.481***                -0.600***                -0.548***
                                                (0.027)                  (0.028)                  (0.026)
    EBITDA/Assets                              0.206***                 0.244***                 0.227***
                                                (0.023)                  (0.025)                  (0.023)
    Observations                   182500       177190      276300       267846     458800        445036
    Adj R-Squared                   0.523        0.536       0.558        0.571      0.546         0.559
    Event FE                         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes           Yes
    Year FE                          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes           Yes

Notes: This table examines the investment level around firm-years with large CAPEX spikes in different fiscal
quarters, where large spikes are defined as CAPEX Q/Ave(Q1-Q4) exceeding 113.65% (the sample median Q4
spike level). Dummy variables indicate the time period from the spiking year to three years after large spikes.
The dependent variable is CAPEX divided by total capital level (PPENT) in the year before spikes. The omitted
benchmark year is the year before spikes. Columns (5) and (6) compare firm-years with large spikes in Q3 and
Q4 to firm-years with large spikes in Q1 and Q2. Spike event fixed effects and year fixed effects are included.
Standard errors are clustered at the firm level.




                                                     58
              Table 8: Investment Spikes and Complicated Firms: Use it or Lose it?

                                                         (1)      (2)
                                       # Segments      2.6***
                                                        (0.3)
                                       # SIC2                    1.6***
                                                                  (0.3)
                                       Observations    94280     94262
                                       Adjusted R2      0.02      0.02
                                       Controls          Yes       Yes
                                       Year FE           Yes       Yes

Notes: This table presents regression estimates relating firm Q4 investment spikes to measures of corporate bud-
getary complexity. These measures include: (1) the number of segments; (2) the number of two digit SIC codes
in the corporate segments. Control variables include ln(Assets), Market-to-Book, Cash/Assets, CAPEX/PPE, and
Sales 4/3. The right-hand-side variables are standardized for ease of interpretation. Year fixed effects are in-
cluded. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level.




                                                      59
                Table 9: Spikes in Capital Goods Shipments, Inventories, and Prices

                             Shipments (%)        Lagged Inventories (%)                PPI (%)
                              (1)      (2)          (3)         (4)             (5)       (6)        (7)
        Month 3/6/9/12      22.1***               2.38***                     -0.020
                             (5.4)                 (0.49)                    (0.102)
        March                       24.3***                   2.29***                     0.057
                                      (4.6)                    (0.74)                   (0.241)
        June                        22.6***                   2.45***                     0.050
                                      (5.5)                    (0.63)                   (0.035)
        September                   20.1***                   2.37***                    -0.109
                                      (5.3)                    (0.72)                   (0.261)
        December                    21.6***                   2.41***                    -0.076
                                      (6.6)                    (0.43)                   (0.411)
        Shipments (%)                                                                               -0.004
                                                                                                   (0.003)
        Observations         3,348      3,348      3,333         3,333        3,348      3,348       3,348
        R-Squared            0.36       0.36       0.07          0.07         0.01       0.01        0.01

Notes: This table presents regression estimates of the within industry-year seasonality of capital goods shipments,
inventories, and prices. The unit of observation is at the industry­month level. For each variable, we compute
the ratio of monthly value to the average monthly value within that month's calendar year. Standard errors are
clustered at the industry level.




                                                       60
For Online Publication

A   Institutional Background and Variable Definitions




                             61
         Table A.1: Historical U.S. Corporate Income Tax Rate and Bonus Depreciation

                          Year          Income Bracket                Tax Rate (%)
                          1984-1986     First $25,000                 15
                                        $25,000 to $50,000            18
                                        $50,000 to $75,000            30
                                        $75,000 to $100,000           40
                                        $100,000 to $1,000,000        46
                                        $1,000,000 to $1,405,000      51(a)
                                        Over $1,405,000               46
                          1987          First $25,000                 15
                                        $25,000 to $50,000            16.5
                                        $50,000 to $75,000            27.5
                                        $75,000 to $100,000           37
                                        $100,000 to $335,000          42.5
                                        $335,000 to $1,000,000        40
                                        $1,000,000 to $1,405,000      42.5
                                        Over $1,405,000               46
                          1988-1992     First $50,000                 15
                                        $50,000 to $75,000            25
                                        $75,000 to $100,000           34
                                        $100,000 to $335,000          39(b)
                                        Over $335,000                 34
                          1993-2013     First $50,000                 15
                                        $50,000 to $75,000            25
                                        $75,000 to $100,000           34
                                        $100,000 to $335,000          39(c)
                                        $335,000 to $10,000,000       34
                                        $10,000,000 to $15,000,000    35
                                        $15,000,000 to $18,333,333    38(d)
                                        Over $18,333,333              35

                              Year       Bonus Depreciation
                              2001-02    30% Tax years ending after 9/10/01
                              2003       50% Tax years ending after 5/3/03
                              2004       50%
                              2008-09    50% Tax years ending after 12/31/07
                              2010-11    100% Tax years ending after 9/8/10
                              2012-13    50%
Notes:
(a) The Deficit Reduction Act of 1984 added an additional 5 percent to the tax rate in order to phase out the
benefit of the lower graduated rates for corporations with taxable income between $1,000,000 and 1,405,000.
Corporations with taxable income above $1,405,000, in effect, pay a flat marginal rate of 46 percent.
(b) Rates shown effective for tax years beginning on or after July 1, 1987. Taxable income before July 1, 1987
was subject to a two tax rate schedule or a blended tax rate.
(c) An additional 5 percent tax, not exceeding $11,750, is imposed on taxable income between $100,000 and
$335,000 in order to phase out the benefits of the lower graduated rates.
(d) An additional 3 percent tax, not exceeding $100,000, is imposed on taxable income between $15,000,000
and $18,333,333 in order to phase out the benefits of the lower graduated rates.
Source: IRS



                                                     62
                                                         Table A.2: Variable Definitions

     CAPEX/ PPE               Capital Expenditures/ Property, Plant and Equipment
     CAPEX Q4 Spike           Ratio of Q4 CAPEX to the average of Q1 through Q3
     Cash/Assets              Cash and Short-term Investment/L.Assets
     Cash Flow/Assets         (Income Before Extraordinary Items+Depreciation and Amortization)/L.Assets
     Dividend Payers          A dummy variable = 1 if a firm pays dividend in a given year
     EBITDA/Assets            Earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortization/L.Assets
     Faulkender-Petersen I    A dummy variable = 1 if a firm's investment expenditures exceed its internal cash flow
     Faulkender-Petersen II   Faulkender-Petersen I × A dummy variable = 1 if a firm does not have an S&P domestic long term issuer credit rating
     Investment Duration      The inverse of the present value of future depreciation deductions (at NAICS four-digit level)
     Leverage                 (Debt in Current Liabilities + Long-Term Debt)/ (Debt in Current Liabilities + Long-Term Debt+ Common Equity)
     Market-to-Book           (Total Assets - Common Equity + Common Shares Outstanding × Closing Price (Fiscal Year))/Assets
     Sales Volatility         Standard deviation of a firm's sales, normalized by the average sales
     Sales Q4 Spike           Ratio of Q4 sales to the average of Q1 through Q3
     Speculative Grade        A dummy variable = 1 if a firm receives an S&P long-term issuer credit rating below or equal to BB+ in a given year
     Tobin's Q                (Total Assets + Common Shares Outstanding × Closing Price (Fiscal Year) - Common Equity - Deferred Taxes)/Asset




63
B                                      Appendix Exhibits

                                                                          Figure B.1: Robustness of Q4 Investment Spikes

                                                         (a) Alternative Spike Measure                                                                                              (b) Fiscal Q1 Drop




                                                                                                            Ratio of Quarterly CAPEX to Average CAPEX %
       Ratio of Quarterly CAPEX to Average CAPEX %




                                                                                                                                                  110
                                    110    120




                                                                                                                                        100
                           100




                                                                                                                              90
                  90




                                                                                                                80
         80




                                                     1984q4     1993q4               2002q4   2011q4                                                                       1984q4     1993q4               2002q4   2011q4
                                                                         Fiscal Quarter                                                                                                        Fiscal Quarter



                                                       (d) Stable Fiscal Year-End Sales                                         (d) Fiscal Q4 Book Depreciation Spikes
                                                                                                               Ratio of Quarterly Depreciation to Average Depreciation %
                                                                                                                                                                   110
    Ratio of Quarterly CAPEX to Average CAPEX %
                            100      110   120




                                                                                                                                           100
           80        90




                                                                                                                 90




                                                     1984q4     1993q4               2002q4   2011q4                                                                       1984q4     1993q4               2002q4   2011q4
                                                                         Fiscal Quarter                                                                                                        Fiscal Quarter



Notes: This figure illustrates the robustness of fiscal Q4 CAPEX spikes. Panel (a) plots the median ratio of quarterly
          l 2.CAP EX +l 1.CAP EX + f 1.CAP EX + f 2.CAP EX
CAPEX to                          4                        . Panel (b) plots the Q4 CAPEX spikes with red dots being the average
of Q4 and next fiscal Q1 to the average CAPEX within a firm's fiscal year. Panel (c) plots the time series of Q4
CAPEX spikes for firms with stable fiscal year-end sales, defined as firm-years for which fiscal Q4 sales are lower
than the average of the first three fiscal quarters. Panel (d) plots the median ratio of quarterly book depreciation
to the average book depreciation within a firm's fiscal year.




                                                                                                       64
                                                   Figure B.2: Time Series of Fiscal Q4 R&D Spikes
                               130
           Ratio of Quarterly RD to Average RD %
               90       100    80  110      120




                                         1989q1          1995q1         2001q1          2007q1       2013q1
                                                                      Fiscal Quarter



Notes: This figure shows fourth quarter Research and Development (R&D) spikes for U.S. firms in Compustat
between 1989 and 2013. We plot the median ratio of quarterly R&D to the average R&D within a firm's fiscal
year. Red dots indicate the fourth fiscal quarter. R&D is net of R&D related salary and benefit expenses, calculated
as the industry average according to the Business Research and Development and Innovation Survey (BRDIS)
conducted by the National Science Foundation.




                                                                         65
                                                                    Figure B.3: Quarterly Investment after Spikes
                                                      (a) Fiscal Q1 Spikers                                                                       (b) Fiscal Q2 Spikers
                       300




                                                                                                                   300
  Quarterly CAPEX Relative to Baseline (%)




                                                                                              Quarterly CAPEX Relative to Baseline (%)
                            200




                                                                                                                        200
             100




                                                                                                         100
                       0




                                                                                                                   0


                                                 -3     1   2   3   4    5       9                                                           -3     1   2   3   4    5    9
                                                                    Quarter                                                                                     Quarter


                                                      (c) Fiscal Q3 Spikers                                                                       (d) Fiscal Q4 Spikers
                                           300




                                                                                                                                       300
  Quarterly CAPEX Relative to Baseline (%)




                                                                                              Quarterly CAPEX Relative to Baseline (%)
                            200




                                                                                                                       200
            100




                                                                                                        100
                       0




                                                                                                                   0




                                                 -3     1   2   3   4    5       9                                                           -3     1   2   3   4    5    9
                                                                    Quarter                                                                                     Quarter

Notes: This figure presents the quarterly investment level after large spikes in Q1, Q2, Q3, and Q4 in panels (a)-
(d), respectively. Large spikes are defines as event quarter spikes CAPEX Q/Ave(Q1-Q4) exceeding 113.65% (the
sample median Q4 spike level). The baseline (denominator) is the average quarterly CAPEX in the year before
spikes (t from -3 to 0), and the numerator is the quarterly CAPEX. The dotted lines are 95% confidence intervals.




                                                                                         66
                                      Figure B.4: Time Series of Immediate Benefits from Depreciation
                       80
          Share of Observations (%)
           50       60 40    70




                                      1992   1994   1996     1998      2000      2002      2004      2006          2008   2010

                                                     Positive Net Income Before Depreciation and Potential NOL
                                                     Positive Net Income After Depreciation Before Potential NOL
                                                     Positive Net Income Before Depreciation After Potential NOL




Notes: This figure shows the share of firms in our matched Compustat-SOI sample who have potential to immedi-
ately benefit from depreciation deductions. We plot the share of firms with positive net income before depreciation
and potential net operating loss (NOL) deductions, the share after depreciation but before potential NOL deduc-
tions, and the share before depreciation but after potential NOL deductions. The dashed lines correspond to the
two periods of "bonus" accelerated depreciation in our sample (2001­2004 and 2008­2010). The shaded regions
denote NBER recession windows.




                                                                          67
                                                     Table B.1: Investment Spikes and Debt Spikes
                                                             (a) Debt Spikes for all Sample Firms
                                                   (1)                      (2)                     (3)                     (4)
                                          Debt Issues 4/3 (%)    Long-term Debt 4/3 (%)    Current Debt 4/3 (%)    Total Debt 4/3 (%)
                        CAPEX 4/3 (%)           7.56***                  3.25***                  1.35**                 2.46***
                                                 (0.63)                   (0.27)                  (0.56)                  (0.22)
                        Observations             47879                    92252                   85738                   92182
                        Adjusted R2               0.07                     0.04                    0.03                    0.07
                        Year FE                    Yes                      Yes                     Yes                     Yes
                        Firm FE                    Yes                      Yes                     Yes                     Yes




68
                                                 (b) Debt Spikes for Firms with non-December Fiscal Year-End
                                                    (1)                     (2)                     (3)                     (4)
                                           Debt Issues 4/3 (%)   Long-term Debt 4/3(%)     Current Debt 4/3 (%)    Total Debt 4/3 (%)
                         CAPEX 4/3 (%)           5.50***                 2.14***                   0.72                  1.56***
                                                  (1.03)                  (0.42)                  (0.89)                  (0.35)
                         Observations             16486                   33383                   31689                   33266
                         Adjusted R2               0.07                    0.03                    0.05                    0.08
                         Year FE                    Yes                     Yes                     Yes                     Yes
                         Firm FE                    Yes                     Yes                     Yes                     Yes




     Notes: This table presents regression estimates relating the magnitude of firm Q4 investment spikes to Q4 debt spikes. Firm and year fixed effects are
     included. Firm Q4 investment spikes are standardized for ease of interpretation. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level.
         Table B.2: Fiscal Q4 CAPEX Spikes and Tax Status (Alternative Specifications)
                                         (a) CAPEX Q4/Ave (Q1-Q4)
                            (1)      (2)        (3)           (4)       (5)         (6)         (7)
        D(taxable)        5.8***   5.2***    2.8***         7.2***    5.0***      5.2***      4.9***
                           (0.8)    (0.8)      (0.8)         (1.7)     (1.7)       (1.0)       (1.0)
        CAPEX/PPE                  2.2***    2.0***                   2.3**                   2.3**
                                    (0.6)      (0.6)                   (1.2)                   (1.0)
        EBITDA/Assets                        23.4***
                                               (2.9)
        Observations      49178    47582      47524      19429        18744      29749       28838
        R2                0.0825   0.104      0.106      0.0901       0.116      0.0943       0.110
        Controls            No       1           2         No            1         No           1
        Firm FE             Yes     Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes
        Year FE             Yes     Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes
        Period                                          Pre-2000     Pre-2000   Post-2000   Post-2000

                                         (b)CAPEX Q4/Total CAPEX
                            (1)       (2)      (3)        (4)           (5)        (6)         (7)
        D(taxable)        1.5***    1.3***   0.7***     1.8***        1.2***     1.3***      1.2***
                           (0.2)     (0.2)    (0.2)      (0.4)         (0.4)      (0.2)       (0.2)
        CAPEX/PPE                   0.5***   0.5***                   0.6**                  0.6**
                                     (0.2)    (0.2)                    (0.3)                  (0.2)
        EBITDA/Assets                        5.9***
                                              (0.7)
        Observations      49178     47582    47524      19429         18744      29749       28838
        R2                0.0825    0.104    0.106      0.0901        0.116      0.0943       0.110
        Controls            No        1         2         No             1         No           1
        Firm FE             Yes      Yes       Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes         Yes
        Year FE             Yes      Yes       Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes         Yes
        Period                                         Pre-2000      Pre-2000   Post-2000   Post-2000

Notes: This table presents regression estimates of firm Q4 CAPEX spikes on firm tax position by combining CAPEX
spike data from Compustat with tax position data from corporate tax returns for the years 1993 through 2010.
Specifications follow Table 3 with alternative spike specifications.




                                                       69
Table B.3: Fiscal Q4 CAPEX Spikes and the Tax Reform Act of 1986 (Alternative Specifications)
                                       (a) CAPEX Q4/Ave (Q1-Q4)
                                    (1)      (2)      (3)      (4)       (5)       (6)
                  D(1984-1987)    5.2***   2.5***   4.8***   2.5***   5.1***    3.2***
                                   (0.7)    (0.8)    (0.6)    (0.7)    (0.6)     (0.7)
                  Observations    24744    22886    61262    56986    117155    107924
                  Adjusted R2      0.08     0.08     0.06     0.08      0.07      0.09
                  Controls          No       Yes      No       Yes       No        Yes
                  Firm FE           Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes
                  Period          84-92    84-92    84-00    84-00     84-13     84-13

                                       (b) CAPEX Q4/Total CAPEX
                                    (1)      (2)      (3)      (4)       (5)       (6)
                  D(1984-1987)    1.3***   0.6***   1.2***   0.6***   1.3***    0.8***
                                   (0.2)    (0.2)    (0.2)    (0.2)    (0.2)     (0.2)
                  Observations    24744    22886    61262    56986    117155    107924
                  Adjusted R2      0.08     0.08     0.06     0.08      0.07      0.09
                  Controls          No       Yes      No       Yes       No        Yes
                  Firm FE           Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes
                  Period          84-92    84-92    84-00    84-00     84-13     84-13

Notes: This table presents regression estimates of firm Q4 CAPEX spikes around the Tax Reform Act of 1986.
Specifications follow Table 4 columns (1)-(6) with alternative spike specifications.




                                                    70
                           Table B.4: Comparative Statics for the Full Model

 Model Version                          ^
                                                                             Tax Credit?       Mean Investment
                                                                                                    Ratio

 Full                                 0.119                 0.35                 NO                 107.30
 Low Tax Depreciation Rate             0.06                 0.35                 NO                 103.73
 High Tax Depreciation Rate           0.18                  0.35                 NO                 119.34
 Low Tax Rate                         0.119                 0.21                 NO                 103.15
 High Tax Rate                        0.119                 0.46                 NO                 108.11
 Tax Credit                           0.119                 0.35                 YES                117.78

Notes: This table shows how changing the parameters of the Full model affects the average magnitude of fiscal
Q4 investment spikes. The mean investment ratio is defined as the mean value of CAPEX Q4/Ave(Q1-Q4) over
all firm-years in the simulated model output. The first row presents the parameterization and mean investment
ratio of the Full model, while the other rows present this information for versions of the Full model with either a
modified tax depreciation rate, a modified corporate income tax rate, or the inclusion of a tax credit.




                                                       71
