                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   GLOBAL LESSONS FROM CLIMATE CHANGE LEGISLATION AND LITIGATION

                                     Shaikh M. Eskander
                                      Sam Fankhauser
                                        Joana Setzer

                                     Working Paper 27365
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27365


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2020




We acknowledge financial support from the Grantham Foundation for the Protection of the
Environment, and from the UK Economic and Social Research Council (ESRC) through its
support of the Centre for Climate Change Economics and Policy (CCCEP). We are grateful to
Caterina Gennaioli, Matthew Kotchen and Michal Nachmany for their insights and feedback. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Shaikh M. Eskander, Sam Fankhauser, and Joana Setzer. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Global Lessons from Climate Change Legislation and Litigation
Shaikh M. Eskander, Sam Fankhauser, and Joana Setzer
NBER Working Paper No. 27365
June 2020
JEL No. K32,Q54,Q58

                                          ABSTRACT

There is no country in the world that does not have at least one law or policy dealing with climate
change. The most prolific countries have well over 20, and globally there are 1,800 such laws.
Some of them are executive orders or policies issued by governments, others are legislative acts
passed by parliament. The judiciary has been involved in 1,500 court cases that concern climate
change (over 1,100 of which in the US). We use Climate Change Laws of the World (CCLW), a
publicly accessible database, to analyze patterns and trends in climate change legislation and
litigation over the past 30 years. The data reveal that global legislative activity peaked around
2009-14, well before the Paris Agreement. Accounting for effectiveness in implementation and
the length of time laws have been in place, the UK and South Korea are the most comprehensive
legislators among G20 countries and Spain within the OECD. Climate change legislation is less
of a partisan issue than is commonly assumed: the number of climate laws passed by
governments of the left, center and right is roughly proportional to their time in office. We also
find that legislative activity decreases in times of economic difficulty. Where courts have got
involved, judges outside the US have ruled in favor of enhanced climate protection in about half
of the cases (US judges are more inclined to rule against climate protection).

Shaikh M. Eskander                               Joana Setzer
London School of Economics                       London School of Economics
Houghton Street                                  Houghton St
London WC2A 2AE                                  London WC2A 2AE
United Kingdom                                   United Kingdom
S.M.Eskander@lse.ac.uk                           j.setzer@lse.ac.uk

Sam Fankhauser
London School of Economics
Houghton St
London WC2A 2AE
United Kingdom
s.fankhauser@lse.ac.uk
                                          1. Introduction

   The international climate change architecture and the scientific evidence both demand accelerated

action on climate change. Under the Paris Agreement, countries are obliged to ratchet up their

Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) to the Paris process in 2020. According to climate

scientists, current emission reduction commitments are likely to result in a global mean temperature

rise of around 3°C by 2100, rather than the "well below 2°C" envisaged under Paris (Rogelj et al.

2016).


   We observe that national climate action is accelerating. Between 1990 and 1999, only 110 laws

and significant policies were passed that directly or indirectly addressed climate change. Between 2010

and 2019 the flow of new laws had grown tenfold to about 1,100 laws and policies. The total stock of

climate change laws and policies worldwide now stands at 1,800 and continues to grow.


   Our awareness of those initiatives is improving at the same time. In 2013, climate change

legislation was tracked in just 33 countries (Townshend et al. 2013). By 2015 the number had risen to

66 countries (Fankhauser et al. 2015a, b). Today coverage is global at the level of nation states. In the

course of the data gathering, understanding also grew about the breadth of actions that are relevant to

climate change, which brought additional laws into the count. This was the case especially for

adaptation laws, where the delineation with related activities, such as disaster risk management, is

necessarily fuzzy.


   Climate legislation is an essential part of climate change governance, as successful action against

climate change requires a legal basis. Emissions pledges are not credible unless the targets, and the

measures enacted to achieve them, are rooted in law. Although climate laws and policies vary greatly

in scope and ambition (that is, at the intensive margin), their growing number (the extensive margin)

is an important indicator of countries' ambition on climate change.



                                                   2
      In addition to the laws, edicts and policies passed by executive and legislative bodies, we are

observing an increasing participation by the judiciary in the governance of climate change. About

1,500 climate change-related court cases have so far been identified worldwide, three quarters of which

in the United States.


      The relationship between climate legislation and litigation is still unclear (Setzer and Vanhala

2019), but broadly the two appear to serve complementary functions. The judiciary is implementing

government policy prescriptions, interpreting climate legislation and filling enforcement gaps. While

"regulation through litigation" can compensate for deficits in the volume or quality of legislation, the

judiciary is also mobilized in countries with progressive climate change legislation. In fact, legal

mobilization for climate change ­ using the courts and legal techniques as an instrument for obtaining

wider collective objectives ­ often occurs combination with other forms of mobilization, such as

legislative activity, but also political pressure and grassroots activism (Setzer and Vanhala, 2019).


      One of the best tools for tracking global trends in climate change policy, legislation and litigation

is Climate Change Laws of the World (CCLW), a searchable, publicly accessible database created and

maintained by the Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change and the Environment at the London

School of Economics.1 2 The database is a joint initiative with the Sabin Centre for Climate Change

Law at Columbia Law School. At the end of 2019 it featured 1,800 climate laws in 198 jurisdictions,




1
    Climate Change Laws of the World can be accessed at https://climate-laws.org.
2
 There are other databases, which focus on particular policy processes, sectors or subsets of countries. The Climate Policy
database project (http://climatepolicydatabase.org) gathers information on which countries are implementing good-practice
policies or policies to reduce carbon emissions. The International Energy Agency (IEA) Policies and Measures Database
(https://www.iea.org/policies) provides access to information on past, existing or planned government policies and
measures to reduce GHG emissions, improve energy efficiency and support the development and deployment of renewables
and other clean energy technologies. ClimateWatch (https://www.climatewatchdata.org) tracks progress with Nationally
Determined Contributions (NDCs) to the Paris Agreement.



                                                             3
alongside 355 court cases in 36 jurisdictions.3 The aim is to provide transparency about the actions of

individual countries in addressing global climate change, the ultimate collective action problem.


    This paper uses CCLW to analyze patterns and trends in national climate change legislation and

litigation over the past 30 years. It provides an overview of what countries are already doing ­ and

what countries that are not yet doing it could potentially do ­ to implement the objectives of the Paris

Agreement. We look at the contribution of governments (the executive), parliaments (the legislature)

and courts (the judiciary).


    Our interest is in high-level patterns. We do not aspire to provide detailed case studies or carefully

identified statistical relationships. There is an emerging literature that is aiming to do this (cited below).

We restrict ourselves to a few simple statistics and correlations. The data reveal that global legislative

activity peaked before the Paris Agreement in around 2009-14. We find that climate change legislation

is in most countries a bipartisan concern and that legislative activity decreases in times of economic

difficulty. The UK and South Korea are the most comprehensive legislators among the G20, and Spain

is the most comprehensive legislator within the OECD. Where courts have got involved, judges outside

the US have ruled in favor of enhanced climate protection in about half of the cases.


    The next section briefly introduces the CCLW database, including its history, scope, shortcomings

and a few descriptive statistics. Section 3 discusses some key findings that may be gleaned from the

data. Section 4 concludes.




3
  Information on climate change litigation in the United States is contained in a separate database maintained by the Sabin
Centre. The data can be accessed at http://climatecasechart.com/us-climate-change-litigation/. The database is maintained
in collaboration with the law firm Arnold & Porter, to which the Sabin Center has close links.


                                                            4
                   2. The Climate Change Laws of the World Database

   2.1 Background

   The Climate Change Laws of the World database has been compiled over a decade with the help

of international partners such as the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU), the global organization of

national parliaments, and the Global Legislators Organization for a Balanced Environment (GLOBE),

an international legislators' forum. The impetus for the initiative was a desire to document national

climate action following the 2009 Copenhagen summit and debunk the myth that each country was

acting alone (Townshend et al. 2011). Over the years, reporting grew from a handful of major emitters

to global coverage. Collaboration with the Sabin Center on Climate Change Law at Columbia Law

School from 2015 onward (when the database acquired its current name) allowed the extension of the

database from climate change legislation to climate change litigation.


   Data are collected in real time from official sources such as government websites, parliamentary

records and court documents. There is an internal protocol to ensure new entries conform with

CCLW's definition and interpretation of what constitutes climate change legislation and litigation.

Most entries contain a link to the actual text of the law or the filing and court decision.


   This is the first academic synthesis of the main patterns and trends that the CCLW data reveal. So

far, the data have mostly served to assess global progress in adopting climate policies (Dubash et al.

2013; Iacobuta et al. 2018; Townshend et al. 2013), understand the political economy of passing

climate laws (Fankhauser et al. 2015a, b), identify good practice in climate change governance

(Averchenkova et al. 2017; Jordan et al. 2018) and assess the environmental impact of climate

legislation (Eskander and Fankhauser 2020). The litigation data have been used to assess trends in

climate litigation (Burger et al. 2017; Setzer and Bangalore, 2017; Wilensky 2015) and to analyze

particular aspects of climate litigation, such as litigation in the financial sector (Solana 2020) and in

the Global South (Peel and Lin 2019; Setzer and Benjamin 2019).


                                                    5
   2.2 Climate change legislation

   The main part of the CCLW database concerns climate change legislation. The legislation database

aspires to be a globally comprehensive record of legislation activities in 198 jurisdictions (197

countries and territories, plus the European Union as a block). It adopts a broad definition of climate

legislation, including legislative acts, executive orders and policies of equivalent importance.

Legislative acts, passed by parliaments, account for about 40 percent of entries and executive orders

and policies, issued by governments, for about 60 percent (see Table 1). For simplicity, we refer to all

these interventions as "laws".


   The laws included in CCLW either specifically refer to climate change or promote the sectoral

measures required to reduce emissions and increase climate resilience. As such, the database covers

the full range of interventions that is relevant to climate change, including:


       ·   overarching policies like carbon pricing schemes (e.g., New Zealand's Climate Change

           Response (Emissions Trading) Amendment),

       ·   energy sector policies (e.g., Germany's Renewable Energy Sources Act),

       ·   transport interventions (e.g., Brazil's Mandatory Biodiesel Requirements),

       ·   forestry interventions as relate to climate (e.g., the Democratic Republic of Congo's Law

           on Protection of the Nature), and

       ·   adaptation interventions (e.g., Japan's Climate Change Adaptation Act).


   A particularly important category is strategic framework laws, which aim to create a unifying

institutional structure to reduce greenhouse gas emissions or address physical climate risks, or often

both. An instructive example is the UK Climate Change Act of 2008, which (i) sets a legally binding

long-term mitigation goal (since strengthened to net-zero by 2050), (ii) legislates intermediary short-

term targets (or carbon budgets), (iii) creates an independent advisory body (the Committee on Climate

                                                    6
Change), (iv) establishes a continual process of adaptation planning, and (v) mandates regular

government reporting on progress (Averchenkova et al. 2020; Muinzer 2018).4 Many of these features

have been replicated in other framework laws, for example Mexico's General Law on Climate Change

2012,5    New Zealand's Climate Change Response (Zero Carbon) Amendment Bill 2019,6 and the

climate change acts of several European countries (Nash and Steurer 2019). South Korea's Framework

Act on Low-Carbon Growth 2010 stands out because it couches climate action in a wider green growth

narrative, combining environmental with industrial policy.7


    However, the majority of climate laws concern sector-specific interventions, in particular on

energy. About 60 percent of laws contain provisions on energy supply, such as the promotion of

renewable energy, and / or energy demand, such as industrial or residential energy efficiency.

Interventions on transport and forestry are less frequent. About a third of all laws concern climate

resilience and adaptation to climate risks. CCLW now also covers disaster risk management, that is,

laws concerned with the impacts of current climate variability, rather than future climate change.


                                 <Table 1: Descriptive legislation statistics>

    2.3 Climate change litigation

    The litigation database within CCLW is different from the legislation database in that it does not

aspire to be comprehensive in its geographic coverage or in the number of cases it contains.




4
  Full text and summary available at: https://climate-laws.org/cclow/geographies/united-kingdom/laws/climate-change-
act-34405aa9-396e-4a78-a662-20cad9696365.
5
  Full text and summary available at: https://climate-laws.org/cclow/geographies/mexico/laws/general-law-on-climate-
change. For challenges in implementing the law, see Averchencova and Guzman Luna (2018).
6
  Full text and summary available at: https://climate-laws.org/cclow/geographies/new-zealand/laws/climate-change-
response-act-2002-as-amended-by-the-climate-change-response-zero-carbon-amendment-act.
7
 Full text and summary available at: https://climate-laws.org/cclow/geographies/south-korea/laws/framework-act-on-low-
carbon-green-growth-regulated-by-enforcement-decree-of-the-framework-act-on-low-carbon-green-growth.


                                                          7
   CCLW adopts a broad definition of litigation in terms of actors (governmental and non-

governmental), jurisdictional levels (local, regional, national and international) and the profile of the

case (climate as central or peripheral). Included in the database are lawsuits brought before

administrative, judicial and other investigatory bodies that raise issues of law or fact regarding the

science of climate change and climate change mitigation and adaptation efforts (Markell and Ruhl

2012; Burger et al. 2017). The case files contain keywords such as climate change, global warming,

global change, greenhouse gas, GHGs, and sea level rise. Cases that make only passing reference to

the fact of climate change, its causes or its effects are excluded if they do not address in direct or

meaningful fashion the laws, policies or actions that compel, support or facilitate climate mitigation

or adaptation. Cases that seek incidentally to accomplish (or prevent) climate change policy goals

without reference to climate change issues are not included (Burger et al. 2017). Thus, for example,

the database does not include cases in which the parties seek to limit air pollution from coal-fired

power plants but do not directly raise issues of fact or law pertaining to climate change.


   The identification of climate change litigation also involves characterizing the centrality of climate

change issues to the case (Peel and Osofsky 2015; Bouwer 2018). Climate change can range from

being a central issue in a case, to peripheral, that is, litigation that was brought in part over climate

change issues but focuses on other grounds (for example, disputes over the siting of wind farms or

about subsidies for renewable energy). Litigation that is not explicitly tied to climate change arguments

but is within the context of climate change (for instance, disputes relating to insurance and risk, or

intellectual property rights) has been underappreciated by the literature, but has important strategic,

policy and governance implications because it could implicitly impact on accessibility of finance or

new technologies to support climate change (Bouwer 2018).


   The vast majority of climate change litigation cases (1,154) has been filed in the United States, and

these are contained in a separate database. The material difference between US and non-US cases



                                                   8
makes cross-country analysis and the comparison of US and non-US trends impracticable. We focus

our analysis on the 355 cases that have been filed in 36 non-US jurisdictions (as of end-2019). The

majority of them are in Australia (96 cases) and in the European Union (57 cases). The database also

includes 18 cases that have been brought before supranational tribunals such as the UN Human Rights

Committee, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, and the Inter-American Court on

Human Rights. (See Appendix Table A4 for details).


   Over 80 percent of the non-US cases have been brought against governments, and typically the

plaintiff is either a private company or a non-governmental organization (NGO). Lawsuits against

private defendants are still relatively rare (Table 2; see also Wilensky 2015). Most cases are routine

and concern the application, interpretation and enforcement of laws such as planning law or the

operation of emissions trading schemes (Markell and Ruhl 2012; Bouwer 2018).


   Climate change is at the core of the legal argument in less than 40 per cent of cases (138 out of

355). A smaller number of these lawsuits can be described as strategic cases. The delineation is not

firm, but these are high-profile claims brought either against governments, where plaintiffs seek

increased mitigation ambition, or against large emitters, where plaintiffs seek compensation for

damages caused by, or costs incurred due to, climate change. Their aim is to advance policy outcomes

and to drive behavioral shifts by key actors (Peel and Osofsky 2015). Table 3 contains summaries of

three landmark cases (Urgenda Foundation v. State of the Netherlands; Leghari v Federation of

Pakistan; and the Carbon Majors Inquiry), which received considerable media attention and have

inspired similar cases in other jurisdictions.


                              <Table 2: Descriptive litigation statistics>

                                 <Table 3: Strategic litigation cases>




                                                   9
   2.4 Limitations

   While CCLW is arguably the most comprehensive database of its kind, it has some limitations. In

terms of legislation data, an important issue is that the database is silent about the quality of different

laws. Stringent and comprehensive framework laws like the UK Climate Change Act, which has been

praised for its innovative features (Averchenkova et al. 2020; Muinzer 2018), are treated in the same

way as unsuccessful laws such as Indonesia's various attempts to combat deforestation.


   The delineation of what does and does not constitute a climate change law can be difficult.

Although CCLW errs on the side of inclusion, by restricting the collection to certain categories of

climaterelated laws and policies, the dataset presents an incomplete picture of regulatory efforts

relating to climate change (Scotford and Minas 2019). The issue is perhaps most pertinent in the areas

of adaptation and land-use change, but similar definitional issues also affect the litigation database.


   The legislation database focuses on national climate policy, which means initiatives at the sub-

national level and by non-state actors are not covered. State, province and city-led initiatives are

particularly significant in countries with federal structures or where national engagement with climate

change has been intermittent, such as Australia, Brazil, Canada and the United States. In each of these

countries, climate policy at sub-national level is fairly advanced and often ahead of the national

discourse.


   Conversely, in EU member states a focus on national climate policy would ignore the important

role of the European Union in national climate policy. The EU has passed 33 climate laws, including

legislation to set up an EU-wide emissions trading scheme and establish ambitious targets on

renewable energy, which are legally binding for its member states. Fortunately, there is a relatively

easy fix to this bias, which is to add all EU laws to the tally of member states (Eskander and Fankhauser

2020).




                                                    10
   A potential problem for time series or panel data analysis is that when laws are amended the

database only records the latest version, thus omitting earlier activities. Legal provisions are often

tightened over time (as for example Switzerland did when revising its CO2 Act in 2013), but there are

also cases of reversal (such as the repeal of Canada's Kyoto Implementation Act in 2012 and Australia's

Clean Energy Act in 2014). In each case, these events supersede earlier database entries.


   The litigation dataset has its own limitations. Perhaps the most important one concerns data

collection. While the CCLW dataset is the largest one compiled to date, it cannot be deemed

representative or comprehensive. Rather, the dataset consists of cases from a limited number of

countries, dictated by data accessibility and language considerations. The case list heavily relies on

partners of the data providers and on media reports, predominantly in English ­ ultimately meaning

we cannot be sure of the full extent of unidentified litigation cases. Moreover, due to different

regulation and litigation cultures, the database is highly uneven, with the majority of the cases

attributable to a few jurisdictions. Finally, the CCLW dataset does not include litigation in the US,

where the majority of cases has been brought and where, due to relative advantages in procuring

information about the cases, the data is closer to being comprehensive.




                                            3. Insights

   3.1 The peak in climate change legislation predates the Paris Agreement

   Practically all climate change laws have been passed over the last 30 years (Figure 1). In 1990,

there were only 35 laws with relevance to climate change worldwide (Table 1 above). As there was

little awareness of the climate issue at that time, most of these laws had related objectives such as

energy efficiency (e.g. Costa Rica's Energy Law 1990). Other early laws had wider environmental

objectives that were later applied to climate change. For example, the US Clean Air Act 1963 is

concerned with air pollution, but after a 2007 ruling by the Supreme Court (Massachusetts vs

                                                  11
Environmental Protection Agency), the Obama administration used it as the legal basis to regulate

greenhouse gas emissions.


                          < Figure 1: Climate change legislation over time>.

   By the mid-1990s the number of climate laws began to rise. Prominent early examples are

Sweden's Carbon Tax Act 1991 and Japan's Act on Promotion of Global Warming Counter Measures

1998. Law making reached a peak in the period 2009-14, when over 120 new laws were passed each

year. During this heyday, significant framework laws were passed for example in the UK (2008), South

Korea (2010) and Mexico (2012). The European Union's 2020 Climate and Energy Package with its

20-20-20 targets (for emissions, renewable energy and energy efficiency) was also passed in this

period. In the United States, a law of similar standing, the American Clean Energy and Securities Act

2009, known as the Waxman-Markey Bill after its sponsors, was approved by the House of

Representatives, but not tabled in the Senate. After 2014, legislative activity began to tail off.


   The 2009-14 peak was supported by increased activity in developing countries, sometimes with

the support of development agencies. Many of these interventions concerned adaptation, which was a

bigger legislative focus than in the industrialized world. Most of them were policy documents, such as

Ethiopia's Climate-resilient Green Growth Strategy 2011. Legislative acts passed by parliament are

much rarer (Table 1 above), although there are notable exceptions such as Kenya's Climate Change

Act of 2016.


   Climate change litigation cases peaked at around the same time, although the rise was more sudden,

with very few cases before the mid-2000s (Figure 2). Litigation was spearheaded in industrialized

countries (EU and OECD member states, including the US), with a much slower ramp up of cases

elsewhere.


                            < Figure 2: Climate change litigation over time>.


                                                    12
   It is difficult to discern an impact of external factors, such as the international climate negotiations,

on national climate legislation or litigation. Fankhauser et al. (2015b) found a statistically significant

difference in legislative activity between Annex 1 (industrialized) and non-Annex 1 (developing)

countries in the aftermath of the Kyoto Protocol, which imposed binding obligations on the former.

However, the effect was temporary and relatively small.


   The impact of the Paris Agreement appears equally limited. The peak in legislative activity clearly

pre-dates the Agreement, which was signed in December 2015. Only about 230 climate-relevant laws

were passed in the subsequent four years, which is less than half the annual rate than during the peak

years.


   The more significant impact of the Paris Agreement was perhaps on the ambition of new laws (the

intensive margin), rather than their number (the extensive margin). Several countries, including

Sweden (2017), France (2019), New Zealand (2019) and the UK (2019) have passed acts to put into

law an economy-wide net-zero emissions target (that is, a balance between emissions and their removal

from the atmosphere) in line with the Paris objectives. However, analysis has shown that very few of

the emissions pledges contained in countries' NDCs are matched by legislated national emissions

targets (Nachmany and Mangan 2018). The legislative implementation of the Paris Agreement is still

far from complete.


   3.2 Spain, the UK and South Korea are the most comprehensive legislators

   Every country in the world now has at least one climate law, as defined by CCLW, and in some

jurisdictions the number is well over 20 (Figure 3a). The median country has passed eight climate

change laws and policies (Table 1).


                  <Figure 3: Map of climate legislation and litigation by countries>




                                                    13
    The number of climate laws a country has passed tells us something about the interest of its law

makers in climate change. However, it is not a perfect indicator of climate action. Simply counting the

number of laws ignores the considerable heterogeneity that exists in countries' legislative approaches

to climate change (Averchenkova et al. 2017). What is covered in one overarching piece of legislation

in one country may require several separate interventions in another. China, for example, only has 8

climate change laws, but this includes powerful provisions incorporated in the 12th and 13th Five Year

Plan. In comparison, Brazil has 28 recorded climate change laws, including 8 interventions trying to

halt deforestation. In Europe, Sweden has 11 climate change laws, compared with 20 laws in the UK.

Yet both countries are seen as leaders in the fight against climate change.


    Bearing this caveat in mind, we calculate three statistics that we believe are informative about

countries' determination to act on climate change. The first indicator is the number of laws that were

on the statute book (or more accurately, in the CCLW database) by the end of 2019. The second

indicator accounts for government effectiveness. The presumption is that laws passed by effective

governments are more likely to be implemented, and therefore have a higher real-world impact, than

those passed by ineffectual governments. Our effectiveness indicator is the Rule of Law variable from

the Worldwide Governance Indicators by Kaufman et al. (2010). The variable captures "perceptions

of the extent to which agents have confidence in and abide by the rules of society, and in particular the

quality of contract enforcement, property rights, the police, and the court" (Kaufman et al. 2010). 8


    The third indicator factors in the date when a law was passed, by calculating the number of law-

years in a country. For example, the UK Climate Change Act, which was passed in 2008 has a weight

of 12. The presumption is that laws that were passed early on have had a longer and therefore bigger


8
  The Worldwide Governance Indicators are collected by the World Bank and available on https://info.worldbank.org/
governance/wgi/. The indicators reflect the views of a large number of enterprises, citizens and experts on different aspects
of governance, including inter alia the rule of law. The original scale was converted into a [0,1] range as follows:  =
    
       -
           .
 -



                                                             14
impact on climate policy. Law-years are again weighted by the level of government effectiveness to

account for differences in implementation.


   Table 4 reports the top and bottom five performers among three (overlapping) sets of countries,

the G20 group of leading economies, the member states of the Organization for Economic Cooperation

and Development (OECD), and the member states of the European Union during the period of interest.

The full set of results can be found in Appendix Table A1.


   The three indicators lead to very consistent results, with rank correlations of 0.88 or more between

them. However, for individual countries there can be interesting deviations, related to the effectiveness

with which laws are implemented. European countries like Spain, Italy and the UK are among the most

prolific legislators, with over 20 laws each (not counting EU-level laws, which also apply to member

states). Spain and the UK, and to a lesser extent Italy also score well in the other two indicators, as

European countries tend to have relatively effective governments and many of their climate laws are

several years old. However, government effectiveness makes a difference in Brazil and Indonesia.

Both countries are in the top-five G20 countries in terms of number of laws, but controlling for

government effectiveness and law-years, the best G20 performers are the UK and South Korea.


                                  < Table 4: Country-law statistics>




   3.3 Climate legislation is less of a partisan issue than commonly assumed

   A striking feature of the climate change debate, particularly in anglophone countries like Australia,

Canada and the United States, is the strong party-political divide. There is evidence that left-of-center

governments are generally more inclined to legislate on the environment (Neumayer 2003), but the

issue appears particularly pronounced for climate change, where we observe a notable undercurrent of

climate skepticism on the political right (McCright and Dunlap 2011a, b; and Painter and Ashe 2012).

However, the effect of party politics on environmental policy is complex (Carter et al. 2018), and it

                                                   15
has also been suggested that that right-wing climate skepticism may primarily be an Anglo-Saxon

phenomenon (Fankhauser et al. 2015a). There may also be a gender dimension (Mavisakalyan and

Tarverdi 2019).


     To shed more light on this debate we look at climate change legislation in the democratic countries

of the sample, defined as countries with a democracy score of 6 or more in the Polity IV dataset (a

standard measure of democratic quality).9 For each of these countries we calculate the fraction of

climate change laws that was passed by administrations of a particular political orientation (right, left

or center), divided by the share of years they have been in power. Algebraically, the indicator for

partisanship  has the form:


           
           /
      =    
             
                                                     ()
            /
             


where,  denotes number of laws passed,  denotes years in power and subscript  denotes political

orientation,  = {, , }. Data on party-political orientation was taken from the World

Bank's Database of Political Institutions (DPI).10


     The indicator has a straightforward interpretation: A score greater than one suggests that

governments of political persuasion  are disproportionately inclined to pass climate change

legislation. Their share of climate laws is greater than their relative time in power. A score less than

one suggests a comparative reluctance to legislate on climate change.


     Figure 4 shows the distribution of scores across the 99 democratic countries we considered, split

by legislative acts (passed by parliament) and executive orders (issued by governments). For the


9
  Polity IV is an annual, cross-national time-series which assesses democratic and autocratic patterns of authority and
regime changes in all independent countries. The data are available on https://www.systemicpeace.org/inscrdata.html
10
   DPI contains data on institutional and electoral factors, such as checks and balances, tenure and stability of the
government, party affiliations and ideology, among others. The data are available on https://datacatalog.worldbank.org/
dataset/wps2283-database-political-institutions.


                                                          16
country-level results of combined (parliamentary and executive) activity see Appendix Table A2. We

would expect the distribution for the right-wing index to be to the left of one (i.e., most countries score

less than one) and those for left and center parties to be to the right of one. However, this is not what

we find. For most distributions we cannot reject the hypothesis that their mean is equal to one (Table

5). In industrialized countries (OECD and European Union members), and for all countries in the case

of legislative acts, there is no statistical evidence that the number of climate laws passed by

governments of the left, center and right is not proportional to their time in office. Only in the case of

executive orders issued by governments outside the OECD / EU does the political right appear to be

less inclined to act on climate change.


   Although we do not control for confounding factors, this suggests that the task of passing climate

change legislation is less of partisan issue than the public debate in countries like the Australia, Canada

and United States would make us believe.


   Of course, indicators like equation (1) mask important political dynamics, and the left-right divide

does not always mirror a divide on environmental matters (Carter 2018; Carter et al 2018). The UK,

for example, has a low right-wing party score of 0.6 (Appendix Table A2), but climate policy has

mostly transcended party lines. The opposition Conservatives supported many of the laws put forward

by Labour governments, most notably the Climate Change Act 2008. The US score of 1.3 reflects the

fact that the legislative and executive are often controlled by different parties. President Obama's

flagship Clean Power Plan, for example, was an executive order passed in 2015, when Congress was

in Republican hands.


                        < Figure 4: Histogram of political orientation scores>

                          < Table 5: Statistical tests of political orientation>




                                                    17
     3.4 Climate legislation slows during difficult economic times

     Climate change requires persistent policy intervention over decades and as such it should cut across

the business cycle. Nevertheless, there is a question about countries' determination to pursue climate

policy in difficult economic times.


     There are two sides to the argument. On the one hand, concern for the environment may have less

political traction during a recession, when issues like growth and employment take center stage. Kahn

and Kotchen (2010) found that interest in the environment tends to wane in difficult economic times.

On the other hand, green investment ­ or a "green deal" ­ can be an effective fiscal stimulus, as argued

by Barbier (2010) and Zenghelis (2012). In the aftermath of the 2008 financial crisis, governments in

Europe and elsewhere saw climate investment as a promising way to kick start an ailing economy

(Bowen and Stern 2010). The same call is now being made with respect to the Covid-19 recovery

(Hepburn et al 2020).


     CCLW can help to shed some light on the link between climate legislation and the business cycle

(see Doda (2014) for a related application). We use Hodrick-Prescott decomposition to calculate the

cyclical component of GDP and identify the periods during 1990 to 2017 when national economies

were performing above trend (HP > 0) and below trend (HP < 0).11 Using the same structure as equation

(1), we then calculate the share of climate laws passed while the economy is underperforming, divided

by the fraction of years when this was the case.


     Countries where legislative activity slowed down in difficult economic times will have a score of

less than one, while countries that sought to implement green deal-style policies may have a score

greater than one. Figure 5 displays the distribution of scores across countries (the full results




11
  The Hodrick-Prescott filter (after Hodrick and Prescott 1997) is a common decomposition method used in
macroeconomics. It is calculated in statistical packages like STATA (using the command "tsfilter hp").


                                                    18
reproduced in Appendix table A3). The scores are skewed slightly to the left, suggesting a majority of

countries legislates less in difficult economic times. This is confirmed by statistical tests (Table 6).


   We conclude that the business cycle has had a material impact on the pace of climate change

legislation, notwithstanding the fact that the peak in climate legislation coincided with the aftermath

of the 2008 financial crisis (Figure 1). This raises questions about the likelihood of ratcheting up NDCs

in accordance with the Paris Agreement, as the next round of NDC reviews will likely occur during a

global recession, caused by Covid-19.


                           <Figure 5: Histogram of business cycle scores>

                          <Table 6: Statistical tests of business cycle scores>




   3.5 Non-US judges tend to rule in favor of climate action

   The role of the judiciary in climate change governance does not just depend on the number of cases

brought, but also on their outcomes. We are therefore interested in the extent to which judges rule

against or in favor of tighter climate action. CCLW contains this information for most cases where a

ruling has been issued.


   The way judges rule is particularly material in the case of strategic court cases (such as those in

Table 3), which play an important supporting role in ensuring the national implementation of

international emission-reduction commitments and the alignment of national laws with the Paris

Agreements (Peel and Osofsky 2015; Setzer and Vanhala 2019). However, we are interested in the

broader role of courts beyond just high-profile cases.


   To inform this issue, court rulings have been classified as either strengthening climate action or

weakening climate action. The distinction is similar to another classification found in the literature,

which splits court cases into "pro" and "anti" regulatory suits, depending on the aims of the plaintiffs


                                                    19
(Markell and Ruhl 2012; Hilson 2012). "Pro" (also known as "favorable") cases are brought with the

objective of increasing regulation or liability associated with climate change; and "anti" (also known

as "con" or "hindering") cases aim to decrease regulation or liability (Wilensky 2015). However, here

we are interested in the ruling of the judge, rather than the objective of the plaintiff.


   In the United States, an earlier analysis of cases brought between 1990 and 2016 found that

outcomes favored anti-regulatory litigants compared with pro-regulatory litigants by a ratio of 1.4 to

1 (McCormick et al. 2018). We re-examined 534 of these cases and found that judges ruled in favor

of more climate regulation in 225 (42%) of them (Table 7). Examined by topic, pro-regulation litigants

have tended to win renewable energy and energy efficiency cases, but frequently lost coal-fired power

plant cases (McCormick et al. 2018). This win ratio seems to have been enough to shape some policy

outcomes. According to Osofsky (2012) climate litigation has brought about credible steps to increase

the share of renewable energy in the US electricity mix.


   Outside the United States, judges appear more inclined to support climate action. There are 355

non-US court cases where a judgement has been reached and the climate change outcome has been

assessed. Among these, the ruling has been supportive of climate change action in 187 cases, or about

half of the time (Table 7). The number is slightly lower than in Setzer and Byrnes (2019), who found

that judges favored pro-regulatory litigants over anti-regulatory litigants by a ratio of 1.6 to 1. In

Australia, the country with the highest number of cases outside the US, these court rulings have

apparently been instrumental in forcing administrative decision-makers to consider climate change

impacts in the approval of certain large-scale projects (Preston 2011; Peel 2011; Hughes 2019).


                                       <Table 7: Judicial rulings>




                                                    20
                                          4. Conclusions

   This paper uses Climate Change Laws of the World (CCLW), a publicly accessible, searchable

database hosted by the Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change at the London School of

Economics, to identify trends in climate change legislation and litigation over the past 30 years.


   CCLW documents the explosion of national climate change legislation over this period, although

global action on climate change still falls short of what the Paris Agreement requires. By the end of

2019, the database contained 1,800 climate change laws and policies of similar status worldwide,

compared with 35 laws in 1990 and 145 laws in 1999. Only about 40 percent of these laws are

legislative acts passed by parliaments. The remainder are executive orders, decrees or significant

policies issued by governments.


   The judiciary got involved in 1,500 court cases in which climate change was a concern, three

quarters of which in the US. In about half of the non-US cases for which there is a ruling, the judges

strengthened or upheld climate change concerns. Earlier (pre-2017) evidence for the US suggests that

the odds of a pro-climate outcome are lower in the United States.


   There is no country in the world that does not have at least one law or policy dealing with climate

change, and the most prolific countries have well over 20 such laws. Accounting for government

effectiveness and the length of time a law has been in effect, Spain, the UK and South Korea are the

most comprehensive legislators on climate change.


   Global legislative activity peaked in the period 2009-14, when jurisdictions like the EU, Mexico,

South Korea and the UK passed their flagship framework laws on climate change. While unable to

ascertain causality, the fact that climate legislation peaked before the 2015 Paris Agreement suggests

that a push in national climate legislation could have facilitated the Paris Agreement, rather than the

other way round.


                                                  21
    The Paris Agreement has probably influenced national climate legislation more with respect to the

ambition of climate laws, rather than their number. Following Paris, several countries ­ most notably,

France, New Zealand, Sweden and the UK ­ have adopted binding net-zero emissions targets that are

consistent with the Paris objectives. However, most of the emissions pledges contained in NDCs have

yet to be translated into legislated targets.


    Without going into careful statistical identification, the data reveal some interesting and perhaps

surprising patterns. We find that climate change legislation is much less of partisan issue worldwide

than the debate in countries like the Australia, Canada and United States would suggest. In

industrialized countries (OECD plus European Union members), the number of climate laws passed

by governments of the left, center and right is proportional to their time in office. Only in democracies

outside this group is the political right less inclined to legislate on climate change.


    We further find that legislative activity fluctuates with the business cycle and slows down in times

of economic difficulty. This is despite the fact that the peak in climate change legislation coincided

with the aftermath of the 2008 global financial crisis. It suggests that a determined effort will be needed

to maintain climate action through the economic downturn caused by the coronavirus.


    CCLW has so far mainly been aimed at policy audiences, where it has helped to build trust among

international policy makers and support legislators in drafting their own climate laws. It is only now

starting to be utilized in academic research. Initial applications have used the data to assess global

progress in adopting climate policies, understand the political economy of passing climate laws,

identify good practice in climate change governance, assess the environmental impact of climate

legislation, and identify general trends in climate litigation. It is hoped that this paper will stimulate

other scholars to use the data in their own research.




                                                    22
References

Averchenkova, A., Fankhauser, S., and Finnegan J. 2020. The impact of strategic climate legislation:
       Evidence from expert interviews on the UK Climate Change Act. Climate Policy, under
       revision.
Averchenkova, A, Fankhauser, S., and Nachmany M., eds. 2017. Trends in Climate Change
       Legislation, Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Averchenkova A. and Guzman Luna S. (2018) Mexico's General Law on Climate Change: Key
       achievements and challenges ahead. London: Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change
       and the Environment and Centre for Climate Change Economics and Policy, London School
       of    Economics     and    Political   Science.    http://www.lse.ac.uk/GranthamInstitute/wp-
       content/uploads/2018/11/Policy_brief_Mexico%E2%80%99s-General-Law-on-Climate-
       Change-Successes-and-challenges_8pp_AverchenkovaGuzman-2.pdf
Barbier, E. B., 2010. A global green new deal: Rethinking the economic recovery. Cambridge
       University Press.
Bouwer, K., 2018. The unsexy future of climate change litigation. Journal of Environmental Law,
       30(3), 483­506. https://doi.org/10.1093/jel/eqy017
Bowen, A., and Stern, N., 2010. Environmental policy and the economic downturn. Oxford Review of
       Economic Policy, 26(2), pp.137-163.
Burger, M., Gundlach, J., Kreilhuber, A., Ognibene, L., Kariuki, A., and Gachie, A. 2017. The status
       of climate change litigation. A global review. New York, NY: United Nations Environment
       Programme.       http://columbiaclimatelaw.com/files/2017/05/Burger-Gundlach-2017-05-UN-
       Envt-CC-Litigation.pdf
Carter, N., 2018. The Politics of the Environment: Ideas, Activism, Policy. Cambridge University
       Press.
Carter, N., Ladrech, R., Little, C. and Tsagkroni, V., 2018. Political parties and climate policy: A new
       approach to measuring parties' climate policy preferences. Party Politics, 24(6), 731-742.
Doda, B., 2014. Evidence on business cycles and CO2 emissions. Journal of Macroeconomics, 40,
       214-227.
Dubash, N. K., Hagemann, M., Höhne, N., and Upadhyaya, P., 2013. Developments in national climate
       change mitigation legislation and strategy, Climate Policy, 13:6, 649-664.
Eskander, S., and Fankhauser, S., 2020. Reduction in greenhouse gas emissions by national climate
       laws and policies, Nature Climate Change, forthcoming.



                                                  23
Fankhauser, S., Gennaioli, C., and Collins, M., 2015a. The political economy of passing climate
       change legislation: Evidence from a survey. Global Environmental Change, 35, 52-61.
Fankhauser, S., Gennaioli, C., and Collins, M., 2015b. Do international factors influence the passage
       of climate change legislation? Climate Policy, 16(3): 318-331.
Hepburn, C., O'Callaghan, B., Stern, N., Stiglitz, J. and Zenghelis, D., 2020. Will COVID -19 fiscal
       recovery packages accelerate or retard progress on climate change?. Oxford Review of
       Economic Policy, 36.
Hilson, C. J., 2012. UK climate change litigation: between hard and soft framing. In S. Farrall, T.
       Ahmed, and D. French (Eds.), Criminological and legal consequences of climate change.
       Oxford: Hart 2010.
Hodrick, R.J. and Prescott, E.C., 1997. Postwar US business cycles: an empirical investigation.
       Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 29(1), 1-16.
Hughes, L., 2019. The Rocky Hill decision: a watershed for climate change action?, Journal of Energy
       & Natural Resources Law, https://doi.org/10.1080/02646811.2019.1600272
Iacobuta, G., Dubash, N. K., Upadhyaya, P., Deribe, M., and Höhne, N., 2018. National climate change
       mitigation legislation, strategy and targets: a global update, Climate Policy, 18:9, 1114-1132.
Jodoin, S., Faucher, R., and Lofts, K., 2018. Look before you jump: Assessing the potential influence
       of the human rights bandwagon on domestic climate policy. In Routledge Handbook of Human
       Rights and Climate Governance (pp. 167-182). Routledge.
Kahn, M., and Kotchen, M., 2010. Environmental concern and the business cycle: The chilling effect
       of recession. Working Paper No w16241, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Kaufman, D., Kraay, A., and Mastruzzi, M., 2010. The Worldwide Governance Indicators:
       Methodology and Analytical Issues. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 5430
       (http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1682130).
Markell, D. L., and Ruhl, J. B., 2012. An empirical assessment of climate change in the courts: A new
       jurisprudence or business as usual? Florida Law Review, 64(1), 15­86.
Mavisakalyan, A., and Tarverdi, Y., 2019. Gender and climate change: Do female parliamentarians
       make difference?. European Journal of Political Economy, 56, 151-164.
McCormick, S., Glicksman, R. L., Simmens, S. J., Paddock, L., Kim, D., and Whited, B., 2018.
       Strategies in and outcomes of climate change litigation in the United States. Nature Climate
       Change 8: 829­833.
McCright, A., and Dunlap, R., 2011a. The politicization of climate change and polarization in the
       American public's views of global warming, 2001­2010. The Sociological Quarterly, 52(2),
       155-194.

                                                  24
McCright, A., and Dunlap, R., 2011b. Cool dudes: The denial of climate change among conservative
       white males in the United States. Global Environmental Change, 21(4), 1163-1172.
Muinzer, T. L., 2018. Climate and Energy Governance for the UK Low Carbon Transition: The
       Climate Change Act 2008. Cham: Palgrave Pivot.
Nachmany, M. and Mangan. E. 2018. Aligning national and international climate targets Policy Brief.
       Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change and the Environment, London School of
       Economics. http://www.lse.ac.uk/GranthamInstitute/publication/targets/.Nash, S. and Steurer,
       R. 2019. Taking stock of Climate Change Acts in Europe: living policy processes or symbolic
       gestures? Climate Policy. 19(8), 1052-106.5
Neumayer, E., 2003. Are left-wing party strength and corporatism good for the environment? Evidence
       from panel analysis of air pollution in OECD countries, Ecological Economics, 45(2): 203-
       220.
Osofsky, H. M., 2012. Litigation's Role in the Path of U.S. Federal Climate Change Regulation:
       Implications of AEP v. Connecticut. Valparaiso University Law Review 447-457, available at
       https://scholarship.law.umn.edu/faculty_articles/187.
Painter, J., and Ashe, T., 2012. Cross-national comparison of the presence of climate scepticism in the
       print media in six countries, 2007­10. Environmental Research Letters, 7(4): 044005.
Peel, J., 2011. Issues in climate change litigation. Carbon and Climate Law Review, 5(1), 15­24.
       https://doi.org/10.21552/CCLR/2011/1/162
Peel J., and Lin, J., 2019. Transnational Climate Litigation: The Contribution of the Global South,
       American Journal of International Law, 113(4): 679-726.
Peel, J., and Osofsky, H. M., 2015. Climate change litigation regulatory pathways to cleaner energy.
       Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Preston, B. J., 2011. Climate change litigation (part 1). Carbon & Climate Law Review, 5(1), 3­14.
Rogelj, J., Den Elzen, M., Höhne, N., Fransen, T., Fekete, H., Winkler, H., Schaeffer, R., Sha, F.,
       Riahi, K., and Meinshausen, M., 2016. Paris Agreement climate proposals need a boost to keep
       warming well below 2 C. Nature, 534(7609), 631-639.
Scotford, E., and Minas, S., 2019. Probing the hidden depths of climate law: Analysing national
       climate change legislation. Review of European, Comparative and International
       Environmental Law, 28(1), 67-81.
Setzer, J. and Bangalore, M. (2017). Regulating climate change in the courts, in Averchenkova, A.,
       Fankhauser, S., Nachmany, M. (eds.). Trends in Climate Change Legislation. London, Edward
       Elgar, 175-192.


                                                  25
Setzer, J., and Benjamin, L., 2019. Climate Litigation in the Global South: Constraints and
       Innovations, Transnational Environmental Law, 1-25.
Setzer, J., and Byrnes, R., 2019. Global trends in climate change litigation: 2019 snapshot. Policy
       report. Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change and the Environment, London School
       of     Economics.       http://www.lse.ac.uk/GranthamInstitute/wp-content/uploads/2019/07/
       GRI_Global-trends-in-climate-change-litigation-2019-snapshot.pdf
Solana, J., 2020. Climate Litigation in Financial Markets: A Typology. Transnational Environmental
       Law, 1-33.
Townshend, T., Fankhauser, S., Matthews, A., Feger, C., Liu, J., and Narciso, T., 2011. Legislating
       Climate Change at the National Level, Environment 53(5): 5-16.
Townshend, T., Fankhauser, S., Aybar, R., Collins, M., Landesman, T., Nachmany, M., and Pavese,
       C., 2013. How National Legislation Can Help to Solve Climate Change, Nature Climate
       Change, 3(May): 430-432.
Verschuuren, J., 2019. The State of the Netherlands v Urgenda Foundation: The Hague Court of
       Appeal upholds judgment requiring the Netherlands to further reduce its greenhouse gas
       emissions. Review of European, Comparative & International Environmental Law, 28(1), 94-
       98.
Wilensky, M., 2015. Climate change in the courts: An assessment of non-U.S. climate litigation. Duke
       Environmental Law and Policy Forum, 26(1), 131­179.
Zenghelis, D., 2012. A strategy for restoring confidence and economic growth through green
       investment and innovation. Policy Brief. Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change and
       the Environment, London School of Economics. http://www.lse.ac.uk/GranthamInstitute/
       publication/a-strategy-for-restoring-confidence-and-economic-growth-through-green-
       investment-and-innovation/




                                                26
Figures and Tables

                     Figure 1: Climate change legislation over time




                Source: Authors based on Climate Change Laws of the World.




                                           27
               Figure 2: Climate change litigation over time




Source: Authors based on Climate Change Laws of the World and Sabin Center data.




                                     28
Figure 3: Climate legislation and litigation by country




 Source: Authors based on Climate Change Laws of the World.




                          29
                               Figure 4: Climate laws and political orientation




Notes. Countries with a democracy score of 6 or more in the Polity IV dataset only. Data on political orientation is taken
from the World Bank dataset of political institutions (DPI). Orientation scores greater than one suggest political parties of
that orientation are disproportionately inclined to pass climate laws, relative to their time in power. Median (Mean) right-
wing scores for all, OECD-EU and other countries are 0.961 (0.891), 1.111 (0.923) and 0.8 (0.813); whereas the respective
left-wing scores are 1.0 (1.141), 0.909 (1.118) and 1.012 (1.160), and center-government scores are 1.0 (1.234), 1.0 (0.961)
and 1.0 (1.431).




                                                             30
                              Figure 5: Climate laws and economic crises




Source: Author's own calculations, using World Bank GDP data and Hodrick-Prescott decomposition. Countries with
scores less than one are less inclined to pass climate laws in difficult economic times.




                                                      31
                        Table 1: Descriptive statistics on climate change legislation

                                                                  All countries    OECD-EU countries        Other countries
                                                                    [N=198]            [N=42]                  [N=156]

 Total number of laws
       Total                                                         1,800        605 (33.6% of all laws)   1,195 (66.4%)
       Pre-1990                                                       35                24 (68.6%)            9 (31.4%)
       1990-1999                                                      110               38 (34.6%)            72 (65.4%)
       2000-2009                                                      554              203 (36.6%)           351 (63.4%)
       2010-2019                                                     1,101             340 (30.9%)           771 (69.1%)


 Laws by topic (1990-2019)
      Framework laws                                                  238              85 (35.7%)            153 (64.3%)
      Laws addressing GHG emissions (mitigation laws)                1,620             549 (33.9%)          1,071 (66.1%)
      Mitigation laws focused on energy (energy laws)                1,055             395 (37.4%)           660 (62.6%)
      Laws addressing climate resilience (adaptation laws)            641              143 (22.3%)           498 (77.7%)


 Laws by type (1990-2019)
      Executive orders or policies                                   1,023             244 (23.9%)           799 (76.1%)
      Legislative acts                                                742              337 (45.4%)           405 (54.6%)


 Number of laws by country (1990-2019)
     Mean                                                             8.9                  13.8                  7.6
     Standard deviation                                               6.3                  7.5                   5.2
     Median                                                            8                    12                    6
     Minimum                                                           1                    1                     1
     Maximum                                                          38                    38                   28



Notes. All data from Climate Change Laws of the World. Some laws deal with multiple issues, hence the higher totals for
"laws by topic".




                                                             32
                         Table 2: Descriptive statistics on climate change litigation

                                               All jurisdictions (excl US)   OECD-EU (excl. US)   Other jurisdictions    US
                                                         [N=36]                  [N=21]                [N=15]

 Total number of cases
       Total                                              355                    300 (85%)            55 (15%)          1,154
       Pre-1990                                            0                         0                    0               2
       1990-1999                                           4                         4                    0               5
       2000-2009                                          117                       109                   8              231
       2010-2019                                          234                       187                  47              916

 Number of climate-centric cases
     Total                                                138                    103 (75%)            35 (25%)
     1990-1999                                             0                         0                    0
     2000-2009                                             28                       25                    3
     2010-2019                                            110                       78                   32

 Number of cases by jurisdiction (1990-2019)
     Mean                                                  9.9                       14.3                3.7
     Standard deviation                                   20.1                       25.3                4.7
     Median                                                 2                         2                   2
     Minimum                                                1                         1                   1
     Maximum                                               96                         96                 18

 Court cases by type (1990-2019)
      Plaintiff=Public; Defendant=Public                   48                        32                   16            59
      Plaintiff=Public; Defendant=Private                  17                        14                   3             27
      Plaintiff=Public; Defendant=NGO                      10                         9                   1              8
      Plaintiff=Private; Defendant=Public                 117                        116                  1             90
      Plaintiff=Private; Defendant=Private                 6                          6                   0              3
      Plaintiff=Private; Defendant=NGO                     10                        10                   0              7
      Plaintiff=NGO; Defendant=Public                     141                        107                  34            563
      Plaintiff=NGO; Defendant=Private                     24                        19                   5             65
      Plaintiff=NGO; Defendant=NGO                         4                          4                   0             16


Notes. Cases by type involves the following three parties: Public (federal, state/local and tribal government and different
departments of the governments), Private (corporations and businesses) and NGO (non-profit organizations and
individuals). There were multiple types of plaintiffs in 10 cases, whereas 12 cases had multiple types of defendants. Data
for the US come from McCormick et al. (2018) who studied 838 cases between 1990-2016. The totals under "Court cases
by type" therefore differ from the total numbers reported at the top of the table. This list includes cases with international
and regional jurisdictions, with EU-jurisdiction cases included in total EU cases.

Source: Authors based on Climate Change Laws of the World, Sabin Center data and McCormick et al. (2018).




                                                              33
                              Table 3: Prominent strategic litigation cases

     Case         Year      Plaintiff            Defendant       Summary and status
                  started
 Urgenda          2013      Dutch                State of the    The first case to argue successfully for the adoption of
 Foundation v.              environmental        Netherlands     stricter emissions reduction targets by a government. In
 State of the               group, the Urgenda                   December 2019, the Dutch Supreme Court upheld earlier
 Netherlands                Foundation, and                      rulings, which required the Netherlands to reduce its
                            900 Dutch citizens                   emissions by at least 25 percent on 1990 levels by 2020.
                                                                 Even before the final decision by the Supreme Court, the
                                                                 case triggered substantial changes in government policy,
                                                                 including the adoption of the Climate Act 2019 and the
                                                                 decision to phase out coal-fired power generation by
                                                                 2030 (Verschuuren 2019; Jodoin et al. 2018). The case
                                                                 motivated a wave of Urgenda-inspired climate change
                                                                 litigation across the world.


 Leghari v        2015      Ashgar Leghari       Federation of   An appellate court in Pakistan granted the claims of
 Federation of                                   Pakistan        Ashgar Leghari, a Pakistani farmer, who had sued the
 Pakistan                                                        national government for failure to implement the
                                                                 National Climate Change Policy of 2012 and the
                                                                 Framework for Implementation of Climate Change
                                                                 Policy (2014-2030). The court, citing domestic and
                                                                 international legal principles, determined that "the delay
                                                                 and lethargy of the State in implementing the Framework
                                                                 offend the fundamental rights of the citizens."


 Carbon           2015      Greenpeace           50 investor-    A group of plaintiffs led by Greenpeace Southeast Asia
 Majors Inquiry             Southeast Asia,      owned Carbon    filed a petition asking the Philippines Commission on
                            Philippine Rural     Majors          Human Rights to investigate "the human rights
                            Reconstruction       (largest        implications of climate change and ocean acidification
                            Movement and 12      producers of    and the resulting rights violations in the Philippines",
                            NGOs, 20             crude oil,      and "whether the investor-owned Carbon Majors have
                            individuals, and     natural gas,    breached their responsibilities to respect the rights of the
                            1,288 Filipinos      coal and        Filipino people." The Commission found that fossil fuel
                            (signatories of a    cement)         companies have a clear moral responsibility, and the
                            petition)                            onus falls on individual countries to pass strong
                                                                 legislation and establish legal liability in their courts.
                                                                 The Commission further found that existing civil law in
                                                                 the Philippines provided grounds for action, and that it
                                                                 may be possible to hold companies criminally
                                                                 accountable where they have been clearly proved to have
                                                                 engaged in acts of obstruction and willful obfuscation.



Source: Authors based on Climate Change Laws of the World.




                                                       34
                                    Table 4: Legislative activity by countries

    A) G-20 Countries
                     Laws                        Quality-adjusted laws                 Lifetime quality-adjusted laws
  Ranking     ISO Code   Number             ISO Code          Number                 ISO Code            Number

     1        BRA              28              GBR                16.85                 GBR                209.68
     2        ITA              24              AUS                15.41                 KOR                204.77
     3        IDN              22              KOR                15.25                 ITA                184.01
     4        KOR              22              DEU                15.03                 DEU                163.00
     5        GBR              20              JPN                15.01                 AUS                138.48

     15       CAN              10              IND                5.14                  ZAF                 58.17
     16       IND              10              RUS                4.09                  RUS                 40.94
     17       MEX              10              MEX                3.97                  MEX                 28.81
     18       CHN              8               CHN                3.25                  CHN                 26.08
     19       SAU              3               SAU                1.61                  SAU                 13.45


    B) OECD Countries
                     Laws                        Quality-adjusted laws                 Lifetime quality-adjusted laws
  Ranking     ISO Code   Number             ISO Code          Number                 ISO Code            Number

     1        ESP              38              ESP                27.20                 ESP                234.21
     2        CHL              26              CHL                19.65                 GBR                209.68
     3        ITA              24              GBR                16.85                 KOR                204.77
     4        KOR              22              AUS                15.41                 NOR                186.10
     5        GBR              20              KOR                15.25                 ITA                184.01

     31       CZE               9              ISL                5.93                  ISL                 57.91
     32       ISL               7              SVN                4.92                  SVN                 43.58
     33       SVN               7              MEX                3.97                  MEX                 28.81
     34       EST               3              EST                2.23                  EST                 17.81
     35       LTU               2              LTU                1.34                  LTU                 10.34


    C) EU countries
                     Laws                        Quality-adjusted laws                 Lifetime quality-adjusted laws
  Ranking     ISO Code   Number             ISO Code          Number                 ISO Code            Number

     1        ESP              38              ESP                27.20                 ESP                234.21
     2        ITA              24              GBR                16.85                 GBR                209.68
     3        GBR              20              DEU                15.03                 ITA                184.01
     4        DEU              18              IRL                14.95                 DEU                163.00
     5        IRL              18              ITA                14.57                 DNK                139.93

     24       SVN               7              SVN                4.92                  SVN                 43.58
     25       EST               3              EST                2.23                  EST                 17.81
     26       LTU               2              LTU                1.34                  LVA                 11.42
     27       LVA               2              LVA                1.31                  LTU                 10.34
     28       CYP               1              CYP                0.71                  CYP                 4.92


Notes. Data on climate laws and policies come from Climate Change Laws of the World. See Appendix Table A.1 for the
full list of countries and detailed statistics. Quality-adjusted laws are derived by multiplying each law by the Rule of Law
score of Kaufman et al. (2010) in the year it was passed. Life-time quality adjusted laws are calculated as the number of
years a law has been in force, multiplied by the rule-of-law score in each year. All calculations are done over the period
1990-2019.




                                                            35
                                    Table 5: Statistical tests of political orientation


                                                         Legislative Acts                                  Executive Orders
Null Hypothesis             Alt. Hypo.   All countries   OECD-EU            Other          All countries    OECD-EU         Other
                                                         countries          countries                       countries       countries

One-sample t test
Left-wing score = 1            <1        Not rejected    Not rejected       Not rejected   Not rejected     Rejected        Not rejected
                               1         Not rejected    Not rejected       Not rejected   Not rejected     Rejected        Rejected
                               >1        Not rejected    Not rejected       Not rejected   Not rejected     Not rejected    Rejected

Center score = 1               <1        Not rejected    Not rejected       Not rejected   Not rejected     Not rejected    Not rejected
                               1         Not rejected    Not rejected       Not rejected   Not rejected     Not rejected    Not rejected
                               >1        Not rejected    Not rejected       Not rejected   Rejected         Not rejected    Not rejected

Right-wing score = 1           <1        Not rejected    Not rejected       Not rejected   Rejected         Not rejected    Rejected
                               1         Not rejected    Not rejected       Not rejected   Rejected         Not rejected    Rejected
                               >1        Not rejected    Not rejected       Not rejected   Not rejected     Not rejected    Not rejected

Two-sample Wilcoxon rank-
sum (Mann-Whitney) test
Left-wing score:                         Not rejected                                      Rejected
OECD-EU countries =
Other countries

Center score:                            Not rejected                                      Not rejected
OECD-EU countries =
Other countries

Right-wing score:                        Not rejected                                      Rejected
OECD-EU countries =
Other countries


     Notes. Data on climate laws and policies come from Climate Change Laws of the World. Data on political orientation come
     from the World Bank's Database of Political Institutions. All calculations are done over the period 1990-2017.




                                                                   36
                               Table 6: Statistical tests of business cycle effects

                                                                                         Decision
 Null Hypothesis                        Alternative            All countries         OECD-EU               Other countries
                                        Hypothesis                                   countries

 One-sample t test
 Economic crisis = 1                    <1                     Rejected              Rejected              Rejected
                                        1                      Rejected              Rejected              Rejected
                                        >1                     Not rejected          Not rejected          Not rejected

 Two-sample Wilcoxon rank-sum
 (Mann-Whitney) test
 OECD-EU countries= Other                                                            Rejected
 countries

Notes. Data on climate laws and policies come from Climate Change Laws of the World database. Data on business cycles
are calculated from real GDP data from the World Development Indicators database. All calculations are done over the
period 1990-2017 for 169 countries.




                                 Table 7: Pro-climate rulings by the judiciary


                                                                       Non-US cases                               US cases
       Time period                                    All non-US      OECD-EU       Non-OECD/EU
                                                       [N=36]          [N=21]          [N=15]

        Total cases with a ruling                        355             300                  55                    534
        Cases with a pro-climate ruling               187 (53%)       153 (51%)            34 (62%)              225 (42%)

        Pro-climate cases over time
        1990-1999                                         0               0                     0
        2000-2009                                        68               62                    6
        2010-2019                                        119              91                    28

Notes. Outside the US, a court ruling has been issued in 355 cases between 1990 and 2019. These are contained in Climate
Change Laws of the World. For the US we re-examined 534 court rulings during 1990-2016 from McCormick et al (2018);
here a ruling is pro-climate if judges supported a "pro-regulation" plaintiff or ruled against an "anti-regulation" plaintiff.

Source: Authors based on Climate Change Laws of the World and McCormick et al. (2018). For results by country see
Appendix Table A4.




                                                               37
Appendix tables


                              Table A1: Legislative activity by countries

                                                                  Number of climate laws
   Country Name        ISO    G20    OECD    EU         Number      Quality-adjusted     Lifetime Quality-
                       Code                                             number           adjusted number

    Afghanistan        AFG     0       0      0           9                 1.47              12.03
       Angola          AGO     0       0      0           21                5.55              31.98
       Albania         ALB     0       0      0           3                 1.17              10.36
United Arab Emirates   ARE     0       0      0           6                 3.78              20.88
      Argentina        ARG     1       0      0           17                7.09              72.17
      Armenia          ARM     0       0      0           8                 3.33              47.92
Antigua and Barbuda    ATG     0       0      0           5                 3.23              21.16
      Australia        AUS     1       1      0           18                15.41             138.48
       Austria         AUT     0       1      1           9                 7.87              99.38
     Azerbaijan        AZE     0       0      0           4                 1.39              13.97
      Burundi          BDI     0       0      0           4                 1.08               8.16
      Belgium          BEL     0       1      1           11                8.53              105.21
        Benin          BEN     0       0      0           3                 1.17               9.34
    Burkina Faso       BFA     0       0      0           12                4.82              35.74
     Bangladesh        BGD     0       0      0           10                3.30              31.55
      Bulgaria         BGR     0       0      1           11                5.24              66.73
       Bahrain         BHR     0       0      0           2                 1.18              15.25
   Bahamas, The        BHS     0       0      0           4                 2.67              25.22
     Bosnia and        BIH     0       0      0           1                 0.46               1.27
    Herzegovina
       Belarus         BLR     0       0      0           15                4.30              57.70
       Belize          BLZ     0       0      0           3                 1.19              10.81
       Bolivia         BOL     0       0      0           16                5.00              53.87
        Brazil         BRA     1       0      0           28                12.86             117.33
      Barbados         BRB     0       0      0           4                 2.91              30.56
 Brunei Darussalam     BRN     0       0      0           4                 2.45              15.90
       Bhutan          BTN     0       0      0           8                 4.46              45.17
      Botswana         BWA     0       0      0           5                 3.11              34.96
  Central African      CAF     0       0      0           2                 0.43               4.95
      Republic
       Canada          CAN     1       1      0           10                8.52              91.32
    Switzerland        CHE     0       1      0           9                 7.86              102.59
        Chile          CHL     0       1      0           26                19.65             172.26
        China          CHN     1       0      0           8                 3.25              26.08
   Co´te d'Ivoire      CIV     0       0      0           14                4.62              26.82
     Cameroon          CMR     0       0      0           5                 1.41              13.33
       Congo           COG     0       0      0           7                 1.78              21.10
    Cook Islands       COK     0       0      0           4                 1.25              11.79
      Colombia         COL     0       0      0           23                9.88              62.92
      Comoros          COM     0       0      0           1                 0.32               1.80
    Cabo Verde         CPV     0       0      0           7                 4.23              40.21
     Costa Rica        CRI     0       0      0           24                14.40             116.34
        Cuba           CUB     0       0      0           9                 3.36              46.91
       Cyprus          CYP     0       0      1           1                 0.71               4.92
  Czech Republic       CZE     0       1      1           9                 6.09              78.76
      Germany          DEU     1       1      1           18                15.03             163.00
      Djibouti          DJI    0       0      0           8                 2.65              28.08
      Dominica         DMA     0       0      0           5                 3.10              26.58
      Denmark          DNK     0       1      1           12                10.70             139.93
Dominican Republic     DOM     0       0      0           10                3.82              43.95
       Algeria         DZA     0       0      0           13                4.63              54.79
      Ecuador          ECU     0       0      0           13                3.88              28.00
        Egypt          EGY     0       0      0           6                 2.42              20.15
       Eritrea         ERI     0       0      0           2                 0.48               9.13
        Spain          ESP     0       1      1           38                27.20             234.21


                                                  38
                                                               Number of climate laws
   Country Name         ISO    G20   OECD   EU        Number     Quality-adjusted     Lifetime Quality-
                        Code                                         number           adjusted number

       Estonia          EST     0     1     1           3              2.23                17.81
       Ethiopia         ETH     0     0     0           13             4.54                64.95
       Finland          FIN     0     1     1           12             10.76               95.86
           Fiji          FJI    0     0     0           5              2.22                22.73
        France          FRA     1     1     1           15             11.84               77.17
     Micronesia         FSM     0     0     0           4              1.96                14.37
        Gabon           GAB     0     0     0           7              2.81                25.73
  United Kingdom        GBR     1     1     1           20             16.85               209.68
       Georgia          GEO     0     0     0           2              1.13                 3.88
        Ghana           GHA     0     0     0           9              4.41                60.59
        Guinea          GIN     0     0     0           3              0.76                 9.60
       Gambia           GMB     0     0     0           6              2.38                25.48
   Guinea-Bissau        GNB     0     0     0           2              0.48                 4.08
 Equatorial Guinea      GNQ     0     0     0           1              0.21                 1.11
        Greece          GRC     0     1     1           14             8.75                101.63
       Grenada          GRD     0     0     0           6              3.17                33.68
     Guatemala          GTM     0     0     0           8              2.34                22.26
       Guyana           GUY     0     0     0           3              1.22                10.11
      Honduras          HND     0     0     0           9              2.86                32.53
       Croatia          HRV     0     0     1           15             8.18                66.52
         Haiti          HTI     0     0     0           2              0.44                 3.40
       Hungary          HUN     0     1     1           11             7.24                76.95
      Indonesia         IDN     1     0     0           22             8.51                75.77
         India          IND     1     0     0           10             5.14                64.64
        Ireland         IRL     0     1     1           18             14.95               125.94
          Iran          IRN     0     0     0           10             3.26                45.52
          Iraq          IRQ     0     0     0           1              0.16                 1.99
       Iceland           ISL    0     1     0           7              5.93                57.91
         Israel          ISR    0     1     0           17             11.68               156.05
          Italy         ITA     1     1     1           24             14.57               184.01
       Jamaica          JAM     0     0     0           4              1.73                19.09
        Jordan          JOR     0     0     0           3              1.72                18.04
         Japan          JPN     1     1     0           19             15.01               118.29
     Kazakhstan         KAZ     0     0     0           11             3.57                55.53
        Kenya           KEN     0     0     0           14             5.11                32.87
     Kyrgyzstan         KGZ     0     0     0           7              1.97                21.48
      Cambodia          KHM     0     0     0           6              1.65                17.46
       Kiribati         KIR     0     0     0           11             5.93                57.65
Saint Kitts and Nevis   KNA     0     0     0           4              2.44                18.88
    South Korea         KOR     1     1     0           22             15.25               204.77
      Lao PDR           LAO     0     0     0           5              1.55                13.83
       Lebanon          LBN     0     0     0           4              1.35                 7.28
        Liberia         LBR     0     0     0           8              2.12                21.85
         Libya          LBY     0     0     0           2              0.54                 5.16
     Saint Lucia        LCA     0     0     0           5              3.24                32.02
    Liechtenstein        LIE    0     0     0           6              4.78                51.09
      Sri Lanka         LKA     0     0     0           8              4.04                46.33
       Lesotho          LSO     0     0     0           5              2.30                24.59
      Lithuania         LTU     0     1     1           2              1.34                10.34
    Luxembourg          LUX     0     1     1           12             10.27               73.37
        Latvia          LVA     0     0     1           2              1.31                11.42
      Morocco           MAR     0     0     0           14             6.55                48.20
       Monaco           MCO     0     0     0           2              1.38                 8.14
      Moldova           MDA     0     0     0           6              2.57                27.53
    Madagascar          MDG     0     0     0           10             3.52                26.35
      Maldives          MDV     0     0     0           7              3.06                35.33
       Mexico           MEX     1     1     0           10             3.97                28.81
  Marshall Islands      MHL     0     0     0           5              2.41                13.25
  Macedonia, FYR        MKD     0     0     0           6              2.73                23.57
         Mali           MLI     0     0     0           25             9.44                74.51
         Malta          MLT     0     0     1           8              6.10                48.38
      Myanmar           MMR     0     0     0           7              1.64                10.35
    Montenegro          MNE     0     0     0           4              1.96                16.73

                                                 39
                                                              Number of climate laws
   Country Name        ISO    G20   OECD   EU        Number     Quality-adjusted     Lifetime Quality-
                       Code                                         number           adjusted number

      Mongolia         MNG     0     0     0           12             5.57                59.91
    Mozambique         MOZ     0     0     0           11             4.08                41.16
     Mauritania        MRT     0     0     0           3              1.06                14.08
      Mauritius        MUS     0     0     0           6              4.02                29.45
       Malawi          MWI     0     0     0           11             4.98                50.79
      Malaysia         MYS     0     0     0           6              3.56                43.27
       Namibia         NAM     0     0     0           11             6.03                56.27
        Niger          NER     0     0     0           4              1.50                27.67
       Nigeria         NGA     0     0     0           5              1.47                10.28
      Nicaragua        NIC     0     0     0           11             3.95                48.24
         Niue          NIU     0     0     0           8              2.75                24.30
     Netherlands       NLD     0     1     1           16             13.82               131.05
       Norway          NOR     0     1     0           17             15.22               186.10
        Nepal          NPL     0     0     0           5              1.67                22.70
        Nauru          NRU     0     0     0           4              1.77                18.61
    New Zealand        NZL     0     1     0           10             8.75                101.82
        Oman           OMN     0     0     0           4              2.36                19.61
       Pakistan        PAK     0     0     0           11             3.78                28.66
       Panama          PAN     0     0     0           10             4.83                49.56
         Peru          PER     0     0     0           16             6.22                56.19
     Philippines       PHL     0     0     0           16             6.73                88.86
        Palau          PLW     0     0     0           8              5.08                57.22
 Papua New Guinea      PNG     0     0     0           10             3.37                25.05
        Poland         POL     0     1     1           12             7.49                79.69
    Korea, North       PRK     0     0     0           4              0.95                12.06
       Portugal        PRT     0     1     1           15             10.78               101.29
      Paraguay         PRY     0     0     0           12             3.98                45.47
        Qatar          QAT     0     0     0           2              1.24                18.83
        Russia         RUS     1     0     0           12             4.09                40.94
       Rwanda          RWA     0     0     0           8              3.30                32.94
    Saudi Arabia       SAU     1     0     0           3              1.61                13.45
        Sudan          SDN     0     0     0           1              0.23                 3.14
       Senegal         SEN     0     0     0           17             7.59                80.31
      Singapore        SGP     0     0     0           9              7.42                84.86
  Solomon Islands      SLB     0     0     0           6              2.38                18.94
    Sierra Leone       SLE     0     0     0           8              2.54                21.96
     El Salvador       SLV     0     0     0           8              2.93                30.66
     San Marino        SMR     0     0     0           3              2.06                18.32
        Serbia         SRB     0     0     0           5              2.21                15.15
    South Sudan        SSD     0     0     0           2              0.26                 1.54
   Sao Tome and        STP     0     0     0           2              0.69                 5.58
       Principe
      Suriname         SUR     0     0     0           3              1.39                10.98
      Slovakia         SVK     0     1     1           17             10.30               103.58
      Slovenia         SVN     0     1     1           7              4.92                43.58
       Sweden          SWE     0     1     1           11             9.80                108.61
     Swaziland         SWZ     0     0     0           4              1.58                19.89
     Seychelles        SYC     0     0     0           7              3.64                26.11
Syrian Arab Republic   SYR     0     0     0           4              1.20                 9.77
         Chad          TCD     0     0     0           3              0.72                 3.88
         Togo          TGO     0     0     0           14             4.68                42.32
      Thailand         THA     0     0     0           10             4.71                50.84
      Tajikistan       TJK     0     0     0           7              1.72                26.44
    Turkmenistan       TKM     0     0     0           1              0.22                 1.65
        Tonga          TON     0     0     0           6              3.04                28.81
Trinidad and Tobago    TTO     0     0     0           6              2.92                37.79
       Tunisia         TUN     0     0     0           4              1.99                19.58
       Turkey          TUR     1     1     0           14             7.13                67.31
        Tuvalu         TUV     0     0     0           8              5.35                56.71
       Taiwan          TWN     0     0     0           5              3.48                27.78
      Tanzania         TZA     0     0     0           14             5.80                48.16
       Uganda          UGA     0     0     0           6              2.56                30.54
       Ukraine         UKR     0     0     0           13             4.18                63.17

                                                40
                                                                                Number of climate laws
    Country Name         ISO      G20      OECD       EU           Number         Quality-adjusted     Lifetime Quality-
                         Code                                                         number           adjusted number

       Uruguay           URY        0        0         0             17                  10.71               96.72
   United States of      USA        1        1         0             11                  9.03                102.86
        America
      Uzbekistan         UZB        0        0         0              6                  1.50                 16.99
 Saint Vincent and the   VCT        0        0         0              3                  1.97                 14.80
      Grenadines
       Venezuela         VEN        0        0         0             4                   0.69                 7.76
        Vietnam          VNM        0        0         0             15                  6.09                 58.11
        Vanuatu          VUT        0        0         0             7                   3.96                 34.29
         Samoa           WSM        0        0         0             9                   5.85                 56.28
        Yemen            YEM        0        0         0             6                   1.56                 20.45
     South Africa        ZAF        1        0         0             12                  6.23                 58.17
        Zambia           ZMB        0        0         0             15                  6.42                 52.84
      Zimbabwe           ZWE        0        0         0             9                   1.68                 14.45


Notes: Data on climate laws and policies come from Climate Change Laws of the World. Quality-adjusted laws are derived
by multiplying each law by the Rule of Law score (Kaufman et al 2010) in the year it was passed. Life-time quality adjusted
laws are calculated as the number of years a law has been in force, multiplied by the Rule of Law score in each year. All
calculations are done over the period 1990-2019.




                                                            41
                             Table A2: Climate laws and political orientation

   ISO        Right-wing        Left-wing        Center         ISO         Right-wing        Left-wing          Center
   code          score            score          score          code           score            score            score

  ALB            0.718            1.244                         KGZ           1.000
  ARG            0.800            1.400          0.000          KOR           1.193                              0.742
  AUS            0.659            1.394                         LBN           1.067                              0.000
  AUT            0.444            1.185                         LKA                             1.455            0.000
  BEL            0.884            1.852                         LSO                             1.000
  BFA            0.000            0.000          7.500          LUX                                              1.000
  BGR            1.111            0.000                         LVA           1.636                              0.000
  BHS            0.467                           1.615          MDA           0.000             0.902            1.533
  BLZ            1.000                                          MDV           1.000
  BOL            0.700            1.422          0.250          MEX           0.778                              1.167
  BRA            0.000            1.077          4.308          MKD                             1.000
  BRB            1.500            0.500                         MLI                                              1.000
  BWA            1.000                                          MLT           0.795             1.750
  CAN            1.197            0.830                         MWI           1.000
  CHL                             0.971          1.071          NAM                             1.000
  COL            3.250                           0.000          NGA           0.900             1.800
  COM                                            1.000          NIC           0.971             1.012
  CPV                             1.333          0.750          NLD           1.263             0.444
  CRI            0.117            1.663                         NOR           1.140             0.878
  CYP            0.000            4.800                         NPL                             1.000
  CZE            0.500            1.250                         NZL           0.194             2.450
  DEU            1.111            0.667                         PAK           0.000             1.333
  DNK            1.313            0.583                         PAN           1.000
  DOM            0.000            1.400          1.318          PER           0.170             2.036            0.622
  ECU                             1.000                         PHL                             0.000            1.045
  ESP            1.314            0.686                         POL           1.643             0.348            1.533
   FIN           1.867            0.333          1.021          PRT           0.828             1.149
  FRA            1.091            0.909                         PRY           1.116             0.467
  GBR            0.560            1.508                         ROU           0.000             2.500            0.000
  GHA            0.617            1.215                         RUS                                              1.000
  GNB                             1.000                         SEN           1.917             0.000
  GRC            0.701            1.205                         SLE                             1.000
  GRD            0.519            1.867                         SLV           0.525             2.188
  GTM            0.600            3.000                         SVK                             1.000
  GUY                             1.000                         SVN           0.000             0.863            1.533
  HND            1.000                                          SWE           1.620             0.599
  HRV            0.568            0.600          2.880          TTO           0.622             1.436
  HUN            1.157            0.898                         TUN                             0.758            2.778
  IND            1.037            0.982                         UKR                             0.833            1.042
   IRL           1.556                           0.737          URY           0.110             2.027
   ISL           1.438                           0.000          USA           1.273             0.795
   ISR           0.961            1.235                         VUT           0.917             1.048
   ITA           1.165            0.971          0.809          ZAF           0.000             1.217
  JAM            2.800            0.609                         ZMB                             1.000
  JPN            1.111            0.000


Notes: Data on climate laws and policies come from Climate Change Laws of the World. Data on political orientation come
from the World Bank's Database of Political Institutions. All calculations are done over the period 1990-2017.




                                                          42
                                Table A3: Climate laws and business cycle

   ISO Code       Score           ISO Code       Score          ISO Code        Score          ISO Code       Score

     BIH            0               ISL          0.533            PHL           0.750            MYS          0.933
     COM            0              JPN           0.538            SGP           0.750            SWZ          0.933
     GNB            0              SLV           0.538            NOR           0.760            VEN          0.933
     KGZ            0              TUR           0.538            BHR           0.778            ZAF          0.955
     KWT            0              LUX           0.545             ERI          0.778            MNG          0.972
     LBR            0              MOZ           0.545            LBN           0.778            BWA          0.988
     LBY            0              MAR           0.574            MEX           0.778            AZE          1.000
     LTU            0              SVK           0.581            KAZ           0.783            IRN          1.000
     SSD            0              BLZ           0.583            MDV           0.800            NER          1.000
     TKM            0              EST           0.583            SVN           0.800            SLE          1.000
     TLS            0              MRT           0.583            ZWE           0.800            TJK          1.000
     TUN            0              PAK           0.599             FJI          0.800            FRA          1.018
     CZE          0.207            THA           0.600            NGA           0.800            LAO          1.018
     MLI          0.240            AGO           0.614            NPL           0.800            NAM          1.018
     VNM          0.249            ARE           0.622            NZL           0.808            MKD          1.050
     ESP          0.267            ECU           0.622            BRN           0.824            OMN          1.077
     YEM          0.275             FIN          0.622            LVA           0.824            RWA          1.077
     GAB          0.286            GIN           0.622            NLD           0.824            SLB          1.077
     RUS          0.292            SUR           0.622            ROU           0.824            UKR          1.089
     TTO          0.311            KOR           0.636            URY           0.824            GTM          1.094
     USA          0.318            AFG           0.655            IND           0.830            CMR          1.120
     CIV          0.333            BOL           0.656            DNK           0.848            COG          1.143
     BLR          0.339            MLT           0.656            MMR           0.848            CPV          1.143
     PNG          0.346            TUV           0.656            MWI           0.848            ARM          1.167
     BFA          0.359            TZA           0.663            SAU           0.848            BEN          1.167
     KEN          0.359            GRC           0.667             IRL          0.857            BHS          1.167
     HUN          0.364            GHA           0.667            ATG           0.862            LKA          1.167
     AUS          0.380            GRD           0.667            COD           0.862            BGD          1.200
     IDN          0.381            HRV           0.688            NIC           0.862            ALB          1.244
     LSO          0.400            ITA           0.696            ETH           0.862            TCD          1.244
     TGO          0.424            DOM           0.700            PRT           0.862            BEL          1.292
     UZB          0.424            UGA           0.718            BDI           0.875            MUS          1.292
     CHL          0.449            BRA           0.718            BTN           0.875            BRB          1.400
     DZA          0.462            AUT           0.732            EGY           0.875            GUY          1.436
      ISR         0.471            CHE           0.732            POL           0.875            VUT          1.436
     COL          0.500            MDG           0.737            PRY           0.897            SDN          1.750
     CRI          0.500            QAT           0.737            HND           0.915            CYP          1.867
     GBR          0.500            PAN           0.747            CAF           0.933            JAM          1.867
     ARG          0.509            PER           0.747            CHN           0.933            JOR          1.867
     SWE          0.509            ZMB           0.747            GMB           0.933            GEO          2.000
     DEU          0.519            BGR           0.749            KHM           0.933            GNQ          2.000
     CAN          0.519            SEN           0.749            MDA           0.933            IRQ          2.333
                                                                                                  HTI         2.545

Notes: Data on climate laws and policies come from Climate Change Laws of the World. Data on business cycles are
calculated from real GDP data from the World Development Indicators database. All calculations are done over the period
1990-2017.




                                                          43
                      Table A.4: Number of climate litigation cases by jurisdiction


  ISO         Total       Cases with a pro-environment         ISO         Total    Cases with a pro-environment
  Code       Number                 decision                   Code       Number              decision

 ARG            1                      0                       IRL           3                   2
 AUS            96                     56                      JPN           3                   0
 AUT            1                      1                       KEN           1                   1
 BEL            1                      0                       LUX           1                   0
 BRA            6                      4                       MEX           1                   1
 CAN            20                     7                       NGA           1                   1
 CHE            2                      1                       NLD           2                   1
 CHL            2                      0                       NOR           1                   0
 COL            2                      2                       NZL          17                   6
 CZE            1                      0                       PAK           4                   2
 DEU            5                      2                       PER           1                   0
 ECU            1                      1                       PHL           2                   1
 ESP            13                     5                       POL           2                   0
 EUU            57                     37                      SWE           1                   0
 FRA            11                     6                       UGA           1                   0
 GBR            60                     28                      UKR           2                   1
 IDN            1                      8                       USA         1,154                n/a
 IND            10                     0                       ZAF           4                   2
 INT            18                     11

Notes: This list includes the European Union (EUU) and International (INT) cases.




                                                          44
