                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       GLOBAL CAPITAL AND LOCAL ASSETS:
                    HOUSE PRICES, QUANTITIES, AND ELASTICITIES

                                       Caitlin S. Gorback
                                       Benjamin J. Keys

                                      Working Paper 27370
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27370


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2020




We thank Brian Cadena, Joe Gyourko, Brian Kovak, Tarun Ramadorai, Hui Shan, Leslie Shen,
and participants at the Urban Institute's Housing Finance Policy Center and the Urban Economics
Association meetings for helpful comments and suggestions. Trevor Woolley provided
outstanding research assistance. Keys thanks the Research Sponsors Program of the Zell/Lurie
Real Estate Center for financial support. Any remaining errors are our own. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Caitlin S. Gorback and Benjamin J. Keys. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Global Capital and Local Assets: House Prices, Quantities, and Elasticities
Caitlin S. Gorback and Benjamin J. Keys
NBER Working Paper No. 27370
June 2020
JEL No. K25,R21,R31

                                           ABSTRACT

Interconnected capital markets allow mobile global capital to flow into immobile local assets.
This paper examines how foreign demand affects U.S. housing markets, and uses this demand
shock to estimate local price elasticities of supply. Other countries introduced foreign-buyer taxes
meant to deter Chinese housing investment beginning in 2011. We first show house prices grew 8
percentage points more in U.S. zipcodes with high foreign-born Chinese populations after 2011,
subsequently reversing with the onset of the U.S.­China trade war. Second, we use international
tax policy changes as a U.S. housing demand shock and estimate local house price and quantity
elasticities with respect to international capital. We find that a 1% increase in instrumented
foreign capital raises house prices at the zip code level by 0.27%, and housing supply by 0.004%.
Finally, we use the two elasticities to construct new local house price elasticities of supply for the
largest 100 CBSAs. These supply elasticities average 0.1 and vary between 0.02 and 0.7,
suggesting that local housing markets are inelastic in the short run and exhibit substantial spatial
heterogeneity.


Caitlin S. Gorback
University of Pennsylvania
cgorb@wharton.upenn.edu

Benjamin J. Keys
Department of Real Estate
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
432 Vance Hall
3733 Spruce Street
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
benkeys@wharton.upenn.edu
1     Introduction
The emergence of a new international supply of savings, the so-called "global savings glut,"
has been suggested as a possible source of asset market instability and contributor to the
Global Financial Crisis (e.g. Bernanke (2005); Justiniano, Primiceri and Tambalotti (2014)).
Investors in search of yield, vacation homes, or protection from corruption crack-downs,
frequently invest in housing abroad (Favilukis and Van Nieuwerburgh, 2017; Badarinza and
Ramadorai, 2018). In the United States, this phenomenon has been especially dramatic:
Foreign purchases of residential real estate increased from $66 billion in 2010 to $153 billion
in 2017 (NAR, 2017). These foreign residential investments are often contentious because
they are perceived to drive up housing costs for local residents, exacerbating existing concerns
with affordability. In response, many countries have enacted foreign real estate buyer taxes,
designed to deter foreign capital inflows and stabilize housing prices.
    In this paper, we use geographic and temporal variation in exposure to international
capital flows to study their impact on an untaxed substitute market, the U.S. housing market.
First, we examine the effects of these extreme capital flows and international foreign buyer
taxes on housing prices and quantities. Second, we estimate elasticities of house prices and
quantities with respect to foreign capital. Third, we use this natural experiment to isolate a
housing demand shock and estimate new local house price elasticities of supply for the 100
largest U.S. cities.
    In order to measure the direct impact of increased foreign capital on domestic housing
markets, we exploit both time-series variation in international tax policy and cross-sectional
variation in the likely destinations for these investments. Foreign buyer taxes were first
imposed in Singapore in December 2011, and have followed a predictable path thereafter
based on the proximity to China and the associated influx of Chinese foreign capital through
Hong Kong, Australia, and Canada. We therefore define our policy intervention date based
on Singapore's adoption of their foreign buyer tax.
    Our cross-sectional variation in the predicted destinations for foreign investment builds
on the immigration literature that finds differential likelihoods of immigrant arrival based on
the pre-existing mix of foreign-born residents in a local market (Altonji and Card, 1991; Card


                                               1
    and DiNardo, 2000; Card, 2001); namely, foreign capital is expected to flow to foreign-born
    enclaves. We compare house price growth in zipcodes with larger shares of foreign-born
    residents to those less likely to attract foreign capital. To establish the credibility of the
    demand shock, we initially focus on foreign-born Chinese purchasers. While applicable to
    all foreign purchasers, the substantial capital outflows from China over this period and
    large Chinese resident population in the U.S. enable a difference-in-differences analysis to
    document meaningful domestic price effects of foreign macroprudential policy.1
        Estimates from our difference-in-differences design suggest that house prices rose differ-
    entially in high foreign-born Chinese neighborhoods relative to the rest of the U.S. by 8
    percentage points (pp) from 2012 to 2018. In contrast, quantities (as measured by permit-
    ting activity) rose differentially by 1.85pp. We explore a range of alternative counterfactual
    house price paths to address concerns related to the parallel trends assumption inherent in
    this comparison: house prices are assumed to have evolved similarly across zipcodes before
    and after 2012. Beyond comparing pre-trends in an event study design, we also generate
    control groups through propensity score matching and synthetic control exercises. Our pre-
    ferred specification includes MSA-by-quarter fixed effects to control for heterogeneity in the
    housing market recovery across cities and instead focus exclusively on within-city variation
    in pre-shock immigrant concentration. Using only this within-city variation for identification
    also mitigates concerns of sorting by investors or immigrants based on inter-city labor mar-
    ket prospects. Finally, we show that in light of recent capital control tightening in China,
    as well as escalation of the U.S.­China trade war, the differential price gain in immigrant
    enclaves has fallen sharply since 2018.
        In order to measure the elasticity of house prices and quantities to foreign capital more
    generally, we move away from focusing only on foreign-born Chinese neighborhoods and
    develop a continuous measure of expected foreign capital inflows for each zipcode. This
    approach introduces other foreign buyers besides the Chinese and relaxes the binary "high
    foreign born" treatment approach taken in our first empirical exercise, thereby capturing the
    broader variation in the foreign-born population across zipcodes. Our continuous expected
1
    Using other immigrant groups with less capital variation in such a blunt research design is noisy. In our
    later analysis we unpack this reduced form method, study continuous capital flows directly, and
    incorporate all foreign purchaser groups.


                                                         2
capital flow measure distributes foreign capital from any country of origin throughout the
U.S. to zipcodes based on their pre-period foreign-born composition (in the style of a Bartik
instrument). We then instrument for expected capital flows into these foreign-born enclaves
with the difference-in-differences in the first stage, using fraction foreign-born instead of
binary zipcode status. The benefit of using this method is twofold. First, it removes the
simultaneity bias coming from domestic housing supply responses, since this shock is driven
by foreign tax policy changes. Second, it uses only relevant housing demand-side variation
since individual purchasers experience the tax shock, while foreign firm and government
capital is not affected.
   This two-step research design yields an estimated elasticity of house prices to expected
capital flows of 0.27. Expected capital flows increased by 32% for the median zipcode.
This increase in foreign investment would thus translate into an 8.6% increase in house
prices. The median zipcode experienced 42% house price growth over our sample period, so
increased foreign capital can explain roughly one-quarter of observed house price growth. For
quantities, we estimate a supply elasticity with respect to capital flows of 0.004. The median
county in our sample increased expected capital flows by 80%. With the median county's
quarterly growth rate of 0.003 to its housing stock, the influx of foreign capital more than
doubles the low baseline permitting rate for new construction. We conclude that foreign
capital flows significantly affected both prices and quantities of exposed housing markets.
   In the final empirical exercise, we use the demand shock from foreign capital inflows to
construct a new local house price elasticity of supply for a given city. We construct this
elasticity by taking the ratio of the estimated house price and quantity elasticities with
respect to expected capital flows. We estimate short-run supply elasticities for the 100
largest U.S. cities (as measured by population in 2010). The average city's housing market
is highly inelastic in the short run, with an elasticity of 0.10. Our new measure produces
a metro ranking consistent with others in the literature, with Providence, San Francisco,
and Boston as the least elastic metros, and places like Ocala, FL and Salisbury, MD as the
most elastic over this ten-year period (2009­2018). These estimates are robust to a variety
of instrument specifications and controls for differential tech sector growth, and provide new
local measures of how responsive housing construction is to demand shocks over the most


                                              3
    recent time horizon.
        Our work contributes to a growing literature on cross-country capital flows and their
    impact on asset markets such as housing. In related concurrent work, Li, Shen and Zhang
    (2019) find that a Chinese demand shock in three California cities between 2007 and 2013
    significantly raised house prices in areas exposed to more Chinese immigrants, with the
    largest impacts after 2012, in line with our post­period results. Badarinza and Ramadorai
    (2018) examine inflows to the London housing market from countries experiencing political
    risk, Sá (2016) explores properties in the U.K. owned by foreign companies, while Cvijanovic
    and Spaenjers (2018) study the effect of international buyers on the Paris housing market.
    A now extensive literature has also emphasized the role of investors and out-of-town buyers
    during the U.S. housing boom (Bayer et al., 2011; Chinco and Mayer, 2015; Favilukis et al.,
    2012; Favilukis and Van Nieuwerburgh, 2017; DeFusco et al., 2018). We extend this literature
    by exploring a time period when international housing purchases in the U.S. skyrocketed and
    were uniquely driven by the growth in purchases from one country (China).
        These results also inform the literature on the impact of immigration on housing markets.
    We similarly exploit cross-sectional variation in pre-existing population shares, as in Card
    (2001), expanding the applicability of this strategy beyond the flow of migrants to predicted
    exposure to capital flow shocks. Many papers have examined the impact of immigrants on
    house prices directly, such as Sá (2014), Saiz (2003, 2007), Saiz and Wachter (2011), Akbari
    and Aydede (2012), Pavlov and Somerville (2016). In our setting, as in some mentioned
    above, these housing purchases are likely to be used as secondary residences, rather than
    as primary residences or investment properties; In Appendix B.2, we show that while rents
    have risen slower than house prices, there is still evidence of rental displacement as rents rise
    by 5% more on average in highly exposed areas.2
        Our work documents an important consequence of international macroprudential poli-
    cies: Foreign buyer taxes in other countries affect the flow of capital into the United States.
    Claessens (2014) provides an overview of these macroprudential policy tools and their re-
    lationship with housing markets. As discussed in detail by Gergen (2017), taxes of this
2
    A related strand of literature has explored the role of institutional, but not necessarily international,
    investors in the U.S. housing market. See, e.g. Lambie-Hanson, Li and Slonkonsky (2019), and Agarwal,
    Sing and Wang (2018) on foreign institutional investors in commercial real estate.


                                                         4
nature are especially likely to lead to avoidance or evasion. We innovate by using these non-
U.S. macroprudential policies as a shock to U.S. housing markets, thereby incorporating the
effects of policy to influence the destination of international capital flows.
    Finally, our work contributes to a growing literature estimating local house price elastic-
ities. Gyourko and Summers (2008) show that the U.S. housing market has a large spatial
distribution of regulatory policies, and construct a local measure of regulatory stringency.
Saiz (2010) uses this local measure in combination with geographic and topographic char-
acteristics to provide long­run estimates of supply elasticities, and Cosman and Williams
(2018) update this model by incorporating dynamic changes to available land. Consistent
with Gyourko, Hartley and Krimmel (2019) survey-based result that local housing markets
have become increasingly regulated, Aastveit, Albuquerque and Anundsen (2019) instru-
ment for house prices with crime rates and disposable income changes and find that housing
markets have become more inelastic. In complementary work, Baum-Snow and Han (2019)
use Bartik labor demand shocks, in conjunction with theory, to construct hyper-local house
price elasticities. While a local labor market shock exploits intensive-margin variation in
demand within a market coming from improvements in local labor outcomes, we instead
exploit extensive-margin variation in the form of a housing demand shock originating from
foreign countries to estimate the housing market's short-run response. These two new ap-
proaches use different sources of variation, and can be calculated over different geographies
and time horizons, thus providing new directions for estimating more locally-relevant house
price elasticities of supply.
    In the next section, we provide background on the tax policies and Chinese capital flight.
Sections 3 and 4 discuss our data and differences-in-differences research design, while Section
5 presents the results. We discuss our instrumental variables design and results in Section
6. House price elasticity results are presented in section 7. Section 8 concludes.



2     Background
Our identification strategy relies on a change in the probability of international investment
in the U.S. housing market after foreign purchaser tax policies are implemented elsewhere.


                                               5
    While applicable to all international buyers, many of these policies targeted Chinese buyers
    during a period when capital flight from China sharply increased. In this section, we docu-
    ment the growth in Chinese capital investment in the U.S. housing market and describe the
    foreign buyer tax policies that steered capital toward the untaxed U.S. market starting in
    2011.


    2.1     Chinese Policies Impacting Capital Flight

    As shown in Figure 1(a), beginning in 2012 and accelerating in 2014, massive amounts of
    capital fled China, peaking at over $200 billion per quarter in the second half of 2015.3 While
    China is known for its tight capital controls, limiting official renminbi to USD conversions
    to $50,000 per person per year in 2015, huge volumes of capital left the country through
    pooled individual conversions and underground banking networks.4 Relaxation of policies
    related to capital outflows, in conjunction with anticipatory behavior around an expanded
    anti-corruption campaign, led to sharp increases in capital flight beginning in 2013 and
    continuing for the next four years.5
       In September 2013, the Chinese State Council approved the Shanghai Free Trade Zone,
    with the intention to increase investment in China and abroad.6 Combined with free trading
    of renminbi in offshore financial markets like Hong Kong, capital began to flow out of China
    in earnest in 2014. In addition, the Chinese savings glut had trouble finding returns in
    domestic asset markets outside of housing, which became increasingly expensive.7
       The drive to crackdown on corruption seemed, if anything, to initially spur even more
    capital flight. In contrast to financial institutions, real estate agents were generally not
    required to report suspicious activity associated with money laundering, such as large cash
3
  Our measure of capital outflows comes from China's State Administration of Foreign Exchange's (SAFE)
  time series of balance of payments. Capital outflows are defined as the quarterly sum of: 2.2.1.2. Portfolio
  Investment, 2.2.1.4. Other Investment, and 3. Net errors and omissions, in accordance with the definition
  used by Fitch Ratings.
4
  Hu, Fox, Alfred Liu, Paul Panckhurst and Sheridan Prasso. "China's Money Exodus: Here's how the
  Chinese send billions abroad to buy homes," Bloomberg News, Nov. 2, 2015.
5
  Sender, Henry. "China's anti-corruption push may drive wealthy overseas." The Financial Times, Nov. 11,
  2014.
6
  Orlik, Tom. "China Signals Speedier Moves to Loosen Capital Controls; Bank Official Says Recent
  Volatility Shouldn't Hinder Reform," The Wall Street Journal, Sept. 5th , 2013
7
  Bradsher, Keith and Dionne Searcey. "Chinese Cash Floods U.S. Real Estate Market." The New York
  Times, Nov. 28, 2015.


                                                       6
    transactions or purchases involving LLCs Hundtofte and Rantala (2018). In November 2014,
    private bankers in Hong Kong stated that demand for foreign real estate had grown since the
    anti-corruption campaign began.8 Not surprisingly, from 2013­2014, 76% of Chinese home
    purchases in the U.S. were all-cash, with an average transaction price of over $590,000. For
    comparison, during the same time period, 33% of domestic purchases were all cash, with a
    mean transaction price of $247,000.9
       Two notable events have limited capital flight from China during the later years of our
    data period. First, at the end of 2016, the Chinese government began limiting the amount
    of capital leaving the country by requiring financial institutions to report overseas transfers
    above $10,000, and disallowing the $50,000 individual quota to be used to purchase overseas
    property. Capital outflows dropped in earnest during 2017 and 2018. Second, the rise of
    the U.S.­China trade war has disrupted investment in a variety of U.S.-based assets. In this
    paper, we largely focus our analysis on the period 2010­2018; however, we also provide evi-
    dence that these two capital limitations have negatively impacted domestic housing markets
    in Section 5.3.


    2.2    Foreign Buyer Tax Policies

    Observing foreign investment bidding up domestic house prices, many countries have imposed
    taxes on the purchase of housing by foreign buyers. For instance, Singapore, Hong Kong,
    Australia, and Canada have all introduced taxes in recent years.10 These policies add a
    stamp tax or additional duty to purchases by foreign buyers, ranging from 3% (Victoria,
    Australia's first tax) to 20% (Singapore's third tax). Some of these foreign buyer taxes have
    been coupled with "empty home" taxes as in British Columbia and New South Wales, or
    limits on foreign ownership of new apartment and hotel construction projects, as in New
    South Wales and New Zealand.
8
   Henry Sender, "China's anti-corruption push may drive wealthy overseas," Financial Times, November
   11th, 2014.
 9
   Yun, Lawrence, Jed Smith and Gay Cororaton, "2014 Profile of International Home Buying Activity:
   Purchases of U.S. Real Estate by International Clients for the Twelve Month Period Ending March 2014."
   National Association of Realtors, June 2014.
10
   See Appendix A for details of these tax policies. In addition, New Zealand has recently banned
   non-resident foreigners from buying homes, while the United Kingdom's Conservative Party and the New
   York Democratic governor have new proposed pied-a-tierre taxes.


                                                     7
    The reported political motivations for these taxes have focused on the macroprudential
stability of housing markets and affordability for domestic residents. However, the imple-
mentation of these taxes have predictably responded to an influx of Chinese foreign capital
sharply driving up the cost of housing. Figure 2 shows the time series of price indices of se-
lect international housing markets, with vertical lines denoting periods between Singapore's
first tax in December 2011 and the relevant location's foreign buyer tax adoptions. Most
geographically proximate to China, Singapore and Hong Kong experienced rising prices from
2010 to 2012, as shown in panels (a) and (b). Chinese investment moved east to Australia,
shown in panels (b) and (c), then further east to Canada, shown in panels (d) and (e). Figure
3 summarizes the timing and location of the enactment of these taxes, displaying how they
originated in countries closest to China beginning in 2011 and expanded outward thereafter.
    Figure 1(b) presents time series of foreign home sales from the National Association
of Realtors from 2009­2019. The gap between Chinese and all foreign home sales volumes
began to widen over 2013­2014, as the anti-corruption campaign escalated and the tax polices
came into effect in more countries. In what follows, we estimate the effect of this influx of
international capital on U.S. housing markets.



3     Data

3.1    Treatment Definition

In order to differentiate exposure to Chinese capital flowing into the U.S. housing market, we
draw on the methods from Altonji and Card (1991) and Card (2001), in which immigrants
tend to move to enclaves in which other immigrants of their same origin country previously
settled. In our context for capital, possibly attached to immigrants but in many cases
unattached, we anticipate that Chinese capital is most likely to flow to locations with ex-
ante high shares of Chinese immigrants. This is the hypothesis we test in our difference-in-
differences specification.
    Chinese purchasers may seek to invest their capital in cities with initially high Chinese
populations, and purchase real estate by employing an agent who has worked with Chinese



                                              8
     buyers in the past. Recent work by Badarinza, Ramadorai and Shimizu (2019) suggests pur-
     chasers of commercial real estate prefer to transact with sellers of the same origin country,
     regardless in which country the transaction takes place, while Li, Shen and Zhang (2019)
     show a direct increase in Chinese names among home buyers in areas with prior exposure to
     many Chinese immigrants. News sources report that Chinese capital has flowed dispropor-
     tionately to cities known to have higher than average shares of residents of Asian descent,
     such as Melbourne, Sydney, Vancouver, San Francisco, and Seattle.11 These areas are likely
     attractive to foreign buyers as they already have familiar language, other cultural infrastruc-
     ture, and communities for the foreign buyers. Note, of course, that residential real estate
     purchases need not be tied to historical immigration networks, as these properties may not
     be regularly visited, or visited at all, but instead owned solely for investment purposes.
        To define our treatment group, we use data from the 2011 American Community Sur-
     vey (ACS) to construct the share of the zipcode's population originating from any foreign
     country.12 For our difference-in-differences analysis, we define as "treated" those zipcodes
     whose Chinese immigrant share in 2011 is above the 99th percentile, denoted as "foreign-born
     Chinese" zipcodes, F BCi .


                                             F BCpopi
                               F BCi = 1                    99th percentile                             (1)
                                                popi
        The treatment indicator equals 1 for those zipcodes with at least 5.7% foreign-born
     Chinese residents, the 99th percentile cutoff. Nationally, the average zipcode in our sample
     is 0.4% foreign-born Chinese, with the median zipcode having no Chinese immigrants. For
     our instrumental variables approach to estimating the price elasticity of supply, we define a
     continuous treatment measure, expanded to all immigrant groups, discussed in Section 6.
        Figure 4 shows the geographic distribution of our treatment variable, F BC = 1. Panel
     (a) shows that treated zipcodes are clustered in many coastal cities such as New York City,
11
   Fong, Dominique, Rachel Pannet and Paul Vieira. "Western Cities Want to Slow Flood of Chinese Home
   Buying. Nothing Works." The Wall Street Journal, June 6, 2018. Bradsher, Keith and Dionne Searcey.
   "Chinese Cash Floods U.S. Real Estate Market," The New York Times, Nov. 28, 2015.
12
   ACS 5-year estimates, see table DP05 for total population and table B05006 for foreign-born population by
   country of origin. The ACS tables are available at the zipcode level from 2011 onwards. The Decennial
   Census (2000) provides "Place of Birth for the Foreign-Born Population" (Table PCT019). There is no
   comparable data available between 2001 and 2010.


                                                       9
Seattle, San Fransisco, Los Angeles, Washington, D.C., and Boston. Note however that our
treatment definition is not restricted to the coasts; large Chinese immigrant communities are
also present in Houston, Atlanta, and even Nebraska. Panel (b) shows the fraction of county
population that is foreign-born Chinese (used in our housing supply analysis). Counties
shaded in red are treated (by being in the top 1% of counties), and are distributed across
almost every state. Furthermore, 25% of the counties in our sample have at least 0.2% of
their total population born in China.


3.2    Policy Intervention Definition

We define our policy intervention date based on Singapore's first foreign-buyer tax adoption
in 2011q4:


                                    P ostt = 1{t  2011q 4}                                  (2)

   Amid all of the tax policy changes listed in Section 2.2, we choose the timing of Singa-
pore's adoption of the foreign buyer tax as it was the first of its kind and prompted a wave
of similar policies.


3.3    House Prices

We use CoreLogic's transactions database to construct zipcode-level hedonic house price
indices from 2000 to 2018. We limit the sample to the 48 contiguous states as well as
Washington, D.C., and only include zipcodes with at least 20 transactions between 2000
and 2018 to cut down on especially noisy index construction. Our data contains numerous
characteristics of the transacted home and lot.
   We rely on hedonic price indices because it is not feasible to use repeat-sales to quality
control for a housing stock at such small geographies. Since the main aim of the repeat-sales
index is to control for housing characteristics, we include covariates in the hedonic index that
capture the variation in housing quality and characteristics over the time period. As shown
in Equation 3, for each transaction j we control for lot size in acres, living square footage,
year built, number of bedrooms, number of bathrooms, and whether the house has a garage.

                                              10
     We construct the index separately for each zipcode i. This yields a zipcode-by-quarter panel
                                     i
     of house price indices, hpiit = t . To validate the robustness of our hedonic methodology, to
     examine the most recent time periods after 2018, and to study rental markets, we also use
     Zillow's Zillow Home Value Index and the Zillow Rent Index in our analysis.13




      ln(P ricei      i             i         i         i       i        i          i    i
               jt ) = t qtrt + Acresjt + Sqf tjt + Builtjt + Bedjt + Bathjt + Garagejt + jt (3)



        After constructing these indices for each zipcode, we limit our sample to 2009­2018 to
     avoid the house price collapse in 2007­2008. This yields valid house price indices for 26,040
     zipcodes across 2,659 counties, covering 42.5 million transactions. Appendix Table D1 shows
     the housing characteristics for the zipcode-quarters in our sample.


     3.4     Housing Supply and Additional Economic Data

     To study the supply of new housing, we use data from the Census' Building Permits Survey,
     2005­2018. We collect monthly county-level building permits for single­ and multi­family
     units, aggregating totals to the quarterly level of analysis to be consistent with the house
     price indices.
        In our matched sample and synthetic control robustness checks, we include a number
     of real economic variables to control for local economic characteristics. We use zipcode
     level annual employment, establishment counts, and payroll data from the County Business
     Patterns, 2005­2011. We also include zipcode population data from the 2010 Decennial
     Census and 2011 zipcode population data and median income from the ACS.


     3.5     Expected Capital Flows

     As our measure of capital flows, we collect aggregate data on foreign sales volume from the
     National Association of Realtors' (NAR) Annual Profiles of International Home Buyers from
     2011 to 2019. This measure is derived from an annual survey of randomly selected realtors.
     The 2019 survey was sent to 150,000 randomly selected realtors, of which about 12,000
13
     See Appendix B.2 for details on Zillow data construction.


                                                        11
     replied, with 12% reporting experience helping an international client in the last 12 months.
     The NAR observes substantial specialization among realtors, with 4% of all realtors in 2011
     reporting that over 75% of their transactions came from international clients (NAR, 2011).
     This pattern is likely due to language and cultural familiarity among a subset of realtors,
     supporting the network effects assumption we make in order to define the treatment group
     of zipcodes. In contrast to other methods that attempt to identify foreign-born residents by
     name, such as Li, Shen and Zhang (2019), we use aggregated data on identified international
     clients. This approach assuages concerns of identifying American citizens and residents as
     international when they share similar ethnic names, a particular concern given that foreign
     investors tend to purchase in cultural enclaves.
         The 2011 NAR report includes data as far back as 2009. Each report provides a national
     estimate for the sales volume purchased by international clients originating from Canada,
     China, Mexico, India and the United Kingdom, as well as the total sales volume purchased
     by all international clients. The NAR defines an international client in two ways: 1) Clients
     with a permanent residence outside of the United States, purchasing in the United States
     for the purpose of investment, vacation, or stays shorter than 6 months; or 2) Clients who
     have immigrated to the United States in the past two years, or who have temporary visas
     and plan to reside in the United States for more than 6 months. The NAR profiles do not
     distinguish between sales volume going to the two types of international clients, nor do they
     provide detailed geography by source country of these foreign sales.14



     4     Difference-in-Differences Empirical Design
     While the foreign-buyer taxes impact any buyer from a foreign country, no immigrant group
     invested as much in the U.S. housing market as the Chinese after the implementation of
     these taxes. Chinese home purchase volume more than tripled from $6.8 billion in 2009 to
     $31.6 billion in 2017, before falling to $13.4 billion in 2019.15 The difference-in-differences
14
   Appendix B.3.2 attempts to disentangle whether these international clients contribute to immigration or
   population changes.
15
   Over the same time frame, purchases from Canada grew from $11B to $19B (73%), those from India grew
   from $5B to $7.8B (56%), and from the United Kingdom fell from $11.4B to $9.5B (-20%). In addition,
   local immigrant population shares are much smaller from these countries; the 99th percentile treatment


                                                     12
framework is too blunt a design to estimate local house price responses to foreign-buyer taxes
without large changes in purchase volumes and meaningful population shares. However,
after showing that the foreign-buyer taxes do in fact affect local prices and quantities in the
Chinese context, we expand the analysis to both include home purchase capital flows other
foreign countries, and relax the treatment condition to use the continuous fraction of the
foreign-born population.
   The difference-in-differences analysis compares treated zipcodes, those with high shares
of foreign-born Chinese residents, to control zipcodes, those with lower shares. For this
design to be valid, treated and control zipcodes must trend similarly in house prices and
quantities absent the tax policy changes that redirected capital to the U.S. housing market.
While panel (a) in Figure 5 and Table 1 support parallel trends in the pre-period for housing
market characteristics, not all demographic or labor market characteristics are balanced
between treated and control zipcodes. To mitigate concerns regarding the comparability
of treatment and control groups and the sorting of foreign-born purchasers into markets
with positive amenities correlated with house prices, we modify our approach by including
geographic time trends. Going further, we perform additional analyses with a propensity
score matched sample and a synthetic control sample based on pre-period data, using the
modified samples in the differences-in-differences specification.
   Our baseline specification in Equation 4 uses a generalized difference-in-difference design
for zipcode i in quarter t:


                      HP Iit =  + F BCi × postt + i + t + g × t + it                       (4)


   The parameter of interest is  , which measures the differential house price in treated
versus control zipcodes after Singapore introduced its foreign buyer tax. We also include
zipcode, i , and quarter, t , fixed effects. In order to address concerns that our design is
capturing broader local trends instead of level differences in means, we additionally con-
trol for state-by-quarter, commuting zone-by-quarter, or MSA-by-quarter trends, with trend
geography denoted by g .
zipcode cutoffs would be 1.7% for the U.K., 2.5% for Canada, and 4% for India.



                                                  13
         These regressions compare zipcodes with relatively larger shares of foreign-born Chinese
     population to the rest of the United States. We directly address labor market or investment
     sorting concerns by controlling for geography-by-time fixed effects to make comparisons
     exclusively within the same MSA in the same quarter. Below, we also construct matched
     samples and apply a synthetic control method, but we first present the straightforward
     difference-in-difference estimates using the full sample of control zipcodes.



     5     Establishing the Local Housing Demand Shock

     5.1     Difference-in-Differences Results

     Figure 5a presents the comparison between the house prices of high fraction foreign-born
     Chinese (F BC ) zipcodes, that is, zipcodes in the top 1% of all zipcodes ("treated" zips),
     and all other zipcodes ("control" zips). The figure first shows smooth and parallel house price
     trends prior to the start of 2012, after which Chinese capital flows (Chinese home purchases
     in the U.S.) increased. After the last quarter of 2011 (indicated by the vertical line), the two
     house price series sharply diverge, with treated zipcodes experiencing much greater house
     price appreciation between 2012 and 2018.
         Table 2 formalizes this comparison in our difference-in-differences regression framework,
     with associated quarterly event study difference-in-differences coefficients from column (4)
     presented in Figure 5b. Column (1) of the table includes both quarter and zip fixed effects,
     and each column adds progressively more restrictive geography-by-time fixed effects to flex-
     ibly account for different patterns in house prices in different geographies. The estimated
     differences in house prices between treated and control zipcodes are consistently large and
     statistically significant, ranging from 8 to 17 percentage points (pp) higher in FBC zipcodes,
     depending on the specification.16 Our preferred estimate in is column (4), where even after
     flexibly conditioning on commuting zone-specific time trends, we estimate that after 2012,
     house prices in high foreign-born Chinese zipcodes were 9.5pp higher than in control zipcodes
     in the same MSA.
16
     Standard errors are clustered by quarter in column (1), and in the other columns are clustered at the level
     of geography associated with the geography-specific time fixed effects.


                                                         14
   Decomposing the treatment group into a more continuous treatment measure, Table 3
shows the house price changes for zipcodes with foreign-born Chinese population shares in
the 50th - 90th percentiles, 90th - 95th percentiles, 95th - 99th percentiles, and above 99th
percentile relative to the lower half of the distribution of zipcodes (which contain no foreign-
born Chinese residents). The results are consistent with the more blunt treatment measure:
House prices rose the most in zipcodes with higher shares of foreign-born Chinese residents.
Specifically, in our preferred specification in column (4), we find that zipcodes in the 99th
percentile of foreign-born Chinese share see house prices 13pp higher than those in the bottom
half of the distribution. However, the zipcodes need not be that concentrated; zipcodes in
the 95th - 99th percentiles see a 6pp house price increase, the 90th - 95th percentiles see a
house price increase of 2.5pp, and the 50th - 90th percentiles a 2pp increase.
   A notable feature of Chinese buyers of U.S. housing is that they tend to purchase rela-
tively more expensive properties than either other foreign buyers or domestic U.S. buyers.
As mentioned above, the average house price for Chinese buyers at their peak purchasing
volume in 2017 was over $780,000, while other foreign buyers spent $537,000 and domestic
buyers spent $278,000 on average (National Association of Realtors 2017). This difference
may reflect the fact that Chinese and other foreign nationals buy more expensive houses in
low-price communities, or, more likely, that they tend to locate in high-price communities.
We thus investigate whether the responsiveness of house prices to Chinese capital flows is
concentrated in the most expensive tier of housing. If house prices responded in all tiers, we
might be concerned that other drivers of price appreciation, such as local labor markets or
improved amenities, were instead contributing to the house price appreciation we document.
   In Figure 6a, we separately plot the path of house prices for those high foreign-born
Chinese zipcodes in the top quintile of the U.S. house price distribution (in red), and for
those in the other four quintiles (in blue). The time series of house prices for all other
zipcodes is plotted in black. Prior to 2012, the three house price series have nearly identical
trends. Starting in the first quarter of 2012, the house price series for the foreign-born
Chinese zipcodes in the top quintile of prices diverges sharply from the other two series
and stays persistently higher through the end of 2018. Table 4 reproduces the difference-in-
differences specifications of Table 2, but interacts the treatment indicator with the quintile


                                              15
of the house price distribution of U.S. zipcodes, grouping the bottom four quintiles into one
indicator. The table shows minimal differences for zipcodes in the bottom four quintiles,
with most of the effect of Chinese capital flows after 2012 concentrated in the high foreign-
born Chinese zipcodes in the top 20 percent of the initial house price distribution. Not only
does foreign capital flow to immigrant heavy communities, column (4) in Table 4 shows it
targets expensive zipcodes within a given local market.
   Has this increase in house prices, induced by an influx of foreign capital, translated into
real economic effects? In Table 5 we explore this question, using data on the construction
of new residential buildings from the U.S. Census' Building Permits Survey, as discussed
in Section 3.4. The data is less granular than the house price indices we constructed from
transaction data, and is instead available at the county-by-quarter level. The table presents
estimates from difference-in-difference specifications similar to those in Table 2. The depen-
dent variable is defined as the cumulative new stock (sum of all permits between 2011 and
time t t) relative to 2011, in percentage points:

                                                     t      P ermitsi,
                           N ewBuildit = 100 ×                                              (5)
                                                    =2011   Stocki,2011

In column (4), our preferred specification that includes commuting zone-specific time con-
trols, we estimate that high foreign-born Chinese zipcodes experienced 1.85 percentage points
more cumulative additional stock after 2012, a significant portion of the 2.63 percentage point
average cumulative stock created over the same time period. This estimate provides new
evidence that Chinese capital flows have had a direct and local effect on real construction
activity in the United States.
   In sum, in this section we have documented differential house price and housing supply
growth in zipcodes that were ex-ante more likely to be destinations for Chinese capital,
namely those with a larger pre-existing foreign-born Chinese population. In contrast, we
find no differential house price effects in other zipcodes that may be affected by international
capital flows, but that are not destinations with pre-existing relationships with large shares
of Chinese residents.



                                              16
     5.2    Robustness to Counterfactual Construction:
            Matching and Synthetic Control Approaches

     While the prior section provides straightforward evidence of similar patterns prior to 2012
     and divergence thereafter between high foreign-born Chinese zipcodes and all other zipcodes,
     a natural concern might be that the drivers of house price growth may not necessarily have
     evolved in parallel across these two groups of neighborhoods. In addition, given that our
     approach to defining "treatment" is to focus on the top 1% of zipcodes in terms of foreign-
     born Chinese residents, there may be concerns with including other high-percentile zipcodes
     in the "control" group, when the treatment of increased capital flows may instead affect the
     top 5%, 10% or 25% of zipcodes (as suggested by Table 3).
        In this section, we address this concern by creating two new counterfactual house price
     trends based on propensity score matching and synthetic control techniques. As both ap-
     proaches yield results that are very similar to those of the baseline difference-in-differences
     design, we describe the matching exercise here and report on the synthetic control approach
     in Appendix Section B.1.
        To construct a matched control group, we first restrict the sample to those with the
     fraction of foreign-born Chinese below the 75th percentile. This restriction, which limits the
     foreign-born Chinese population to at most 0.3 percent, addresses the issue related to the
     arbitrary cutoff of the top 1%. Next, we keep only those MSAs with at least one zipcode
     in the top 1% in order to match on MSA. Third, we generate a propensity score for each
     zipcode by regressing (probit) F BCi on zipcode-level characteristics from 2010 and 2011.
     We include demographic, economic, and housing characteristics, listed in Table 1. Fourth,
     we match one nearest-neighbor control zipcode within the same MSA to each treated zipcode
     with replacement.17
        Figure 7 presents the time series of house prices for the matched control group, in blue,
     and the treatment group (same series as in Figure 5a) in red. The two house price series are
     on the same trends in the pre-period, and then diverge starting in 2012 (the vertical line).
     Table 6 presents results from difference-in-difference specifications similar to those above, this
17
     Appendix Table D2 presents the covariate balance between FBC and non-FBC zipcodes after matching.



                                                     17
     time using the matched control group (hence the much smaller number of observations). The
     results are quite stable regardless of the specificity of geography-by-time fixed effects, with
     estimated differences in prices between 8 and 17pp for more foreign-born Chinese locations
     relative to their matched counterparts.
         The findings from this matching exercise suggest that our estimates are not particularly
     sensitive to the choice of control group when conducting the difference-in-differences esti-
     mation. In Appendix Section B.1, we conduct an additional counterfactual construction
     exercise using synthetic control techniques, and find relatively precisely estimated house
     price differences of around 11pp between high foreign-born Chinese zipcodes and their "syn-
     thetic" counterparts. In Appendix Section B.2, we substitute the zipcode-level Zillow Home
     Value Index (ZHVI) for our constructed house price index using Corelogic transactions data,
     and the results remain robust. Finally, Appendix Section B.3.1 discusses the impacts on
     real business outcomes such as employment and establishments, as well as immigration and
     population flows.
         We conclude that these additional approaches to constructing plausible counterfactual
     house price paths support the broader difference-in-differences assumptions related to parallel
     trends: Namely, that this influx of Chinese capital represented an unexpected shock to local
     housing markets, and that the neighborhoods affected by this shock were predominantly those
     with high ex-ante exposure in the form of a larger share of foreign-born Chinese residents.


     5.3     What Happens when Foreign Capital Dries Up?

     The escalation of the U.S.­China trade war and concurrent crackdown on Chinese capital
     flight provides a stark reversal in treatment for the F BC zipcodes.18 In order to expand the
     time series beyond the onset of the trade war, and the peak of the national housing market
     which occurred in late 2018, we use data from Zillow's Home Value Index (ZHVI) through
     the end of 2019.
18
     For a discussion of Chinese capital restrictions, see Shen, Samuel and Galbraith Andrew, "China constrict
     capital outflows with eye on yuan stability," October 11, 2018. For a brief summary of real estate investment
     declines in response to Chinese capital controls, see Olsen, Kelly "Beijing's capital controls are weighing on
     Chinese investors looking to buy property abroad," CNBC, February 26, 2019. For a timeline of the
     U.S.­China trade war, see "Timeline: Key dates in the U.S.­China trade war," Reuters, January 15, 2020.



                                                          18
   To illustrate how one city's housing market can respond to swings in available foreign
capital, we look to Seattle. Proximate to Vancouver, a city with increasingly tight foreign
ownership regulation, and with a large foreign-born Chinese population, Seattle has experi-
enced considerable house price volatility in recent years. Importantly, this volatility differs
by a zipcode's foreign-born composition. We categorize each zipcode in the CBSA as either
FBC, an FBC-border zipcode, or neither. FBC-border zipcodes are those that are contigu-
ous with FBC zipcodes; they share a geographic border. This yields 9 FBC zipcodes, 22
border zipcodes, and 116 other zipcodes within the Seattle CBSA.
   Figure 8 shows the evolution of Seattle's monthly Home Value Index from 2009 to the
end of 2019, by zipcode type. We normalize each zipcode's index to 1 in 2011m12, the month
Singapore imposed its first tax. The figure shows that by mid-2018, while FBC and border
zipcodes more than double their index values, other zipcodes did not gain nearly as much,
likely as they attracted less foreign capital.
   The gray vertical bars show capital outflows from China through 2019q4. Capital controls
and the beginning of the trade war led to falling capital outflows beginning in 2017, bottoming
out in in mid-2018. This timing coincides with Seattle's housing market peak. In one year,
between the peak in 2018m6 to the trough in 2019m6, FBC zipcodes lost 4% of their value,
while other zipcodes saw constant prices. In the rebound since the local trough, other
zipcodes again saw faster house price growth, adding 3%, while FBC zipcodes saw only a
1.5% rebound.
   We next examine the effect of a sharp reduction in foreign investment nationwide in
Figure 9. We index each zipcode's house price to the quarter of Singapore's tax introduction,
2011q4, and extend the previous analysis in Table 2 and Figure 5 through 2019. As shown
in panel (a), according to Zillow's HVI, house prices in F BC zipcodes rose approximately
70pp between 2011q1 and 2018q4, while control zipcodes only saw 40pp price growth.
   Implementing the differences-in-differences design, and including commuting zone time
trends, panel (b) plots the difference-in-differences estimate for differential price growth in
FBC areas. Panel (b) shows that on average, F BC zipcodes saw 6pp additional price growth
that control zipcodes in the same commuting zone did not; however, this differential gain
falls sharply almost to zero by the end of the sample period, due to the escalation of the


                                                 19
trade war and capital crackdown which began in 2018. Our analysis thus uses variation in
foreign capital increases and decreases to provide new evidence that liquid foreign capital
can induce large price swings in domestic housing markets.



6     Price and Quantity Elasticities
We now address the more general question of how liquid foreign capital impacts local asset
prices and quantities, with the goal of constructing new local house price elasticities of supply.
Disentangling causality between global capital flows and local asset prices is challenging, as
local communities may draw global capital to their own local markets in the United States
through immigration, educational spending, or reverse remittances. Americans also demand
foreign currencies in order to purchase goods produced abroad. Adding measurement error,
foreigners supply capital in many ways, by investing in U.S. firms, buying U.S. government
debt, and purchasing commercial real estate, in addition to their investments in residential
real estate.
    In our setting, the series of foreign buyer tax policies adopted by other countries serve as
an exogenous demand shifter into the United States housing market. We use this expansion
of capital supply interacted with the fraction of the zipcode that is foreign born in 2011
(f racF Bi ) to instrument for capital flows into the United States. In addition, we use the
home purchase capital flows measure discussed in Section 3.5, instead of a more general gross
capital flow measure, to reduce measurement error introduced by different types of foreign
investors, such as firms or governments. By using home purchase capital flows in conjunction
with variation targeting home purchasing, we can estimate the more fundamental elasticities
of interest: the elasticity of price with respect to foreign capital, and the elasticity of supply
with respect to foreign capital. Taking those two elasticities together, we can construct a
new measure of the price elasticity of supply for local U.S. housing markets.
    The instrumental variable design requires satisfaction of both the relevance condition and
the exclusion restriction. The relevance condition in this context requires that more capital
flows into the U.S. housing market after other countries impose foreign buyer taxes. Formally,
E [ln(ECFit )(f racF Bi × P ostt )] = 0. The difference-in-differences results presented above


                                               20
show that the instrument has a positive correlation on the second stage outcome variable.
In addition, panel (a) in Figure 1 shows a clear positive correlation. Finally, we perform first
stage tests to show positive correlation with a high F-statistic.
   The exclusion restriction requires that foreign buyer tax policy changes only impact U.S.
house prices by diverting capital into the housing market, E [ it (f racF Bi × P ostt )] = 0. A
violation of this restriction would have foreign buyer taxes imposed on real estate purchases
impacting the U.S. housing market through another mechanism besides direct investment
in homes. Investment in the local economy more broadly, such as in local businesses, would
be one example. In the difference-in-differences section, we control for precisely this concern
using geographic trends, matching, and synthetic control estimators. Additionally, in Ap-
pendix C.1, we test whether investments related to growth in the tech industry violate the
exclusion restriction, and find no support for this alternative explanation.


6.1    Expected Capital Flows IV

Because we are no longer estimating a simple comparison in means in response to a blunt
tax policy, we introduce capital flows and populations from other foreign countries into our
analysis to better estimate housing market responses to foreign demand shocks. We now
include home purchase volume as our measure of capital flows from China, Canada, India,
Mexico, the U.K. and "other" foreign countries, provided by the NAR, denoted by capf lowct .
Figure 10 shows the contribution of these top 5 international client groups to the overall
international sales volume from 2010­2019. The darkest bar, at the bottom of the graph, is
the Chinese contribution to the total. Next is Canada, followed by India, Mexico and the
U.K. in that order. Finally, the bar is capped by the "all other foreign" contributions. The
figure shows the rapid expansion of Chinese investment in U.S. residential real estate relative
to other foreign buyers over this period, but also that Chinese investment alone makes up a
relatively small fraction of total foreign investment.
   We construct a measure of local expected capital flows (ECFit ) that "distributes" na-
tional home purchase capital flows (capf lowct , in billions) to zipcodes based on pre-existing
immigrant composition:



                                              21
                                                                       F Bpop2011
                                                                             ic
                              ECFit = 1000 ×            capf lowct ×                                       (6)
                                                  cC                   F Bpop2011
                                                                             c


        where

                                                        F Bpop2011
                                                              ic
                                             1=                                                            (7)
                                                    i   F Bpop2011
                                                              c


     and C = {Canada, China, India, Mexico, U.K., Other}, i denotes zipcode, and t denotes
     quarter. Intuitively, ECFit distributes capital coming from country c at time t, capf lowct ,
     to zipcode i based on how many people from country c ex-ante live in that zipcode relative to
     their national presence; in other words, ECFit is the expected capital flowing to a zipcode,
     should the national flows be distributed uniformly by population.19 We can also scale the
     per-capita term by the zipcode share of the relevant foreign-born population, f racF Bic ,
     to define an exposure measure. The exposure measure methods and results are discussed
     in Appendix C.2. We choose to focus on the per-capita ECFit measure due to its ease of
     interpretation.20
        Appendix Figure E3 shows the ECFit distributions for 2009q1 and 2015q1, based on
     the pre­existing composition of foreign­born residents, with panel (a) showing the raw dis-
     tribution, and panel (b) showing the logged distribution, which drops all zipcodes with
     no foreign-born residents.21 In 2009q1, the median zip code in a CBSA with at least one
     treated zipcode received $176,000 in ECFit , which translates to about one home purchased
     by a foreigner assuming a price at the national average at the time of about $173,000.22 This
19
   This intuition is similar to a Bartik instrument, in which the local industry shares are the population
   shares, and the national industry growth rate is national foreign capital flows. Identification uses
   differential exposure to a common shock, in our case the the foreign­buyer tax policy change. Identification
   relies on the initial population shares being exogenous to house price growth or quantity growth.
   Goldsmith-Pinkham, Sorkin and Swift (2019) suggest testing this by examining how much the initial shares
   are correlated with confounders in the pre­period. We test at length in the difference-in-differences
   empirics, for example by constructing a matched sample and synthetic controls.
20
   While the CoreLogic transactions data contains the buyers' names listed on deeds, these are frequently
   omitted or provide the name of a legal entity (e.g. LLC), which precludes us from directly estimating the
   fraction of foreign buyers based, say, on the last name of the buyer.
21
   Appendix Table D13 provides a numerical example of ECFit construction.
22
   According to Zillow's National All Homes Index, ZHVI.


                                                        22
     increased to $322,000 in 2015q1 and to $418,000 by 2018q1. The 99th percentile zip code
     in 2009q1 received $4.2m, $17.1m in 2015q1, and $20m in 2018q1. In short, our measure of
     expected capital flows ECFit shows there is wide variance in the amount of money flowing to
     individual locations, and that over time, every zipcode has seen an increase in local capital
     flows.
        Our multinational IV design proceeds as follows:




                           ln(ECFit ) =  + f racF Bi × P ostt + i + t + it                                     (8)

                           ln(HP Iit ) =  +  P ln(ECFit ) + i + t +             it                            (2P)
                                  dQit
                                       =  +  Q ln(ECFit ) + i + t +             it                            (2Q)
                                   Qi

        In the first stage,  measures the percent change in capital (in millions of dollars) in
     treated zipcodes in the post period. In the second stage,  measures the elasticity of house
                                                                                                         dQ
     prices or quantities with respect to an increase in expected local foreign capital.23                Q
                                                                                                              mea-
     sures the number of building permits in a county i at time t, relative to the same county's
     stock in 2011.24


     6.2      Expected Capital Flows IV Results

     Tables 7 and 8 present the results from the expected capital flows estimation strategy. We
     present the price results using both the panel of zipcodes and the panel of counties, while
     the quantity results use only the panel of counties due to data availability. All coefficients
     are estimated using commuting-zone time trends, as in our preferred specification from the
     differences-in-differences analysis. We show in Table 7, column (1), that ECFit , the expected
     foreign capital flowing to a zipcode, is strongly associated with the interaction of the foreign-
23
    is likely attenuated towards 0 since ECF is an imperfect measure of local FDI in the housing market.
24
                                                                                dHP Iit ECFit         dQit ECFit
   The elasticity of prices or quantities with respect to ECFit are as follows:                   and             .
                                                                                 HP Iit dECFit         Qit dECFit
                          dX
   ln(X ) approximates        well, so we use the log­log specification for HPI as it is well­estimated in the
                          X
   quarterly data, at a local level. By contrast, the data quality for annual housing stock from the ACS is
   very noisy. As such, we use quarterly permits data, dQit , normalized to pre­period stock, Qi .



                                                         23
born share of the population and an indicator for post-2012 time periods. This instrument
yields an F-statistic of 248, even after the inclusion of zipcode and quarter fixed effects. The
median zipcode has a fraction foreign-born of 2.2%, and the 99th percentile is 43% foreign-
born. The estimated semi-elasticity of 1.01 implies that moving between these two zipcodes
would increase expected capital flows by 41%. Column (2) shows the first-stage results with
the panel of counties for the price outcomes, with the point estimate decreasing from 1.01 to
0.98. Finally, the third column shows the first stage for the panel of counties for which we
have building permit data, and yields a first stage semi-elasticity of 1.1 with an F-statistic
of 80, again demonstrating a strong first stage, as supported by section 5.1.
   Table 8 reports our estimates of the elasticity of zipcode house prices and quantities
on the zipcode's ECFit , instrumented with the interaction of fraction foreign-born and the
post-2012 indicator. Column (1) shows that a 1% increase in ECFit raises house prices
by 0.27% when using a panel of zipcodes. This price increase represents the response to
capital without a concurrent change in quantity supplied, showing prices are quite sensitive
to foreign capital. Between 2011q4 and 2018q4, expected capital flows increased by 32%
for the median zipcode. This increase in foreign investment would thus translate into an
8.6% increase in house prices. The median zipcode experienced 42% house price growth over
our sample period, so increased foreign capital can explain roughly one-quarter of observed
house price growth.
   Column (3) in Table 8 reports the comparable quantity elasticity; a 1% increase in
expected capital flows to a county (holding prices fixed) increase quantities by 0.004%,
showing that quantities are significantly less responsive than prices in the short run. The
median county in our sample increased expected capital flows by 80%. With the median
county permitting 0.3% of its housing stock each quarter in prior to 2011q4, the influx of
foreign capital adds (80 × 0.004) = 0.32% to the baseline permitting rate, doubling it as
capital flows in. Taken together, these results imply that the U.S. housing market is highly
inelastic over the span of one decade.
   In order to mitigate concerns that house prices might rise faster in growing areas, and
those same areas would attract foreign investment, we control directly for income and pop-
ulation in the IV regressions in Appendix Tables D14 and D15. Controlling for population


                                              24
     and income does not seem to impact the baseline results in Tables 7 and 8, whose results are
     recorded in the first columns of the appendix tables. Limiting the sample to those zipcode-
     quarters available in the ACS and Census data that we use for population and income does
     not change the point estimate, and the elasticity only moderately increases when controlling
     for income and population.25
        As we show in the Appendix, this local instrumental variables approach is robust to
     excluding China from both numerator and denominator of ECFit . Appendix Table D17
     shows that the second stage results remain similar, at 0.27 to 0.55 for prices and 0.005 for
     quantities, showing that while Chinese capital flows might be the most newsworthy, the
     rest of the world's capital also flows into the U.S. market, increasing prices. The results
     are also robust to alternative approaches of constructing ECFit . For instance, in Appendix
     C.2, we weight the ECFit by the fraction foreign-born in the zipcode, analogous to the
     exposure treatment measure in ongoing work by Abramitsky et al. (2019) on the impact of
     immigration quotas on local economies.26 This alternative weighting scheme considers the
     overall number of people in a zip code, as a zip code with 100 foreign-born residents out of
     200 may attract capital differently than one with 100 out of 1,000. By scaling the ECFit , we
     find a price elasticity of 0.37 (see Appendix Table D19), and a quantity elasticity of 0.009,
     higher yet in line with our main results.
        In sum, in this section we constructed a generalized instrument for international capital
     flows based on ex­ante foreign population shares, and used the timing foreign-buyer taxes
     in non-U.S. countries to show that U.S. house prices and quantities respond to international
     capital flows. In the short run, house prices are much more responsive than the supply of
     new housing units.
25
   Population and median household income data from the 2011­2018 ACS at the zipcode level. 2010
   population at the zipcode level from the Decennial Census. 2009 population, and 2009­2010 median
   household income from the county level ACS as zipcode level data is not available prior to 2011.
26
   Abramitsky et al. (2019) interact the foreign-born population share from a given origin country with their
   measure of immigration quota bindingness, or intensity of treatment. In their setting, the intensity of the
   quota stringency will matter more in areas with high shares of foreign born populations. In our setting, the
   intensity of treatment is the expected capital flows to a zipcode.




                                                       25
7     Local House Price Elasticities of Supply
To estimate house price elasticities of supply across local housing markets, we use variation
in the demand for housing induced by international tax policy changes, which is plausibly
exogenous to local housing supply decision-makers, interacted with the tax policy change.
Intuitively, local housing markets will be differentially shocked by foreign demand, depending
on their pre­period foreign­born composition. This provides a unique demand shift for each
market, holding the initial supply of housing fixed.
                                       ln(P )               ln(Q)
    The ratio of the elasticities of price,   , and supply,        , with respect to capital
                                       ln(f )               ln(f )
flows from the previous section's second stage results can be used to construct the house
price elasticity of supply,  :



                                      ln(Q)
                                      ln(f )       ln(Q)
                                               =            =                              (9)
                                      ln(P )       ln(P )

                                      ln(f )

    While a national house price elasticity is informative, we care more about how localities
differ in their supply responses to price changes in the short run. In contrast to previous
work describing local house price elasticities through the lens of housing supply restrictions
either due to regulation or topography (Gyourko and Summers (2008); Saiz (2010)), we
exploit exogenous variation in demand for housing to estimate the slope of the supply curve.
While Baum-Snow and Han (2019) trace out the housing supply curve using Bartik local
labor market shocks, capturing an intensive-margin response as residents get wealthier, our
approach captures an extensive-margin response as foreign investment increases in the local
market. Additionally, we can construct an elasticity for any geography that has exposure
to the tax policy shock, i.e. any location with a nonzero share of foreign-born residents,
f racF Bi .
    To obtain local house price elasticities for each CBSA m,  M , we modify the instrumental
variables strategy discussed in Section 6. First, we use the county as the unit of observation,


                                               26
     as this is the granularity available for building permits, our measure of dQct , normalized
     to the 2011 stock, Qc . As above, we instrument for capital flows, ECFct , with fraction
     foreign­born interacted with the "post" indicator, f racF Bc × P ostt , and regress prices and
     quantities on instrumented capital flows:




                      ln(HP Ict ) =  P ln(ECFtc ) + M
                                                    P
                                                      ln(ECFtc ) × CBSAc +  ct                        (2PM)
                            dQct                   Q
                                 =  Q ln(ECFtc ) + M ln(ECFtc ) × CBSAc +  ct                        (2QM)
                             Qc

        This design allows us to estimate both a short­run national and local impact of capital
     flows on house prices and quantities:  k for the average national elasticity, M
                                                                                   k
                                                                                     for the CBSA­
     specific additional elasticity. To recover the distribution of price elasticities of supply, for
     each CBSA we then calculate

                                                               Q
                                                  M
                                                           Q + M
                                                      =                                                  (10)
                                                          P + P
        with  M providing the CBSA­specific house price elasticity of supply. We construct  M
     for the largest 100 CBSA's by population in 2010, mapped in Figure 11, a sample of which
     is displayed in Table 9.27 The most inelastic cities in our sample have price elasticities of
     supply of about 0.02, while the most elastic have an elasticity closer to 0.7.28
        The map in Figure 11 shows the geographic distribution of the elasticities, dividing the
     91 positive values into 4 quartiles. The most inelastic markets tend to be on the coasts,
     though Minneapolis­St. Paul, MN turns out to be one of our empirically most inelastic
     markets.29 The middle of the country remains relatively more elastic, though large areas of
     the Mid­Atlantic also seem elastically supplied over this period.
27
   The full table of elasticities by CBSA is provided in Appendix table D20.
28
   Based on our methodology, nine CBSAs have negative elasticity estimates: Greenville, NC, Columbus, GA,
   Detroit, MI, Deltona, FL, Wilmington, NC, Allentown, PA, Tallahassee, FL, Vineland, NJ, and Atlantic
   City, NJ. These CBSA's represent cities in decline and cities that overbuilt in the last housing cycle, for
   which either the estimated price elasticity with respect to foreign capital, or the estimated quantity
   elasticity is negative.
29
   Using an entirely different methodology, Aastveit, Albuquerque and Anundsen (2019) also unexpectedly
   find that Minneapolis is highly inelastic.



                                                          27
   Figure 12 provides the distribution of local house price elasticities, with the bulk of
short-run elasticities falling below 0.1. This figure shows that over a ten-year period, the
U.S. housing market appears to be highly inelastically supplied. That we observe such
inelastic markets is perhaps unsurprising given the historic sustained growth in house prices
over the duration of our sample, with the Case­Shiller national house price index rising over
40 percent from 2010q1 to 2018q4. This rise in prices has not been driven by an expansion of
credit or a large construction response that characterized the housing bubble of 2003­2007,
the last time we saw such sharp price increases.
   Taking the example of the Boston CBSA, which has an estimated elasticity of 0.03, we can
ground these elasticities in observed changes in prices and quantities. In 2010, the average
home transacted for $350,000, and there were 1.96 million units in the CBSA. This implies
that a 1% change in price of $3,500 would result in 0.03 × 0.01 × 1.96 million  590 more
housing units in response to this demand shock. At the CBSA level, house prices rose by
35%, implying an additional 20.6k units would be built between 2010 and 2018, holding the
supply schedule fixed. Over that same period, equilibrium supply increased by 64.5k units,
suggesting a supply response.
   To better understand the mechanics of our instrument, we plot observed and predicted
price and quantity changes for our sample of the 100 largest cities. Panels (c) and (d) in
Figure 13 plot the predicted and raw price and quantity changes from the data, respectively.
We observe that the slope for the predicted values (c) is much steeper than the slope for
the raw change (d). The intuition for this disparity is shown in panels (a) and (b). If we
use only a demand shock to the local housing market, a large change in P is associated
with a large change in Q; however, if we do not hold the supply of housing fixed, and fail
to isolate a pure demand shock, a large change in Q is associated with a small change in
P. Panels (c) and (d) then show that our IV design solves this simultaneity problem; large
changes in Q are now associated with large changes in P for the predicted panel, while large
changes in Q are associated with small changes in P for the raw equilibria. The average
elasticity for the predicted panel (weighted by city size) is lower than that for the raw
equilibria,  M                          M
             predicted = 0.16 < 0.59 =  raw , highlighting the need for an instrument to isolate

the demand shock, and the apparent success of our natural experiment in doing so.


                                              28
8     Conclusion
International capital flows have the potential to rapidly inflate the value of assets. While
some asset prices may not necessarily have meaningful implications for the real economy,
inflating the value of physical assets such as real estate can distort economic activity towards
home construction at the expense of other industries. In this paper, we first document the
effect of large capital outflows from China on the U.S. housing market, emphasizing that a
series of foreign-buyer taxes in other target housing markets may have made American cities
more attractive investments. Using a difference-in-differences design, we estimate that house
prices rose 8 to 15 percent more in zipcodes with a larger share of foreign-born Chinese
residents prior to the capital shock, and subsequently reversed following the onset of the
U.S.­China trade war.
    Estimating the housing market's sensitivity to global (and not just Chinese) capital more
generally, we find that a 1% increase in instrumented foreign capital raises house prices at the
zip code level by 0.27%, and housing supply at the county level by 0.004%. We then exploit
this demand shock to provide new estimates of the price elasticity of housing supply with
respect to global capital inflows into the U.S. housing market. We find that U.S. housing
markets seem relatively inelastic in the short run, with the average city having a house price
elasticity of supply near 0.11 over a ten year period.
    Our findings have three primary implications. First, we establish that foreign-buyer taxes,
generally imposed in response to Chinese investment, have spillovers in other non-targeted
markets; for instance, imposing foreign buyer taxes in Vancouver has affected Seattle's hous-
ing market. Next, we show that neighborhoods with a large share of foreign residents are
more susceptible to house price swings in response to foreign capital flows. From an afford-
ability standpoint, these neighborhoods are less accessible to existing U.S. residents as prices
rise due to foreign investment. However, we also show that the real economy responds to
these signals, with new construction adding additional housing stock in the same neighbor-
hoods. Finally, we document that the U.S. housing market is highly inelastic in the short
run, but heterogeneous across cities. Our results are consistent with the recent rise in house
prices nationally creating an affordability crisis, as cities are not rapidly adding stock in


                                              29
response.
   Whether this expansion of the housing stock in high-exposure neighborhoods is sustain-
able or not depends on how these homes are used and whether capital continues to flow
to the same destination zipcodes. The current elasticities are estimated under the assump-
tion that new units are occupied. On the other hand, if these homes are used only as
largely-unoccupied pied-à-terres, this usage will increase the housing costs of other residents
competing to live in the same neighborhood; in effect, this biases our estimates downwards.
This concern begs further exploration, as many cities such as Vancouver have levied vacancy
taxes on empty units due to concerns that new supply is not being used.
   On the price side, we show that when foreign capital dries up, prices differentially fall.
Continued declines in capital flows will lead to further differential declines in specific exposed
submarkets. The current Covid-19 crisis has largely frozen many U.S. housing markets, so
an open question is whether foreign capital will return. Furthermore, if the current foreign
investment in the U.S. market relocates abroad, local markets may be oversupplied with
investment properties, leading to more volatile price swings. Given the durability of housing,
the costs of overbuilding could be large and persistent (e.g. Glaeser and Gyourko (2005)).
While our analysis establishes the consequences of capital inflows on U.S. house prices, the
impact of capital outflows, if foreign nationals choose to repatriate capital or move their
funds elsewhere, remains an area of further research.




                                               30
References
Aastveit, Knut A., Bruno Albuquerque, and André Anundsen. 2019. "Time-varying
 housing supply elasticities and US housing cycles." Working Paper.

Abramitsky, Ran, Philipp Ager, Leah Boustan, Elior Cohen, and Casper W.
 Hansen. 2019. "The Effects of Immigration on the Economy: Lessons from the 1920's
 Border Closure." NBER Working Paper.

Agarwal, Sumit, Tien Foo Sing, and Long Wang. 2018. "Information Asymmetries and
 Learning in Commercial Real Estate Markets." National University of Singapore Working
 Paper.

Akbari, Ather H., and Yigit Aydede. 2012. "Effects of Immigration on House Prices in
 Canada." Applied Economics, 44(13): 1645­1658.

Altonji, Joseph G., and David Card. 1991. "The Effects of Immigration on the Labor
 Market Outcomes of Less-Skilled Natives." In Immigration, Trade, and the Labor Market.
 201­234. University of Chicago Press.

Badarinza, Cristian, and Tarun Ramadorai. 2018. "Home Away from Home? Foreign
 Demand and London House Prices." Journal of Financial Economics, 130(3): 532­555.

Badarinza, Cristian, Tarun Ramadorai, and Chihiro Shimizu. 2019. "Gravity, Coun-
 terparties, and Foreign Investment." National University of Singapore Working Paper.

Baum-Snow, Nathaniel, and Lu Han. 2019. "The Microgeography of Housing Supply."
 Working Paper.

Bayer, Patrick, Christopher Geissler, Kyle Mangum, and James W. Roberts.
 2011. "Speculators and Middlemen: The Strategy and Performance of Investors in the
 Housing Market." National Bureau of Economic Research working paper 16784.

Bernanke, Ben S. 2005. "The Global Saving Glut and the US Current Account Deficit."
 Sandrige Lecture, Virginia Association of Economics, Richmond, Virginia, Federal Reserve
 Board, March 2005.

Card, David. 2001. "Immigrant Inflows, Native Outflows, and the Local Labor Market
 Impacts of Higher Immigration." Journal of Labor Economics, 19(1): 22­64.

Card, David, and John DiNardo. 2000. "Do Immigrant Inflows Lead to Native Out-
 flows?" American Economic Review, 90(2): 360­367.

Chinco, Alex, and Christopher Mayer. 2015. "Misinformed Speculators and Mispricing
 in the Housing Market." The Review of Financial Studies, 29(2): 486­522.

Claessens, Stijn. 2014. An Overview of Macroprudential Policy Tools. International Mon-
  etary Fund.



                                           31
Cosman, Jacon, Tom Davidoff, and Joe Williams. 2018. "Housing Appreciation and
 Marginal Land Supply in Monocentric Cities with Topography." Working Paper.

Cvijanovic, Dragana, and Christophe Spaenjers. 2018. "`We'll Always Have Paris':
 Out-of-Country Buyers in the Housing Market." Kenan Institute of Private Enterprise
 Research Paper 18-25.

DeFusco, Anthony, Wenjie Ding, Fernando Ferreira, and Joseph Gyourko. 2018.
 "The Role of Price Spillovers in the American Housing Boom." Journal of Urban Eco-
 nomics, 108: 72­84.

Ding, Xiang, Teresa C. Fort, Stephen J. Redding, and Peter K. Schott. 2019.
 "Structural Change Within Versus Across firms: Evidence from the United States." Work-
 ing Paper.

Favilukis, Jack, David Kohn, Sydney C. Ludvigson, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh.
  2012. "International Capital Flows and House Prices: Theory and Evidence." In Housing
  and the Financial Crisis. 235­299. University of Chicago Press.

Favilukis, Jack Y., and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh. 2017. "Out-Of-Town Home Buyers
  and City Welfare." Columbia University Working Paper.

Gergen, Mark P. 2017. "A Securities Tax and the Problems of Taxing Global Capital."
 University of California-Berkeley Law School Working Paper.

Glaeser, Edward L., and Joseph Gyourko. 2005. "Urban Decline and Durable Housing."
 Journal of Political Economy, 113(2): 345­375.

Goldsmith-Pinkham, Paul, Isaac Sorkin, and Henry Swift. 2019. "Bartik Instru-
 ments: What, When, Why and How."

Gyourko, Joseph, Albert Saiz, and Anita Summers. 2008. "A New Measure of the
 Local Regulatory Environment for Housing Markets: The Wharton Residential Land Use
 Regulatory Index." Urban Studies, 45(3): 693­729.

Gyourko, Joseph, Jonathan Hartley, and Jacob Krimmel. 2019. "the Local Residen-
 tial Land Use Regulatory Environment Across U.S. Housing Markets: Evidence from a
 New Wharton Index." NBER Working Paper, , (26573).

Hundtofte, Sean, and Ville Rantala. 2018. "Anonymous Capital Flows and U.S. Housing
 Markets." University of Miami Business School Research Paper, , (18-3).

Justiniano, Alejandro, Giorgio E. Primiceri, and Andrea Tambalotti. 2014. "The
  Effects of the Saving and Banking Glut on the US economy." Journal of International
  Economics, 92: S52­S67.

Lambie-Hanson, Lauren, Wenli Li, and Michael Slonkonsky. 2019. "Leaving House-
  holds Behind: Institutional Investors and the U.S. Housing Recovery." Federal Reserve
  Bank of Philadelphia Working Paper 19-01.

                                          32
Landvoigt, Tim, Monika Piazzesi, and Martin Schneider. 2015. "The Housing Mar-
  ket(s) of San Diego." American Economic Review, 105(4): 1371­1407.

Li, Zhimin, Leslie S. Shen, and Calvin Zhang. 2019. "Capital Flows, House Prices,
  and the Real Economy: A `China Shock' in the US Real Estate Market." Working Paper.

Pavlov, Andrey, and Tsur Somerville. 2016. "Immigration and Real Estate Returns."
 University of British Columbia Working Paper.

Sá, Filipa. 2014. "Immigration and House Prices in the UK." The Economic Journal,
  125(587): 1393­1424.

Sá, Filipa. 2016. "The Effect of Foreign Investors on Local Housing Markets: Evidence
  from the UK."

Saiz, Albert. 2003. "Room in the Kitchen for the Melting Pot: Immigration and Rental
  Prices." Review of Economics and Statistics, 85(3): 502­521.

Saiz, Albert. 2007. "Immigration and Housing Rents in American Cities." Journal of Urban
  Economics, 61(2): 345­371.

Saiz, Albert. 2010. "The Geographic Determinants of Housing Supply." The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 125(3): 1253­1296.

Saiz, Albert, and Susan Wachter. 2011. "Immigration and the Neighborhood." American
  Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 3(2): 169­88.




                                          33
Tables

                                  Table 1: Covariate Balance

         Variable                           FBC=0          FBC=1          Difference
         HPI                                   1.976          1.888          -0.074
                                             (1.499)        (0.947)         (0.108)
         HPI growth, 1 Year                    0.041         0.039            0.002
                                             (0.473)        (0.379)         (0.015)
         HPI growth, 5 Years                   0.307         0.359            0.057
                                             (0.861)        (0.824)         (0.058)
         Lagged HPI                            1.957          1.894          -0.052
                                             (1.412)        (0.924)         (0.107)
         Sales                               47.533         54.946            3.806
                                            (63.620)       (49.402)         (3.914)
         Lagged Sales                        50.086         55.463            1.903
                                            (64.917)       (49.641)         (4.042)
         Permits: Single Family Units      1,403.915      2,012.000         478.352
                                          (3,445.920)    (3,527.558)      (672.553)
         Permits: All Units                2,220.648      5,550.035      3,123.131**
                                          (5,150.242)    (6,479.830)     (1,364.078)
         Establishments                     390.730       1,055.530      638.459***
                                           (464.619)      (750.433)        (51.042)
         Estab. growth, 1 year                -0.001         0.008         0.008***
                                             (0.075)        (0.037)         (0.002)
         Estab. growth, 5 years               -0.010         0.027         0.034***
                                             (0.178)        (0.104)         (0.009)
         Employment                        6,059.159     17,673.475     11,180.679***
                                          (9,004.811)   (17,567.438)     (1,428.239)
         Emp. growth, 1 year                   0.003         0.009            0.002
                                             (0.162)        (0.201)         (0.004)
         Emp. growth, 5 years                 -0.005         -0.010          -0.007
                                             (0.378)        (0.196)         (0.016)
         Annual Payroll (1000s)             241.617       1,098.492      838.187***
                                           (546.318)     (1,560.161)      (150.819)
         2010 Population                  16,280.107     34,627.074     17,224.406***
                                         (15,861.714)   (21,414.273)     (1,680.279)
         2011 Population                  16,177.837     34,163.547     16,872.781***
                                         (15,766.526)   (21,106.248)     (1,612.878)
         2011 Median Income               55,501.430     80,097.359     23,285.756***
                                         (21,700.305)   (34,987.082)     (4,515.230)
      Notes: This table shows pre-period balance for housing and labor market character-
     istics. F BCi = 1 F BCpop
                            popi
                                 i
                                    99th percentile for zipcode i. Data is zipcode level,
     excepting permits data, which is at the county level. Data at the quarterly level,
     excepting annual employment, establishment, and payroll data. Data through 2011q3
     for the housing and permit data, and through 2012 for the annual data. Standard er-
     rors in parentheses, clustered by MSA. Significance: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.


                                             34
                            Table 2: Differences-in-Differences Results

                               (1)                   (2)         (3)         (4)
                              HPI                   HPI         HPI         HPI
             Post=1 X FBC=1 0.118                 0.167       0.0781      0.0950
                            (0.0693)              (0.0316)    (0.0435)    (0.0385)
               2
             R               0.869                  0.899       0.889       0.891
             Observations    86768                 428903      163355      176224
                                                     Fixed Effects
             Quarter                     X           X          X             X
             Zip                         X           X          X             X
             State X Quarter                         X
             MSA X Quarter                                      X
             Zone X Quarter                                                   X
 Notes: This table shows the coefficient  from hpiit =  + F BCi × P ostt + i + t + it . FBC=1 defined
as F BCi = 1 F BCpop
                 popi
                      i
                         99th percentile for zipcode i. All data at the zipcode by quarter level. Standard
errors in parentheses, clustered by quarter, or by geography of time trend. Significance: *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1.

                          Table 3: Binned Dose Response Results, FBC

                                                 (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)
                                                HPI         HPI         HPI          HPI
         Post = 1 X 50th-90th ptile            0.0377     0.0411       0.0393       0.0223
                                              (0.0372)    (0.0143)    (0.0310)     (0.0317)

         Post = 1 X 90th-95th ptile           -0.00285 0.0762          0.0379       0.0246
                                              (0.0750) (0.0498)       (0.0557)     (0.0536)

         Post = 1 X 95th-99th ptile            0.0555      0.139       0.0771       0.0644
                                              (0.0641)    (0.0590)    (0.0665)     (0.0572)

         Post = 1 X Above 99th ptile           0.200      0.234        0.131        0.130
                                              (0.0972)    (0.0462)    (0.0686)     (0.0515)
         R2                                     0.869       0.899       0.889        0.891
         Observations                           86768      428877      163355       176224
                                                             Fixed Effects
         Quarter                                 X           X          X             X
         Zip                                     X           X          X             X
         State X Quarter                                     X
         MSA X Quarter                                                  X
         Zone X Quarter                                                               X
 Notes: This table shows the coefficients k from hpiit =  + k k F BCbinik × P ostt + i + t + it . All
data at the zipcode by quarter level. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered by quarter, or by geography
of time trend. Significance: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.


                                                     35
              Table 4: Differences-in-Differences Results, by house price quintile

                                                   (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)
                                                   HPI         HPI         HPI          HPI
        Post = 1 X FBC X quintile 1-4           -0.262       -0.00115     0.0240       0.0102
                                                (0.0932)     (0.0711)    (0.0775)     (0.0740)

        Post = 1 X FBC X quintile 5              0.140       0.178       0.0819        0.101
                                                (0.0710)     (0.0369)    (0.0456)     (0.0405)
        R2                                       0.867         0.899       0.889        0.890
        Observations                             86779        428879      163331       176178
                                                                Fixed Effects
        Quarter                                     X           X          X             X
        Zip                                         X           X          X             X
        State X Quarter                                         X
        MSA X Quarter                                                      X
        Zone X Quarter                                                                   X
 Notes: This table shows the coefficient  from hpiit =  + F BCquinti × P ostt + i + t + it . All data at
the zipcode by quarter level. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered by quarter, or by geography of time
trend. Significance: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                      Table 5: Differences-in-Differences, Supply Response

                                      (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)
                                  New Units      New Units      New Units       New Units
          Post=1 X FBC=1           1.535          2.210          2.111           1.850
                                   (0.530)        (0.492)        (0.573)         (0.448)
          R2                        0.715          0.773          0.813           0.830
          Observations              21164          18425           7731            7262
                                                        Fixed Effects
          Quarter                      X                X           X                X
          County                       X                X           X                X
          State X Quarter                               X
          MSA X Quarter                                             X
          Zone X Quarter                                                             X
 Notes: This table shows the coefficient  from N ewU nitsit = +F BCi ×P ostt +i +t +it . N ewU nitsit =
        t      P ermitsi,
100 ×  =2011               All data at the county by quarter level. F BCi = 1 F BCpop
                                                                                 popi
                                                                                      i
                                                                                         95th percentile for
               Stocki,2011
county i. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered by quarter, or by geography of time trend. Significance:
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                    36
                                     Table 6: Matching Results

                                        (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)
               Post=1 X FBC=1          0.168       0.122      0.119     0.0817
                                      (0.127)    (0.0902)    (0.104)    (0.108)
               R2                      0.745      0.772       0.773      0.774
               Observations            11550      11550       11550      11550
                                                    Fixed Effects
               Quarter                   X           X         X           X
               Zip                       X           X         X           X
               State X Quarter                       X
               MSA X Quarter                                   X
               Zone X Quarter                                              X
 Notes: This table shows the coefficient  from hpiit =  + F BCi × P ostt + i + t + it , using the matched
sample. All data at the zipcode by quarter level. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered by quarter, or
by geography of time trend. Significance: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                         Table 7: Expected Capital Flow IV: First Stage

                                          (1)           (2)        (3)
                                      ln(ECFit )    ln(ECFit ) ln(ECFit )
                Post X Frac. FB        1.007         0.983      1.097
                                       (0.0639)      (0.0541)    (0.123)
                R2                       0.989        0.999       0.997
                F                        248.0        330.4       80.03
                Observations            787303        92438       26398
                                                   Fixed Effects
                Zip                        X
                Quarter                    X             X             X
                County                                   X             X
                Zone X Quarter             X             X             X
 Notes: This table shows the first stage results from ln(ECFit ) =  + f rac_F Bi × P ostt + i + t + it .
All data mean collapsed at the quarter level. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered by geography.
Significance: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                   37
                        Table 8: Expected Capital Flow IV: Second Stage

                                           (1)          (2)           (3)
                                                                     dQit
                                        ln(HPI)      ln(HPI)          Qit
                  ln(ECFit )            0.274        0.542       0.00423
                                        (0.0895)     (0.0856)    (0.000920)
                  Root MSE                1.454        0.128      0.00174
                  Observations           787303       92438        26398
                                                   Fixed Effects
                  Zip                       X
                  Quarter                   X             X           X
                  County                                  X           X
                  Zone X Quarter            X             X           X
 Notes:The table shows the second stage results from Yit =  +  ln(ECFit ) + i + t + it , where Yit is either
ln(hpiit ) or dQ
               Qit , and i is either zipcode or county. All data mean collapsed at the quarter level. Standard
                 it


errors in parentheses, clustered by quarter, or by geography of time trend. Significance: *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                            Table 9: Most Inelastic and Elastic CBSA's

                                         Top 5 Most Inelastic
                                  Providence, RI                       0.02
                                  San Francisco, CA                    0.03
                                  Boston, MA                           0.03
                                  Minneapolis ­ St. Paul, MN           0.03
                                  Sacramento, CA                       0.03
                                          Top 5 Most Elastic
                                  Salisbury, MD                0.69
                                  Ocala, FL                    0.60
                                  Lakeland, FL                 0.46
                                  Virginia Beach - Norfolk, VA 0.35
                                  Trenton, NJ                  0.27
Note: This table shows 10 of the 100 price elasticities of supply, for the most inelastic and
elastic CBSA's in the country.




                                                     38
Figures

                                                      Figure 1: International Capital Flight and U.S. House Prices




                                                                                                                                         Foreign Purchase $ Volume, normalized to 2012
            200




                                                                                                                                                                                 2.5
  Capital Flow ( Billions)




                                                                                                                                                                        2
                  100




                                                                                                                                                              1.5
    0




                                                                                                                                            .5        1
            -100




                     2009q3                     2011q3                 2013q3                  2015q3                 2017q3                                                             2009   2010   2011   2012    2013     2014   2015     2016    2017   2018   2019
                                                                       Quarter                                                                                                                                                 year
                             Data taken from China's State Administration of Foreign Exchange, time series of balance of payments
                             Capital flows defined as the quarterly sum of the following:                                                                                                                            Chinese                 All Foreign
                             2.2.1.2. Portfolio Investment, 2.2.1.4. Other Investment, and 3. Net errors and omissions




                                         (a) Net Capital Flows from China                                                                                                                                 (b) Sales Volume, NAR

Source: Capital outflows from SAFE, time series of balance of payments, and are defined as the quarterly
sum of: 2.2.1.2. Portfolio Investment, 2.2.1.4. Other Investment, and 3. Net errors and omissions. Trans-
action volume from annual editions of the National Association of Realtors' (NAR) "Profile of International
Activity in U.S. Residential Real Estate."




                                                                                                                                    39
                                                                        Figure 2: International House Prices
                 160




                                                                                                                                             200
                                           First             Second                                     Third                                                Singapore Tax            Hong Kong                     Hong Kong
                                                                                                                                                                                       First Tax                    Second Tax
                                           Tax                Tax                                       Tax




                                                                                                                                             180
                         150
       HPI, 3 quarter MA




                                                                                                                                  HPI, 3 quarter MA
                                                                                                                                               160
              140




                                                                                                                                     140     120
                 130




                                                                                                                                             100
                 120




                                 2010q3             2012q3            2014q3              2016q3          2018q3                                             2010q3           2012q3           2014q3         2016q3         2018q3
                                                                     Quarter                                                                                                                   dateq



                                                        (a) Singapore                                                                                                            (b) Hong Kong
                 160




                                                                                                                                             180
                                Singapore Tax                            First             Second                                                            Singapore Tax                                First            Second
                                                                       VIC Tax             VIC Tax                                                                                                      NSW Tax           NSW Tax

                                                                                                                                                       160
                                                                                                                                     HPI, 3 quarter MA
                       140
       HPI, 3 quarter MA




                                                                                                                                             140
       120




                                                                                                                                  120        100




                                                                                                                                                             2010q3           2012q3           2014q3         2016q3         2018q3
                 100




                                                                                                                                                                                              Quarter
                                 2010q3             2012q3            2014q3           2016q3           2018q3
                                                                     Quarter                                                                                                      Sydney HPI               Canberra HPI



                                                   (c) Victoria, Australia                                                                                            (d) New South Wales, Australia
                                                                                                                                             7000




                                          Singapore Tax                          First      Second
                                                                                                         300




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 250
                 4000




                                                                                 BC Tax     BC Tax                                                                    Singapore Tax                 ON Tax
                                                                                                                                                     6000
                         3500
        Sales, 12 month MA




                                                                                                                                    Sales, 12 month MA
                                                                                                                       250




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               200
                                                                                                         HPI, 12 month MA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 HPI, 12 month MA
                                                                                                                                            5000
                3000




                                                                                                         200




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 150
       2500




                                                                                                                                  4000
                 2000




                                                                                                                                             3000
                                                                                                         150




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 100




                        2010m1            2012m1          2014m1     2016m1            2018m1        2020m1                                         2010m1            2012m1          2014m1     2016m1      2018m1       2020m1
                                                                datem                                                                                                                       datem

                                                             Sales               HPI                                                                                           Sales Change               HPI Change



                                           (e) British Columbia, Canada                                                                                                        (f) Ontario, Canada

Source: For Singapore, data from data.gov.sg for private residential property price index. For Hong
Kong, data from the Bank for International Settlements via St. Louis Fred, source code Q:HK:R:628, real
residential property prices. For Australia, data from Australian Bureau of Statistics, residential property
price indexes by city. For Canada, data from Teranet and National Bank of Canada, residential property
price indexes by city.




                                                                                                                             40
                              Figure 3: Map of Tax Policy Changes




Notes: Singapore: 10% in 2011m12, 15% in 2013m1, 20% in 2018m7; Australia: 3 % in 2015m6 (VIC),
4% in 2016m6 (NSW), 7% in 2016m7 (VIC), 8% in 2017m7; Canada: 15% in 2016m8 (BC), 15% in
2017m4 (ON), 20% in 2018m2; New Zealand: banned all non-resident foreigners from purchasing existing
SFHs, may still purchase up to 60% of new construction multiunit condos, 2018m8. Other policies include
taxes on vacant units, often at lower rates. The United Kingdom and Malaysia are currently considering
imposing similar policies.




                                                   41
                  Figure 4: Geographic Spread of Treated Zips and Counties




                                              (a) Zip Codes




                                              (b) Counties

Note: Panel (a) plots the FBC=1 zipcodes. Panel (b) plots the fraction foreign-born Chinese by county,
breakpoints correspond to the 50th , 75th and 95th percentiles. Treated counties shaded in red.



                                                   42
                        Figure 5: Differences-in-Differences Event Study, 2009-2018




                                                                                  216
   3.5




                                                                                                                                                      .6
   3




                                                                           Capital Outflow
                                                                                      108




                                                                                                                                                         .3
  2.5
  HPI




                                                                                                                                                      HPI
                                                                                  -54 -27 0
   2




                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                      -.15
   1.5




     2009q1       2011q3        2014q1            2016q3     2019q1                     2009q1        2011q3           2014q1          2016q3     2019q1
                                Quarter                                                                                Quarter

                                 Control Zips                                                                  Capital flows out of China
                                 Treatment zips                                                                DiD estimator: Treatment-Control



                           (a) Raw Data                                                                    (b) DiD Estimator

Note: Panel (b) uses regression estimates from the baseline DiD, adding city-level trends, as in column
(4) of the DiD results: hpiit = F BCi × qtrt + i + t + M SAi × t + it .




              Figure 6: Differences-in-Differences Event Study, by House Price Quintile
                     1
                     .5
                  HPI
                     0
                     -.5




                        2009q1                    2011q3              2014q1                           2016q3                        2019q1
                                                                      Quarter

                                                  Control Zips                                   Treated Price Q1,2,3,4
                                                  Treated Price Q5

 Note: The figure uses regression estimates from the price qauntile DiD, adding city-level trends, as in
 column (4) of the DiD results: hpiit = F BCi × qtrt + i + t + M SAi × t + it .




                                                                      43
                                         Figure 7: Matching Results: Event Study




                                                                                 216
   3.5




                                                                                                                                                     .9
   3




                                                                                                                                                     Capital Outflow
                                                                                 108




                                                                                                                                                             .45
   2.5
  HPI




                                                                              HPI
   2




                                                                                   -18 0
                                                                                 -36




                                                                                                                                                     0
   1.5




                                                                                                                                                     -.15
     2009q1   2011q3               2014q1            2016q3     2019q1                     2009q1    2011q3           2014q1           2016q3    2019q1
                                    Quarter                                                                           Quarter

                                    Control Zips                                                              Capital flows out of China
                                    Treatment zips                                                            DiD estimator: Treatment-Control



                              (a) Raw Data                                                                (b) DiD Estimator

Note: Panel (b) uses regression estimates from the baseline DiD, adding city-level trends, as in column
(4) of the matching results: hpiit = F BCi × qtrt + i + t + M SAi × t + it .




                      Figure 8: Event Study: Seattle's Housing Market 2009-2019
                    200




                                                                                                                                   2
                        100




                                                                                                                                   1.5
               $ Billions




                                                                                                                                       HPI
                    0




                                                                                                                                   1
                    -100




                                                                                                                                   .5




                                 2009m12         2011m12       2013m12 2015m12                      2017m12          2019m12
                                                                   Quarter

                                                     Net Capital Outflows, (L)                        FBC, (R)
                                                     Border, (R)                                      Other, (R)


 Note: Seattle's monthly Zillows Home Value Index, by zipcode foreign-born status.




                                                                         44
   1.8   Figure 9: Differences-in-Differences Event Study, 2009-2019, Treatment Reversal




                                                                                                             200




                                                                                                                                                                                      .15
   1.6




                                                                                                       Capital Outflow




                                                                                                                                                                                      .1
                                                                                                                  100
  HPI




                                                                                                                                                                                       HPI
  1.4




                                                                                                                                                                                      .05
                                                                                                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                      0
   1.2




                                                                                                                                                                                      -.05
                                                                                                             -100
   1




         2009q3         2012q1                          2014q3           2017q1       2019q3                             2009q3      2012q1       2014q3         2017q1      2019q3
                                                       Quarter                                                                                    Quarter

                                                        Control Zips                                                                      Capital flows out of China
                                                        Treatment zips                                                                    DiD estimator: Treatment-Control



                                                  (a) Raw Data                                                                           (b) DiD Estimator

Note: Panel (b) uses regression estimates from the baseline DiD, adding city-level trends, as in column
(4) of the DiD results: hpiit = F BCi × qtrt + i + t + Czonei × t + it . hpiit constructed using Zillow's
Home Value Index, averaged quarterly.



                                                       Figure 10: Expected Capital Flow Index Inputs
                                150
                  Housing Purchases, $ Billions
                     50         0 100




                                                     2010     2011        2012    2013         2014        2015               2016     2017     2018        2019

                                                                             China                          Canada                             India
                                                                             Mexico                         UK                                 Other

 Source: Transaction volume by country from NAR's annual "Profile of International Activity in U.S.
 Residential Real Estate." Capital outflows from SAFE, time series of balance of payments, and are defined
 as the quarterly sum of: 2.2.1.2. Portfolio Investment, 2.2.1.4. Other Investment, and 3. Net errors and
 omissions.




                                                                                                45
             Figure 11: Geographic Distribution of Local House Price Elasticities




   0.10 - 0.69
   0.07 - 0.10
   0.04 - 0.07
   0.00 - 0.04
   -10.77 - 0.00
   No data

Note: This map shows the distribution of house price elasticities. Blue CBSA's are the most observably
inelastic (top quartile), followed by navy, then purple, and finally the red are the most elastic qaurtile
of CBSA elasticities. Yellow CBSA's denote negative elasticities. Gray CBSA's are those we see in the
data but which are not in the top 100 CBSA's by population. White regions have no data in any of our
samples.




                                                   46
                                               Figure 12: Distribution of Local House Price Elasticities
 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65
 0




                                         -.2      -.1      0      .1      .2        .3     .4      .5
                                                                Price Elasticity of Supply

Note: This histogram shows the distribution of house price elasticities. Red bars denote negative elastici-
ties.




                                                                          47
                                                              Figure 13: Endogeneity Issues in Estimating House Price Elasticities


                                                           (a) Isolating Demand Response                                                                                        (b) Supply and Demand Response




                                                           (c) Predicted Equilibria Changes                                                                                     (d) Observed Equilibria Changes
   -10 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100110120130140




                                                                                                                        -10 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100110120130140
                predicted % change HPI




                                                                                                     6.33                                                                                         1.7
                                                                                                                                       raw % change HPI




                                                                                                     (1.46)                                                                                      (.51)




                                                      -2      0     2            4         6           8      10                                                           -2    0   2   4   6     8    10
                                                                        predicted % change # units                                                                                            raw % change # units




Note: This figure highlights the endogeneity problem of using observed house price and quantity changes
to estimate local house price elasticity of supply. Panel (a) shows the ideal experiment, an exogenous
demand shifter. Panel (b) shows the problem in extrapolating the slope from observational data; drawing
a line between points A and C creates a falsely flatter supply curve. The left hand scatter in panel (c)
shows the top 91 CBSA's price and quantities estimated using our IV design strategy, while the right hand
side scatter shows the raw data, without isolating the demand shifter from the supply shifter.




                                                                                                                   48
A     Tax Policy Appendix
We have identified 10 policy events across five countries that make the U.S. housing market
relatively cheaper to invest in from 2011 to 2018, as summarized in Figure 3. In response to
sharply rising house prices, Singapore initiated the first tax on foreign buyers in December
2011. All foreigners and entities (buyers who are not individuals) were charged a 10%
Additional Buyer's Stamp Duty (ABSD) on top of the Buyer's Stamp Duty levied on all real
estate purchases. In January 2013, Singapore raised the ABSD to 15% for foreigners and
entities, and introduced a 5% ABSD of 5% on Singapore Permanent Residents. The ABSD
increased again in July 2018 to 20% for foreigners, 25% for entities, and 30% for housing
developers.
    Hong Kong introduced a 15% buyer stamp duty (BSD) for non-residents in October 2012.
Under the policy, any buyer who was not a Hong Kong permanent resident paid the tax on
top of their purchase price. The policy extended to include companies buying properties,
regardless of their local or nonlocal status. In addition to the purchase tax, Hong Kong
raised the special transactions tax, which is levied on housing sales that occur within three
years of initial purchase, from 10% to 20% to discourage speculation in the housing market.
In November 2016, the Hong Kong government raised the stamp duty for all non first-time
residential property buyers, applicable to both residents and non-residents, from 8.5% to
15%. This effectively raised the taxes paid by foreign parties from 23.5% to 30%.
    The state of Victoria, Australia (home to Melbourne) introduced the Foreign Purchaser
Additional Duty, applicable to foreign persons, corporations, and trusts purchasing residen-
tial property (or non-residential property with the intent of conversion) in June 2015. An
additional duty at 3% of the dutiable value (the higher of the price paid for the property or
the market value) was imposed from June 2015 to July 2016. It was subsequently raised to
7% in July 2016. In June 2016, the state of New South Wales, Australia (home to Sydney)
introduced a 4% surcharge purchaser duty (SPD) applicable to residential real estate pur-
chases by foreign persons. The state raised the SPD to 8% in July 2017. All duties are paid
on top of the original duties paid by any purchaser of residential real estate.
    The provincial government of British Columbia, Canada (home to Vancouver) passed
Bill 28 in August 2016, which introduced a foreign-buyer tax, as well as a vacancy tax to
specific communities in B.C. From August 2016 until February 2018, foreign buyers in the
Greater Vancouver Regional District paid an additional 15% of the fair market value in tax.
In February 2018, the tax amount increased to 20% of the fair market value and expanded
geographically. At the same time, the city of Vancouver initiated a vacant homes tax of 1%
of the assessed taxable value on residences not occupied for at least 6 months of the year.


                                             49
    Ontario, Canada's provincial government implemented the Non-Resident Speculation
Tax (NRST) in April 2017. As per NRST, foreign entities pay a 15% tax on the residential
property value for any property located in the Greater Golden Horseshoe Region of Ontario,
which covers approximately 1/5th of the population of Canada (and includes Toronto).
    Most dramatically, in August 2018, New Zealand barred non-residents from purchasing
real estate, excepting Singaporeans and Australians due to existing trade agreements. A
number of national and local governments continue to tighten restrictions for foreign buy-
ers. In October 2018, Theresa May announced plans to implement a foreign buyer tax in
the United Kingdom, and Governor Andrew Cuomo has included a pied-a-tierre tax in his
proposed 2019 New York State budget. In July 2018, the Chief Executive of Hong Kong
suggested she was open to further policies aimed at limiting non-resident housing purchases.
    Figure 2 documents the effects of these foreign-buyer taxes on their respective local
markets; all graphs plot house price indexes, and include sales volume when available. For
instance, Figure 2d displays one of the more recent policy interventions in British Columbia,
and the results in the local housing market. After the enactment of the taxes, the 12-month
sales volume moving average fell by 54% between its peak in February 2016 and March 2019.
Although the tax has had little effect on the level of Vancouver housing prices, with the
12-month moving average falling only 1%, house price growth has effectively ceased.


B     Difference-in-differences Appendix
B.1     Synthetic Control
In addition to vigorous temporal and geographic controls and the within-city, donut match-
ing estimator, we construct a synthetic control for each treated zipcode. The synthetic
control method builds a synthetic control zipcode for each treated zipcode, using pre-period
demographic, economics and housing market characteristics. This synthetic control need not
map to a real zipcode, and is instead a weighted combination of true zipcodes best fitting to
the relevant treated zipcode. We construct our synthetic controls in a series of four steps.
First, we limit the sample of zipcodes used in control construction to those within the MSA
of the treated zipcode of interest. Next, we restrict to zipcodes with full histories, using data
from 2005q1-2011q4. Third, we restrict the potential control sample to those with fraction
FBC below the 75th percentile, to ensure we do not select all control zips from those around
the treatment threshold. Finally, for each zipcode we generate the synthetic control using
the restricted sample.
    Table D3 shows the covariate balance using the synthetic control method. While many


                                               50
covariates still show statistically significant differences in real economic outcomes such as
establishments and population, the magnitudes are smaller than in table 1. Once we have
our synthetic control sample, we again run specification 4. We cannot include any geographic
trends as these controls do not have a geography, although they are constructed within a
MSA.
    The results of our synthetic control estimation are shown in table D4. Our preferred
specification in column (2) includes quarter fixed effects, and show that house prices in high
foreign-born Chinese share zipcodes rise by 10.8pp more than synthetic control zipcodes,
consistent with our primary differences-in-differences results and our matching results.


B.2     Zillow Rent and House Price Data
We replicate the difference­in­differences design for the house price analysis using the Zillow
Home Valuation Index and the Zillow rent Index. Figure E1 shows the raw price and
rent paths for the ZHVI and ZRI for treated and control zipcodes from 2009m1 for ZHVI
and 2011m1 for ZRI. Both series show much higher gains in FBC zipcodes than in control
zipcodes. Additionally, we plot the ZHVI/ZRI ratio indexed to 1 in 2011q4. This price-rent
ratio falls for control zipcodes over 2012, eventually recovering close to 1 by 2018, while it
increases for the treated zipcode. These results suggest that purchasers were more optimistic
about future house price growth in treated zipcodes than in control zipcodes; prices growing
faster than rents reflect expectations of future growth, rather than any current change in the
local economic environment, which would also drive up rents.
    Our preferred specification in column (4) of Tables D5 and D6 control for commuting­
zone by time trends. Table D5 shows that average quarterly house values are 3pp higher
in the post­period in FBC zipcodes than in control zipcodes. This lower point estimate is
likely due to different coverage samples; the CoreLogic data covers the entire US, while the
Zillow data favors more urban areas that are more dense and hence, where neighborhoods
are more substitutable for foreign homebuyers. Table D6 shows that rents have not been
as responsive as house prices, with rents increasing 1.7pp more per month in FBC zipcodes
relative to control zipcodes in the post period. Finally, Table D7 shows how the price-
rent, or ZHVI/ZRI, ratio responds to the tax policy in zipcodes with high foreign-born
Chinese zipcodes. These treated zipcodes see their price-rent ratio increase by 1.14 more
than their peers, on average. This represents a significant increase in the ratio, up from 1 in
2011q4, where we normalize it, though not necessarily a doubling as the ratio is falling for
the control group over this time period. Regardless, the divergence in the price-rent ratios
between treated and control groups reflects optimism about price growth that is not coupled


                                              51
     with improvements in fundamentals, such as employment, which would concurrently drive
     rent growth.


     B.3     Other Economic Outcomes
     B.3.1   Employment, Establishment Counts, Payroll

     Thus far, the paper has established large price impacts resulting from the influx of foreign
     capital. We have not addressed whether these price impacts reflect large enough local invest-
     ments to spill over into the real economy; there are a variety of other economic outcomes tied
     to the large inflows of international capital. The price results show that house prices rose on
     average by 8pp in FBC zipcodes in the post period, and the ECF results show that a 1% in-
     crease in ECF increases house prices by 0.27%. Higher house prices can positively shock local
     economies through a variety of channels. In this section, we explore results for real economic
     outcomes, changes in housing supply, and population and immigration characteristics.
         First, higher housing demand can lead to an increase in construction jobs, raising demand
     for labor and increasing wages. These can spill over to employment in the broader local
     economy as more money circulates, driving higher consumption of housing and non-housing
     goods alike. Additionally, numerous news outlets have noted a penchant for Chinese firms
     investing in local businesses.30 Foreign direct investment from China to the U.S. increased
     from $3.3 Billion to $39.5 Billion from 2010 to 2017, a nearly 1100% increase. 31
         To test whether the foreign buyer tax policies funneled money into the real economic
     sector, we can study the difference-in-differences for zipcode level employment, establish-
     ments, and annual payroll from the County Business Patterns. Table D8 shows the results
     of this analysis. Panel (a) shows that employment increases between 0.4 and 1.8% in the
     post period, depending on the geographic trends controlled for. Looking to the event study
     associated with column (3), figure E2 panel (a) shows that the average treated zipcode sees
     more than a 2% increase in employment by the end of 2015, with no action in the pre-period.
     Panel (b) in table D8 suggests an increase in establishment count by 1-2%, but the associ-
     ated event study suggests this is a continuation of a pre-period trend. Finally, panel (c) in
     table D8 shows a 1-2% increase in annual payroll, however these results are not statistically
     significant. The figure associated with column (3) in panel (c) of D8, panel (c) in figure
30
   https://www.nytimes.com/2019/07/21/us/politics/china-investment-trade-war.html
   https://www.nytimes.com/2018/07/12/us/politics/trade-war-china-michigan.html?module=inline
   https://www.npr.org/sections/money/2017/10/27/560407035/episode-802-the-hotel-at-the-center-of-the-
   world
31
   Foreign Direct Investment in the U.S., Foreign Direct Investment Position on a Historical-Cost Basis, U.S.
   Bureau of Economic Analysis



                                                      52
E2, shows that by the end of 2015, annual payroll has risen by just over 3% for the average
treated zipcode, relative to the average control zipcode. Annual payroll takes a few years to
respond, leading to the measured insignificance in the table; however, by 2015 the growth is
borderline significantly different from zero.
    Taken together, the real economic results suggest that the influx of capital post-tax has
impacted more than just house prices. An increase in local demand driven by house prices,
or concurrent local investment, has increased employment by 2% and payroll by 3% by the
end of the post-period. Because there is not much annual increase in employment or payroll,
the housing demand shock stimulating the local economy seems a better match to the data
than does FDI in local businesses. As FDI tends to be more concentrated in large factories
or industries, it seems reasonable that this cannot be driving such geographically dispersed
real economic growth.

B.3.2   Immigration vs. Foreign Purchases

Finally, we check to see whether the rise in house prices in FBC zipcodes seems to be
driven strictly by investment in the housing market, or by the concurrent move of people
and capital, namely immigration. Table D9 checks to see how populations, and population
shares have responded to the foreign buyer tax and capital outflows. Panel (a) checks to see
how local populations, foreign born populations, and FBC populations have changed in the
post-period in FBC treated zipcodes. Column (1) suggests that the total population has
increased by 0.8% on average. This growth seems to come from FBC immigrants, as their
population increased by 4.4% on average, while the total foreign-born population, declines
by 2.2%. These results suggest that FBC locations add very little population, but the FBC
population grows significantly; however, since the number of FBC residents is small in the
pre-period, this 4% growth is not very tangible; the FBC population adds about 2.5k new
residents, relative to the average county population of 1.5 million in the pre-period. This
is reflected in panel (b), which studies how the fraction of foreign born populations change
in the post-period. Column (1) says that the total fraction foreign born has declined by
0.0025, from 0.276 in the pre-period to 0.273 in the post-period. Fraction FBC has increased
from 0.039 in the pre-period, on average, to 0.042 in the post-period; foreign-born Chinese
residents still make up only about 4% of even FBC treated counties. All told, it does not
seem feasible that this increase in prices is entirely due to immigration of wealthy Chinese
to the U.S.; instead foreign ownership of local real estate as an investment property matches
the data better.
    Taken altogether, these other outcomes paint a picture of foreign investment in U.S.
housing stimulating local economic demand in the real economy, through the expansion of

                                             53
jobs, annual payroll, and the building of new housing units, all for a relatively unchanged
population. The results are not consistent with immigrants leaving China and setting up
local firms driving our findings.


C     IV Approach Appendix
C.1     IV Exclusion Restriction
A plausible violation of the exclusion restriction is that investment in the technology sector
drives house price results. As foreign countries impose foreign buyer taxes, foreigners choose
to invest in U.S. tech stocks instead of in foreign real estate. This leads to economic growth
in tech-heavy cities, which tend to be inelastically supplied with housing, increasing house
prices. Therefore, the tax policy change = E [ it (F BCi × P ostt )] = 0, where P ostt is the
tax policy change, and the city's high-tech status is in it , which is the second stage error
term, and thus correlated with the second stage left-hand-side variable, ln(hpiit ).
    We test for this mechanism by excluding San Francisco, San Jose and Seattle from our
estimation sample. If tech drives our house prices, the difference-in-difference estimator
should fall to zero. If tech investment is not the destination for all of the foreign capital
and instead it moves into the housing market, the coefficient for our difference-in-difference
estimator should be similar to the unrestricted sample.
    Table D10 shows the results when excluding the big tech hubs from our sample. The
point estimats show a 6-13pp increase in house prices in treated zipcodes relative to control
zipcodes, in line with our main results showing an 8-17pp increase. This shows that Seattle,
San Francisco and San Jose are not driving our results, discrediting this violation of the
exclusion restriction.
    Instead of removing major housing markets from the data sample, we can also directly
control for the tech sector directly. Table D11 shows the results as in Table 2, but also
controlling for either employment or establishments, by NAICS category. Employment and
establishment data is taken at the county by year level from the County Business Patterns,
and so is both local and time-varying. The top panel controls for establishments or employ-
ment in levels, while the bottom panel controls by share. In both panels, the baseline point
estimate shows that after the Singaporean foreing buyer tax, zipcodes with high fractions
of foreign-born Chinese residents see, on average, 10% additional HPI relative to their peers
in the same city. Adding controls from the number of firms in the management and profes-
sional services industries, as in Ding et al. (2019), column (2) reports that the point estimate
falls from 10% to 9%. Controlling just for "Professional, Scientific, and Technical Services"


                                              54
in column (3) yields a similar result. Column (4) controls for the number of businesses in
"Computer Systems Design and Related Services", with a similar point estimate. Columns
(5) - (7) repeat the controls, but use time-varying employment rather than establishment
count.
    In sum, no way of accounting for the employment or establishment growth in the tech
sector between 2009 and 2019 can undo the impact of foreign capital flowing to U.S. housing
markets, and specifically to zipcodes with ex-ante high shares of foreign-born residents. These
results are consistent with excising tech-heavy cities from the sample, with all robustness
checks yielding differential house price growth in treated zips, ranging from 6% to 10%, in
line with our baseline estimate of 10%.


C.2     Expected Capital Flows, Exposure IV
The ECFit exposure IV scales the per-capita capital flows by the fraction foreign-born of the
respective country within a zipcode. For example, consider two zipcodes with 3 foreign-born
Chinese residents. In the baseline ECFit , each Chinese resident receives the same per-capita
share of the national capital flow from China into the U.S. housing market. The exposure
index scales this per-capita share by the share of Chinese residents in the total population
of the zipcode. If the first zipcode has 10 residents, and the second has 100, then the
first zipcode is therefore more exposed to the Chinese capital as it is diluted among fewer
non-foreign-born residents:


                                                      F Bpop2011
                                                            ic
                       ECFit =         capf lowct ×                f racF Bic             (11)
                                 c C                  F Bpop2011
                                                            c


   where

                                                 F Bpop2011
                                                       ic
                                       1=                                                 (12)
                                             i   F Bpop2011
                                                       c


and C = {Canada, China, India, Mexico, United Kingdom, Other}, i denotes zipcode, t de-
notes quarter.
    Table D19 shows the results using the exposure ECFit . The second stage yields an price
elasticity estimate of 0.85, above but in the same ballpark as our preferred measure.




                                                 55
D      Appendix Tables

     Table D1: Housing Characteristics for Transactions in FBC vs. Control Zipcodes

                                               (1)         (2)       (3)
                       Variable             Control       FBC    Difference
                       Price ($1000's)       195.91      559.84 110.98***
                                           (176.74)     (278.86)   (0.00)
                       Lot (Acres)            3.07        0.80    -1.85***
                                            (26.56)      (2.94)    (0.00)
                       Square Feet          1,618.88    1,688.48 -23.80***
                                           (573.51)     (765.81)   (0.00)
                       Year Built             1948        1954      2***
                                              (44)        (34)     (0.00)
                       Bedrooms               2.60        2.55    -0.28***
                                             (0.86)      (1.03)    (0.00)
                       Bathrooms              1.87        2.16     -0.01*
                                             (0.75)      (0.92)    (0.05)
                       Garage Spaces          2.20        1.75    -0.17***
                                             (2.24)      (1.66)    (0.00)
                       Observations        1,030,756     14,526  1,227,368
 Notes: Columns (1) and (2) present raw means for the housing characteristics, with standard errors in
parentheses. Significance: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Column (3) shows the difference in means
between FBC and control zipcodes, controlling for commuting zone, with p-values in parentheses.




                                                 56
                  Table D2: Matching Covariate Balance

 Variable                              FBC=0           FBC=1          Difference
 HPI                                      1.658           1.753          0.095
                                        (0.838)         (0.882)         (0.112)
 HPI growth, 1 Year                      -0.018           0.007         0.025**
                                        (0.140)         (0.270)         (0.010)
 HPI growth, 5 Years                     -0.150          -0.036          0.114*
                                        (0.520)         (0.672)         (0.058)
 Lagged HPI                               1.688           1.767          0.079
                                        (0.905)         (0.902)         (0.123)
 Sales                                  62.406          68.825            6.419
                                       (59.910)        (51.408)        (10.386)
 Lagged Sales                           63.410          70.177            6.767
                                       (62.213)        (52.984)        (10.648)
 Permits: Single Family Units         1,296.888       1,101.770        -195.118
                                     (1,814.654)     (1,551.373)      (122.900)
 Permits: All Units                   3,179.571       3,270.838         91.267
                                     (3,815.905)     (3,040.635)      (453.422)
 Establishments                        639.308        1,059.777      420.469***
                                      (549.566)       (763.174)        (70.664)
 Estab. growth, 1 year                    0.002           0.006           0.004
                                        (0.046)         (0.029)         (0.002)
 Estab. growth, 5 years                  -0.012          0.020          0.031**
                                        (0.118)         (0.101)         (0.013)
 Employment                           8,999.520      17,185.475     8,185.956***
                                     (9,426.618)    (17,234.313)     (1,810.485)
 Emp. growth, 1 year                     -0.011          -0.000          0.010
                                        (0.093)         (0.073)         (0.008)
 Emp. growth, 5 years                    -0.049          -0.021           0.028
                                        (0.218)         (0.190)         (0.031)
 Annual Payroll (1000s)                407.356        1,171.946      764.590***
                                      (465.063)      (1,686.978)      (176.334)
 2010 Population                     29,903.615      33,978.137       4,074.522
                                    (26,508.203)    (21,410.336)     (3,988.653)
 2011 Population                     29,592.615      33,515.078       3,922.463
                                    (26,178.000)    (21,102.682)     (3,945.637)
 2011 Median Income                  75,604.023      80,449.164       4,845.136
                                    (30,497.830)    (35,586.953)     (5,591.262)
 Notes: This table shows pre-period balance for housing and labor market character-
istics, using the matched sample of zipcodes. F BCi = 1 F BCpop
                                                           popi
                                                                i
                                                                   99th percentile
for zipcode i. Data is zipcode level, excepting permits data, which is at the county
level. Data at the quarterly level, excepting annual employment, establishment, and
payroll data. Data through 2011q3 for the housing and permit data, and through
2012 for the annual data. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered by MSA. Signif-
icance: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.



                                        57
              Table D3: Synthetic Control Covariate Balance

 Variable                              FBC=0           FBC=1           Difference
 HPI                                      1.854           1.884            0.029
                                        (0.856)         (0.933)          (0.049)
 HPI growth, 1 Year                       0.001          0.038         0.037***
                                        (0.197)         (0.377)          (0.011)
 HPI growth, 5 Years                      0.281          0.358             0.078
                                        (0.612)         (0.824)          (0.047)
 Lagged HPI                               1.890           1.890           -0.000
                                        (0.799)         (0.910)          (0.039)
 Sales                                  67.583          54.984           -12.599
                                       (58.632)        (49.399)         (10.288)
 Lagged Sales                           67.201          55.502           -11.700
                                       (58.778)        (49.638)         (10.080)
 Permits: Single Family Units         2,210.344       2,008.318         -202.025
                                     (3,498.401)     (3,524.137)       (135.465)
 Permits: All Units                   4,848.725       5,548.749        700.024*
                                     (6,198.069)     (6,481.169)       (349.221)
 Establishments                        705.786        1,056.400       350.614***
                                      (378.453)       (750.135)        (100.694)
 Estab. growth, 1 year                    0.001          0.008           0.007**
                                        (0.026)         (0.033)          (0.003)
 Estab. growth, 5 years                  -0.016          0.027         0.043***
                                        (0.057)         (0.104)          (0.008)
 Employment                           9,436.474      17,688.168      8,251.694***
                                     (6,283.615)    (17,567.346)      (2,464.070)
 Emp. growth, 1 year                     -0.004          0.005         0.009***
                                        (0.054)         (0.157)          (0.002)
 Emp. growth, 5 years                    -0.031          -0.010            0.020
                                        (0.117)         (0.196)          (0.015)
 Annual Payroll (1000s)                377.082        1,099.842       722.760***
                                      (263.612)      (1,560.644)       (178.663)
 2010 Population                     34,189.008      34,651.656          462.648
                                    (20,708.795)    (21,402.146)      (4,886.639)
 2011 Population                     33,767.156      34,187.805          420.650
                                    (20,216.633)    (21,094.246)      (4,834.596)
 2011 Median Income                  67,904.367      80,136.805     12,232.438***
                                    (16,403.313)    (34,968.406)      (4,066.386)
 Notes: This table shows pre-period balance for housing and labor market char-
acteristics, using the synthetic control sample of zipcods. F BCi = 1 F BCpop
                                                                         popi
                                                                              i
                                                                                
99th percentile for zipcode i. Data is zipcode level, excepting permits data, which
is at the county level. Data at the quarterly level, excepting annual employment,
establishment, and payroll data. Data through 2011q3 for the housing and permit
data, and through 2012 for the annual data. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered
by MSA. Significance: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.



                                         58
                               Table D4: Synthetic Control Results

                                                (1)         (2)
                                               HPI          HPI
                     Post=1 X FBC=1          0.392        0.108
                                             (0.0388)    (0.0386)
                     R2                       0.089        0.167
                     Observations             13407        13407
                                                Fixed Effects
                     Quarter                               X
 Notes: This table shows the coefficient  from hpiit =  + F BCi × P ostt + i + t + it , using the
synthetic control as F BC . All data at the quarter level. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered by
quarter. Significance: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




           Table D5: Difference­in­Differences Results: Zillow Home Value Index

                                        (1)      (2)             (3)         (4)
                                       ZHVI     ZHVI            ZHVI        ZHVI
             Post=1 X FBC=1          0.176 0.0894              0.0298      0.0341
                                     (0.0160) (0.0227)        (0.0331)    (0.0345)
             R2                        0.732    0.841           0.879       0.873
             Observations             491259   326948          146391      155260
                                                     Fixed Effects
             Quarter                     X           X          X             X
             Zip                         X           X          X             X
             State X Quarter                         X
             MSA X Quarter                                      X
             Zone X Quarter                                                   X
 Notes: This table shows the coefficient  from ZHV Iit =  + F BCi × P ostt + i + t + it . FBC=1 defined
as F BCi = 1 F BCpop
                 popi
                      i
                         99th percentile for zipcode i. All data at the zipcode by quarter level. Standard
errors in parentheses, clustered by month, or by geography of time trend. Significance: *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                   59
                Table D6: Difference­in­Differences Results: Zillow Rent Index

                                        (1)       (2)             (3)          (4)
                                        ZRI       ZRI             ZRI          ZRI
             Post=1 X FBC=1          0.0908 0.0676             0.00260      0.0173
                                     (0.00899) (0.0185)        (0.0126)     (0.0101)
             R2                        0.730     0.776           0.855        0.848
             Observations             396774    266290          126366       132152
                                                     Fixed Effects
             Quarter                       X          X          X             X
             Zip                           X          X          X             X
             State X Quarter                          X
             MSA X Quarter                                       X
             Zone X Quarter                                                    X
 Notes: This table shows the coefficient  from ZRIit =  + F BCi × P ostt + i + t + it . FBC=1 defined
as F BCi = 1 F BCpop
                 popi
                      i
                         99th percentile for zipcode i. All data at the zipcode by quarter level. Standard
errors in parentheses, clustered by month, or by geography of time trend. Significance: *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1.




            Table D7: Difference­in­Differences Results: Zillow Price/Rent Ratio

                                     (1)            (2)             (3)           (4)
                                 ZHVI/ZRI        ZHVI/ZRI       ZHVI/ZRI       ZHVI/ZRI
         Post=1 X FBC=1            1.273           0.883         1.474          1.136
                                  (0.662)         (0.595)        (0.496)        (0.529)
         R2                        0.453           0.419          0.467          0.457
         Observations             283618          191514          99671         103899
                                                      Fixed Effects
         Quarter X                     X              X           X
         Zip                           X              X           X                 X
         State X Quarter                              X
         MSA X Quarter                                            X
         Zone X Quarter                                                             X
Notes: This table shows the coefficient  from ZHV I/ZRIit =  + F BCi × P ostt + i + t + it .
ZHV I/ZRIit normalized to 1 in 2011q4. FBC=1 defined as F BCi = 1 F BCpop     popi
                                                                                   i
                                                                                       99th percentile for
zipcode i. All data at the zipcode by quarter level. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered by month, or
by geography of time trend. Significance: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                    60
Table D8: Impact on Zipcode Log Employment, Establishments, and Annual Payroll

                                (1)         (2)        (3)       (4)
                              Emp.        Emp.        Emp.      Emp.
         Post=1 X FBC=1     -0.000564    0.0179      0.0110    0.0112
                             (0.0131)   (0.00770)   (0.00712) (0.00646)
         R2                   0.989       1.000       1.000     1.000
         Observations         15163       70890       27673     29966
                                             Fixed Effects
         Year                  X             X          X              X
         Zip                   X             X          X              X
         State X Year                        X
         Zone X Year                                    X
         MSA X Year                                                    X
                                (a) Employment

                           (1)             (2)         (3)          (4)
                           Est.            Est.        Est.         Est.
         Post=1 X FBC=1 0.00647         0.0224      0.0129       0.0158
                        (0.00864)       (0.00381)   (0.00449)    (0.00432)
           2
         R                0.994           1.000       1.000        1.000
         Observations     15487           75778       28516        31050
                                             Fixed Effects
         Year                  X             X          X           X
         Zip                   X             X          X           X
         State X Year                        X
         Zone X Year                                    X
         MSA X Year                                                    X
                              (b) Establishments

                             (1)            (2)        (3)         (4)
                            Pay            Pay        Pay         Pay
           Post=1 X FBC=1 0.0122          0.0233    0.00988      0.0134
                          (0.0213)       (0.0136)   (0.0133)    (0.0151)
           R2              0.992          1.000      1.000       1.000
           Observations    13149          63151      24118       26265
                                             Fixed Effects
           Year                    X         X          X          X
           Zip                     X         X          X          X
           State X Year                      X
           Zone X Year                                  X
           MSA X Year                                              X
                               (c) Annual Payroll


                                        61
Table D9: Impact on County Level Population and Immigration

                            (1)         (2)               (3)
                         ln(Pop.) ln(Pop. FB)       ln(Pop. FBC)
Post = 1 X FBC = 1      0.00791     -0.0216            0.0437
                        (0.00469)   (0.00558)          (0.0225)
Root MSE                  0.0269       0.103            0.332
Observations              25140       25033             15222
Standard errors in parentheses

  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01
                      (a) Population Changes

                                    (1)              (2)
                               Fraction FB     Fraction FBC
      Post = 1 X FBC = 1        -0.00252         0.00374
                                (0.000223)      (0.000107)
      Root MSE                    0.00412         0.00158
      Observations                 25140           15222
      Standard errors in parentheses
      
        p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01
                     (b) Fraction Foreign Born




                                   62
Table D10: Results Excluding Tech-Oriented Housing Markets

                  (1)             (2)          (3)        (4)
                 HPI             HPI          HPI        HPI
Post=1 X FBC=1 -0.0190          0.132        0.0616     0.0636
               (0.0523)        (0.0632)     (0.0451)   (0.0569)
R2              0.876            0.901        0.894      0.892
Observations    76547           415221       162542     149673
   (a) Results Excluding San Francisco, San Jose and Seattle

                   (1)             (2)         (3)        (4)
                  HPI             HPI         HPI        HPI
 Post=1 X FBC=1 0.118           0.167       0.0781     0.0950
                (0.0693)        (0.0316)    (0.0435)   (0.0385)
   2
 R               0.869            0.899       0.889      0.891
 Observations    86768           428903      163355     176224
                                   Fixed Effects
 Quarter                X          X          X           X
 Zip                    X          X          X           X
 State X Quarter                   X
 MSA X Quarter                                X
 Zone X Quarter                                           X
                     (b) Baseline Results




                              63
 Table D11: Results Controlling for County Level Management and Professional Services

                                          NAICS Establishments                    NAICS Employment
                           (1)           (2)      (3)       (4)                 (5)      (6)     (7)
                        baseline      54 & 55     54       5415              54 & 55      54     5415
Post=1 X FBC=1          0.0952        0.0886 0.0887 0.0909                   0.0858 0.0864 0.0924
                        (0.0386)      (0.0385) (0.0386) (0.0385)             (0.0389) (0.0389) (0.0385)
R2                        0.890         0.891    0.891     0.890               0.891    0.891    0.890
Observations             176202        176202   176202    176202              176202   176202   176202
                                                        Fixed Effects
Quarter                     X            X              X          X             X            X            X
Zip                         X            X              X          X             X            X            X
Zone X Quarter              X            X              X          X             X            X            X
                              (a) Employment and Establishment Levels
                                          NAICS Establishments                    NAICS Employment
                           (1)           (2)      (3)       (4)                 (5)      (6)     (7)
                        baseline      54 & 55     54       5415              54 & 55      54     5415
Post=1 X FBC=1          0.0952        0.0986 0.0983 0.0980                   0.0932 0.0955 0.0967
                        (0.0386)      (0.0384) (0.0384) (0.0388)             (0.0384) (0.0383) (0.0383)
R2                        0.890         0.890    0.890     0.890               0.890    0.890    0.890
Observations             176202        176202   176202    176202              176202   176202   176202
                                                             Fixed Effects
Quarter                     X            X              X          X             X            X            X
Zip                         X            X              X          X             X            X            X
Zone X Quarter              X            X              X          X             X            X            X
                              (b) Employment and Establishment Share
 Notes: Regressions control for county level employment or establishment count in the management and professional
services (MPRO) as defined in Ding et al. (2019). Columns (2) and (5) control for NAICS code 54, "Professional,
Scientific, and Technical Services" together with NAICS code 55, "Management of Companies and Enterprises",
which together form MPRO. Columns (3) and (6) control only for activity in NAICS 54, excluding management
services from MPRO; columns (4) and (7) control for a particularly fast growing sub-industry as identified by
Ding et al. (2019), NAICS 5415, "Computer Systems Design and Related Services". Panel (a) controls for either
establishments or employment in level, for each county and year. Panel (b) controls for either establishments
or employment as shares of total establishments or employment in a given county-year. Data from the County
Business Patterns 2009-2015.




                                                   64
                          Table D13: ECFit Intuition: 19104 in 2017q1

            c               F Bpop2011
                                    ic     F Bpop2011
                                                   c     capf lowct , $B   V olumeict , $M
            Canada              140          811,101          4.75              0.82
            China              2175        2,241,390           7.9              7.67
            India               754         1,896,640         1.95              0.78
            Mexico              220        11,604,684        2.325              0.04
            UK                  185          688,588         2.375              0.64
            Other              3845        23,097,640         18.9              3.15
            ECFit , $M                                                          13.1
                                               F Bpop2011
                                                     ic                       F Bpop2011
                                                                                     ic
Notes:     ECFit     =      cC    capf lowct ×            , where 1  =      i             , C =
                                               F Bpop2011
                                                     c                        F Bpop 2011
                                                                                     c
{Canada, China, India, Mexico, United Kingdom}, i denotes zipcode, t denotes quarter. In the ta-
                                    F Bpop2011
                                          ic
ble, V olumeict = 1000  capf lowct 
                                    F Bpop2011
                                          c




Table D14: Expected Capital Flow IV, controlling for Population and Income: First Stage

                             (1)               (2)                            (3)
                          Baseline     ACS-Census Sample        Population & Income Controls
    Post X Frac. FB       1.007             1.007                          0.968
                          (0.0330)         (0.0330)                       (0.0329)
    R2                      0.989            0.989                          0.989
    F                       930.4            930.4                          369.7
    Observations           787303           787224                         787224
                                                        Fixed Effects
    Zip                       X                  X                              X
    Quarter                   X                  X                              X
    Zone X Quarter            X                  X                              X
 Notes: This table shows the first stage results from ln(ECFit ) =  + f rac_F Bi × P ostt + i + t +
Controlsit + it . Controlsit are denoted in the column titles. Baseline results from column (1) in Table
7. All data mean collapsed at the quarter level. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered by geography.
Significance: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                  65
Table D15: Expected Capital Flow IV, controlling for Population and Income: Second Stage

                              (1)              (2)                              (3)
                           Baseline    ACS-Census Sample          Population & Income Controls
     ln(ECFit )            0.274            0.274                            0.294
                           (0.0670)        (0.0670)                         (0.0713)
     Root MSE                1.433           1.433                            1.433
     Observations           787303          787224                           787224
                                                           Fixed Effects
     Zip                       X                  X                                 X
     Quarter                   X                  X                                 X
     Zone X Quarter            X                  X                                 X
 Notes:The table shows the second stage results from Yit =  +  ln(ECFit ) + i + t + Controlsit + it .
Controlsit are denoted in the column titles. Baseline results from column (1) in Table 8. All data mean
collapsed at the quarter level. All data mean collapsed at the quarter level. Standard errors in parentheses,
clustered by quarter, or by geography of time trend. Significance: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




             Table D16: Expected Capital Flow IV, excluding China: First Stage

                                           (1)            (2)        (3)
                                       ln(ECFit )     ln(ECFit ) ln(ECFit )
                  Post X Frac. FB       1.033          0.971      1.031
                                        (0.0697)       (0.0657)    (0.141)
                  R2                      0.987         0.998       0.997
                  F                       219.7         218.4       53.62
                  Observations           784265         92423       26398
                                                    Fixed Effects
                  Zip                       X
                  Quarter                   X               X              X
                  County                                    X              X
                  Zone X Quarter            X               X              X
 Notes: This table shows the first stage results from ln(ECFit ) =  + f rac_F Bi × P ostt + i + t + it .
All data mean collapsed at the quarter level. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered by geography.
Significance: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                      66
           Table D17: Expected Capital Flow IV, excluding China: Second Stage

                                          (1)         (2)      (3)
                                                               dQit
                                       ln(HPI)     ln(HPI)      Qit
                 ln(ECFit )            0.268       0.549 0.00450
                                       (0.0884)    (0.0842) (0.00109)
                 Root MSE                1.453       0.128   0.00177
                 Observations           784265      92423     26398
                                                  Fixed Effects
                 Zip                      X
                 Quarter                  X             X           X
                 County                                 X           X
                 Zone X Quarter           X             X           X
 Notes:The table shows the second stage results from ln(HP Iit ) =  +  ln(ECFit ) + i + t + it . All data
mean collapsed at the quarter level. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered by quarter, or by geography
of time trend. Significance: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                 Table D18: Expected Capital Flow IV, Exposure: First Stage

                                          (1)           (2)        (3)
                                      ln(ECFit )    ln(ECFit ) ln(ECFit )
                Post X Frac. FB        0.749         0.460      0.509
                                       (0.0394)      (0.0494)   (0.0521)
                R2                       0.970        0.998      0.996
                F                        360.4        86.83      95.28
                Observations            787303        92438      26398
                                                   Fixed Effects
                Zip                        X
                Quarter                    X                X           X
                County                                      X           X
                Zone X Quarter             X                X           X
 Notes: This table shows the first stage results from ln(ECFit ) =  + f rac_F Bi × P ostt + i + t + it .
All data mean collapsed at the quarter level. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered by geography.
Significance: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                   67
               Table D19: Expected Capital Flow IV, Exposure: Second Stage

                                          (1)         (2)         (3)
                                                                  dQit
                                       ln(HPI)     ln(HPI)        Qit
                  ln(ECFit )           0.369       1.158      0.00912
                                        (0.125)     (0.211)   (0.00215)
                  Root MSE               1.453       0.124     0.00167
                  Observations          787303       92438      26398
                                                  Fixed Effects
                  Zip                     X
                  Quarter                 X             X          X
                  County                                X          X
                  Zone X Quarter          X             X          X
 Notes:The table shows the second stage results from ln(HP Iit ) =  +  ln(ECFit ) + i + t + it . All data
mean collapsed at the quarter level. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered by quarter, or by geography
of time trend. Significance: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                   68
    Table D20: List of CBSAs from Most to Least Inelastic

Rank                     CBSA                       Elasticity
1            Providence-Warwick, RI-MA               0.0174
2        San Francisco-Oakland-Hayward, CA           0.0298
3        Boston-Cambridge-Newton, MA-NH              0.0298
4    Minneapolis-St. Paul-Bloomington, MN-WI         0.0311
5     Sacramento­Roseville­Arden-Arcade, CA          0.0341
6    Miami-Fort Lauderdale-West Palm Beach, FL       0.0364
7       Riverside-San Bernardino-Ontario, CA         0.0369
8          Charleston-North Charleston, SC           0.0378
9                    Columbia, SC                    0.0380
10        North Port-Sarasota-Bradenton, FL          0.0382
11            New Orleans-Metairie, LA               0.0393
12      Los Angeles-Long Beach-Anaheim, CA           0.0397
13                Stockton-Lodi, CA                  0.0402
14             San Diego-Carlsbad, CA                0.0409
15        Las Vegas-Henderson-Paradise, NV           0.0413
16                    Pueblo, CO                     0.0421
17              Memphis, TN-MS-AR                    0.0425
18                 Las Cruces, NM                    0.0453
19        Augusta-Richmond County, GA-SC             0.0479
20        Indianapolis-Carmel-Anderson, IN           0.0528
21          Phoenix-Mesa-Scottsdale, AZ              0.0531
22                    Greeley, CO                    0.0548
23      Tampa-St. Petersburg-Clearwater, FL          0.0558
24              Cincinnati, OH-KY-IN                 0.0560
25       Naples-Immokalee-Marco Island, FL           0.0569
26           Grand Rapids-Wyoming, MI                0.0580
27                  Pittsburgh, PA                   0.0590
28                   Knoxville, TN                   0.0604
29                  Columbus, OH                     0.0614
30                  Fort Wayne, IN                   0.0616
31                Clarksville, TN-KY                 0.0642
32       Milwaukee-Waukesha-West Allis, WI           0.0657
33            Cape Coral-Fort Myers, FL              0.0659
34                Port St. Lucie, FL                 0.0662
35          Seattle-Tacoma-Bellevue, WA              0.0665
36         Dallas-Fort Worth-Arlington, TX           0.0665
37          Denver-Aurora-Lakewood, CO               0.0674
38    Houston-The Woodlands-Sugar Land, TX           0.0677
39                 Fort Collins, CO                  0.0693
40              Colorado Springs, CO                 0.0698
                                     Continued on   next page


                             69
                                       Continued from previous page
Rank                          CBSA                           Elasticity
41            Louisville/Jefferson County, KY-IN              0.0700
42                     Evansville, IN-KY                      0.0718
43                      St. Louis, MO-IL                      0.0719
44         New York-Newark-Jersey City, NY-NJ-PA              0.0737
45                    Oklahoma City, OK                       0.0741
46              San Antonio-New Braunfels, TX                 0.0743
47     Washington-Arlington-Alexandria, DC-VA-MD-WV           0.0746
48                 Greensboro-High Point, NC                  0.0759
49            Charlotte-Concord-Gastonia, NC-SC               0.0762
50             Greenville-Anderson-Mauldin, SC                0.0766
51                Lafayette-West Lafayette, IN                0.0766
52            Chicago-Naperville-Elgin, IL-IN-WI              0.0772
53                     Salt Lake City, UT                     0.0796
54               Omaha-Council Bluffs, NE-IA                  0.0813
55            Atlanta-Sandy Springs-Roswell, GA               0.0832
56                  Austin-Round Rock, TX                     0.0837
57           Portland-Vancouver-Hillsboro, OR-WA              0.0850
58                    Bend-Redmond, OR                        0.0865
59                    Kansas City, MO-KS                      0.0871
60                         Madison, WI                        0.0901
61                  Birmingham-Hoover, AL                     0.0907
62                        Richmond, VA                        0.0927
63      Nashville-Davidson­Murfreesboro­Franklin, TN          0.0943
64                         Tucson, AZ                         0.0944
65                          Tulsa, OK                         0.0952
66                      Punta Gorda, FL                       0.0998
67                  Durham-Chapel Hill, NC                     0.108
68     Philadelphia-Camden-Wilmington, PA-NJ-DE-MD             0.108
69                          Dover, DE                          0.109
70                        Columbia, MO                         0.112
71              McAllen-Edinburg-Mission, TX                   0.113
72                       Jacksonville, FL                      0.122
73              Pensacola-Ferry Pass-Brent, FL                 0.124
74                     Albuquerque, NM                         0.134
75                         Raleigh, NC                         0.143
76              Orlando-Kissimmee-Sanford, FL                  0.149
77             Des Moines-West Des Moines, IA                  0.156
78                          Reno, NV                           0.157
79             Baltimore-Columbia-Towson, MD                   0.160
80            Palm Bay-Melbourne-Titusville, FL                0.161
                                              Continued on   next page


                                70
                                  Continued from previous page
Rank                       CBSA                   Elasticity
81              Shreveport-Bossier City, LA         0.208
82               College Station-Bryan, TX          0.213
83                     Boise City, ID               0.213
84                 Cleveland-Elyria, OH             0.221
85                  Winston-Salem, NC               0.238
86                      Laredo, TX                  0.251
87                      Trenton, NJ                 0.267
88     Virginia Beach-Norfolk-Newport News, VA-NC   0.346
89              Lakeland-Winter Haven, FL           0.461
90                        Ocala, FL                 0.604
91                   Salisbury, MD-DE               0.687
                      Greenville, NC                   -10.77
                    Columbus, GA-AL                    -7.193
               Detroit-Warren-Dearborn, MI             -0.925
        Deltona-Daytona Beach-Ormond Beach, FL         -0.403
                     Wilmington, NC                    -0.283
           Allentown-Bethlehem-Easton, PA-NJ           -0.167
                      Tallahassee, FL                  -0.105
                  Vineland-Bridgeton, NJ              -0.0792
              Atlantic City-Hammonton, NJ             -0.0468




                             71
E         Appendix Figures

Figure E1: Event Studies for Zillow Home Value Index (ZHVI) and Zillow Rent Index (ZRI)




                                                                             .4
     .8




                                                                             .3
     .6




                                                                            .2
    ZRI




                                                                           ZRI
    .4




                                                                             .1
     .2




                                                                             0
     0




      2009q1   2011q3       2014q1            2016q3            2019q1         2009q1              2011q3         2014q1              2016q3   2019q1
                          YearQuarter                                                                           YearQuarter

                            Control Zips                                                                             Control Zips
                            Treatment zips                                                                           Treatment zips



                        (a) ZHVI                                                                            (b) ZRI
                                 4
                                 2
                               ZRI
                                 0
                                 -2




                                     2009q1            2011q3         2014q1              2016q3            2019q1
                                                                    YearQuarter

                                                                         Control Zips
                                                                         Treatment zips



                                                          (c) ZHVI/ZRI




                                                                    72
Figure E2: Event Studies for Employment, Establishments, and Annual Payroll




                      216




                                                                                              .07
                                                                                              .05
               Capital Outflow




                                                                                                            .03
                         92




                                                                                                        emps
                                                                                              -.01 0 .01
                      0




                                                                                              -.03
                      -92




                                    2009q3     2011q1      2012q3        2014q1      2015q3
                                                          Quarter

                                                  Capital flows out of China
                                                  DiD estimator: Treatment-Control



                                               (a) ln(Employment)
                      216




                                                                                              .07
                                                                                              .05
               Capital Outflow




                                                                                                            .03
                         92




                                                                                                       estabs
                                                                                              -.01 0 .01
                      0




                                                                                              -.03
                      -92




                                    2009q3     2011q1      2012q3        2014q1      2015q3
                                                          Quarter

                                                  Capital flows out of China
                                                  DiD estimator: Treatment-Control



                                             (b) ln(Establishments)
                      216




                                                                                              .07
                                                                                              .05
               Capital Outflow




                                                                                                            .03
                         92




                                                                                                       payann
                                                                                              -.01 0 .01
                      0




                                                                                              -.03
                      -92




                                 2010q1      2011q3       2013q1           2014q3      2016q1
                                                          Quarter

                                                  Capital flows out of China
                                                  DiD estimator: Treatment-Control



                                              (c) ln(Annual Payroll)
                                                           73
                                        Figure E3: ECFit Summary
     1




                                                               1
     .8




                                                               .8
                                                          F(ln(Index))
         .6




                                                                   .6
  F(Index)
.4




                                                          .4
     .2




                                                               .2
     0




                                                               0




              0   5                10           15                       -10   -5                   0        5
                           Index                                                        ln(Index)

                      2009q1       2015q1                                           2009q1          2015q1



                      (a) ECFit                                                (b) ln(ECFit )




                                                     74
