                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              THE MICRO AND MACRO DYNAMICS OF CAPITAL FLOWS

                                        Felipe Saffie
                                        Liliana Varela
                                         Kei-Mu Yi

                                      Working Paper 27371
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27371


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2020




We thank Rodrigo Heresi, Eugene Oue and Alejandra Martinez for excellent research assistance.
We are grateful to Andres Drenik, Luca Fornaro, Loukas Karabarbounis, Marti Mestieri, Dmitry
Mukhin, Eugenio Rojas and participants of Chicago Booth International Macro and Finance
Conference, Princeton Growth Conference, SED- St. Louis and CAGE Research Day for helpful
comments. The views expressed here are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent
those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Felipe Saffie, Liliana Varela, and Kei-Mu Yi. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Micro and Macro Dynamics of Capital Flows
Felipe Saffie, Liliana Varela, and Kei-Mu Yi
NBER Working Paper No. 27371
June 2020
JEL No. F15,F41,F43,F63

                                          ABSTRACT

We empirically and theoretically study the effects of capital flows on resource allocation within
sectors and cross-sectors. Novel data on service firms ­ in addition to manufacturing firms ­
allows us to assess two channels of resource reallocation. Capital inflows lower the relative price
of capital, which promotes capital-intensive industries ­ an input-cost channel. Second, capital
inflows increase aggregate consumption, which tilts the demand towards goods with high income
elasticities ­ a consumption channel. We provide evidence for these two channels using firm-
level census data from the financial liberalization in Hungary, a policy reform that led to capital
inflows. We show that firms in capital intensive industries expand, as do firms in industries
producing goods with high income elasticities. In the short-term, the consumption channel
dominates and resources reallocate towards high income elasticity activities, such as services. We
build a dynamic, multi-sector, heterogeneous firm model with multiple sectors of an economy
transitioning to its steady-state. We simulate a capital account liberalization and show that the
model can rationalize our empirical findings. We then use the model to assess the permanent
effects of capital flows and show that the long-term allocation of resources and, thus, aggregate
productivity depend on degree of long-term financial openness of the economy. Larger
liberalizations trigger long-run debt pushing the country to a permanent trade surplus. This tilts
long-run production towards manufacturing exporters, which also increases aggregate
productivity.

Felipe Saffie                                    Kei-Mu Yi
Darden Business School                           Department of Economics
University of Virginia                           University of Houston
SaffieF@darden.virginia.edu                      3623 Cullen Blvd.
                                                 Houston, TX 77204
Liliana Varela                                   and Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas
Houghton Street                                  and also NBER
Department of Finance                            yik.work@gmail.com
London School of Economics
London, WC2A 2AE
United Kingdom
L.V.Varela@lse.ac.uk
1    Introduction
Over the past half-century, advanced economy countries, followed by emerging market countries, have
received large capital inflows that have shaped the evolution of their economies. The macroeconomic
implications of these inflows have attracted considerable attention from scholars and policy makers.
In recent years, there has been a recognition that a deep empirical and theoretical understanding
of these macroeconomic implications requires an understanding of the effect of capital flows on the
allocation of resources within and across industries and firms. This recent research has thus focused
on the reallocation of resources within manufacturing firms or across broadly defined sectors, such as
manufacturing or services. However, so far, there is no evidence on the impact of capital flows on
services firms, which of course, constitute the vast majority of firms, inputs, and output in an economy.
This gap prevents a full understanding of the impact of capital inflows.
    In this paper, we seek to expand our understanding of the micro and macro-dynamics of capital
flows empirically and theoretically with comprehensive firm-level data and a calibrated heterogeneous
firm dynamic model. Specifically, our paper makes three contributions. First, we bring novel evidence
about the impact of capital flows on service and agricultural firms, in addition to manufacturing firms.
In our empirical analysis, we employ the census of Hungarian firms over the period of Hungary's capital
account liberalization in 2001. Second, we investigate the importance of two channels through which
capital flows can affect the allocation of resources. Capital inflows reduce the relative price of capital,
which favors capital intensive firms and industries ­ an input-cost channel. Also, such inflows increase
current consumption and expand the demand for goods with high income elasticities ­ a consumption
channel. Third, we develop and calibrate a multi-sector, heterogeneous firm, dynamic open economy
model, and then we use it to study the firm, sector, and aggregate effects, as well as the short-run
and long-run effects, of an unexpected capital account liberalization in an economy transitioning to its
financial autarky steady-state.
    Our empirical investigation is centered around the capital account liberalization in Hungary in 2001
for three main reasons. First, while many countries perform financial and trade reforms jointly, Hungary
presents an unusual quasi natural experiment of a pure capital account liberalization. Second, our firm-
level data (APEH) is unique as it provides information on balance sheets for the universe of firms in
all economic activities in Hungary for almost two decades (1992-2008). Finally, this extensive data set
allows us to dissect movements in the extensive margin, as it reports the creation and destruction of
every firm in the economy, from unipersonal firms to large corporations. We can then study ­for the
first time­ the impact of capital inflows by building from firm individual data to aggregate outcomes.
    We start by documenting that the financial liberalization in Hungary in 2001 led to large capital
inflows, and to a reduction in the domestic interest rate. Five years after the reform, the net capital flows
had increased by four-times and the net international investment position had dropped 25 percentage
points of GDP. These flows translated into an expansion of the credit supply and a decrease in the
lending interest rate by 3 percentage points. As a result, the wage-to-interest rate ratio increased by
three-times. Capital inflows were also associated with increased demand, as consumption expenditure
over GDP rose by 3 percentage points within the five years before and after the reform.
    To motivate our empirical strategy, we develop a simple version of our quantitative model and show


                                                     2
how the relative input-cost and consumption channels affect firms' outcomes through two structural
parameters of the model, i.e. the capital and income elasticities. The model's structural relationships
allow us to construct a difference-in-difference estimator to assess the impact of the reform within firms
across industries. We exploit three sources of variation to identify the effect of capital inflows: reform
(time) and heterogeneity in capital and income elasticities across industries (cross section).
   Our empirical results provide evidence for the relative input-cost channel, as firms in sectors with
a high capital elasticity increased their value-added, capital-labor ratio, and capital differentially. Ad-
ditionally, our results also point to the presence of a consumption channel, as firms in high income
elasticity industries differentially increase their value added. The estimated coefficients imply that
moving from the p25 to the p75 of capital elasticity ­such as moving from retail trade to machinery
and equipment­ increases value added by 1% per year, and yearly capital intensity and capital by 2%
per year. Similarly, moving from the p25 to the p75 income elasticity ­such as moving from wholesale
to other business activities­ raises value added by 3.5% per year. The estimated coefficients remain
statistically significant and similar in magnitude when we let the mechanisms compete and include both
the capital and income elasticities in the regression and add for a full set of controls.
   The granularity of the data allows us to study the reallocation of resources within sectors. We show
that there is a decrease in the number of producing firms in capital-intensive industries, and an increase
in high income elasticity industries. The magnitude of these changes is economically significant. Going
from the p25 to the p75 of the capital elasticity implies a decrease in the number of firms by 11%, while
going from the p25 to p75 of income elasticity leads to almost a 20% increase in the mass of producing
firms. The expansion in high income elasticity industries is driven by the increase in the number of net
entrants. Strikingly, while the number of net entrants was not related to income elasticity in the pre-
reform period, upon the increase in capital inflows the number of net entrants correlates strongly with
the industry's income elasticity. After controlling for pre-trends, an industry with an income elasticity
of 1.8 ­as restaurants and bars­ has on average more than 1,500 new firms created per year, which
is 1,200 more firms than an industry with low income elasticity (such as agriculture). Importantly,
entrants are small-domestic firms and have an average of only three employees. Changes in the mass of
firms go hand -in-hand with changes in the size of operating firms, as ­ upon the reform ­ firms' size
increases in the industry's capital elasticity and decreases in the industry's income elasticity.
   These results suggest changes in the operational cut-off across industries with different capital and
income elasticities. Following the liberalization, the operating threshold seems to rise with the capital
elasticity of the industry. Thus, in these activities, there are fewer firms, but the firms are larger and
more productive. By contrast, the threshold for operating profitably seems to fall by more, the higher
the income elasticity of the industry. Thus, there are more firms, and the firms are smaller and less
productive. We then build from the micro data to analyze the aggregate implications of input cost
and consumption channels. Our data suggests that the consumption channel dominates and leads to
reallocation of resources towards industries with high income elasticity, which are chiefly in the service
sector. On the aggregate, we observe that the share of value added, employment and number of firms
in services increases in the seven years after the financial liberalization.
   These strong extensive margin movements and reallocation forces in the data are the motivation
for developing a dynamic, heterogeneous firms, small open economy model. We build this model to

                                                      3
rationalize our empirical findings and to conduct a quantitative assessment on the macroeconomic
importance of the reallocation of resources following the financial liberalization. In our model, there
are two sectors: manufacturing and services. The two sectors differ in three key features. First, they
differ in the capital elasticity of their production technology. Second, they differ in their expenditure
elasticities of demand. Specifically, we employ the Comin, Lashkari, and Mestieri (2018) version of
non-homothetic preferences to allow for heterogenous expenditure elasticities across sectors. Third,
manufactured goods can be traded, while services goods are not. Imports of manufactured goods are
used for consumption and investment. Within each sector, there is a continuum of monopolistically
competitive firms with heterogeneous productivity à la Melitz.
   Our model economy is in transition to its long-run steady state. The economy faces an exogenously
given world real interest rate and capital controls, in the form of a tax on each unit of foreign borrowing,
that potentially limit capital flows. Hence, the domestic real interest rate equals the world real interest
rate plus the capital controls tax plus a risk premium that increases in the amount of foreign debt.
Financial liberalization lowers the tax on foreign debt and triggers endogenous trade and current account
dynamics. The endogenous current account dynamics affect the country's external foreign debt position
during the transition and, potentially, the long-run steady state of the economy.
   We calibrate the model primarily to match annual micro and macroeconomic data from Hungary.
In particular, the model matches the differential labor and income elasticities between manufacturing
and service sectors at the core of the input-cost and consumption channels. The economy is initially
in financial autarky as the level of capital controls is sufficiently high that the real return to capital is
lower than the domestic real interest rate and, thus, there are no capital inflows. We perform a full
financial liberalization to this economy while it transits at 60% of its long-run steady state capital. We
then assess how the unexpected decrease in capital controls affects the allocation of resources within
and across sectors, as well as the economy's transition dynamics and its terminal steady state.
   Through the lens of the model we can unveil the intricate firm-level, sectoral, and macroeconomic
dynamics set in motion by a financial liberalization. The liberalization produces rich short-term adjust-
ments that match the Hungarian experience. In fact, the domestic interest rate drops on impact and
capital flows into the economy. Financial openness breaks the trade-off between investment and con-
sumption as both expand simultaneously. These dynamics lead to reallocation of resources across and
within sectors. Across sectors, the lower cost of capital triggers the relative input-cost channel, which
leads to higher investment and manufacturing activity. Higher capital accumulation and borrowing for
consumption smoothing increase aggregate consumption, which ­ through non-homothetic preferences ­
tilts sectoral consumption towards services. In the short term, whether production reallocates resources
towards manufacturing or services depends on the strength of the relative input-cost and consumption
channels. At the time of the liberalization, the consumption channel dominates and production reallo-
cates towards services. There is also extensive within sector reallocation upon the liberalization. The
relative increase in the demand for services leads to a decrease in the operation productivity cut-off
to operate, encouraging entry. Within the manufacturing sector, the lower relative demand and a real
exchange appreciation raise the operational cut-off of domestic and exporting firms. These short-term
dynamics confirm the reallocation toward services and movements along the extensive margins reported
in our empirical analysis.

                                                     4
   We then leverage our calibrated model by going beyond the time horizon of our empirical analysis to
investigate the long-run implications of a financial liberalization. In fact, the short-term capital inflows
occur hand-in-hand with external borrowing ­ current account deficits ­ and repayment obligations.
For a sufficiently large liberalization, the economy eventually stabilizes its net foreign asset position at a
negative level. This long-run negative net foreign asset position is sustained by net trade surpluses in the
long-run. At the sectoral level, the debt repayment implies that resources shift away from non-traded
services towards tradable manufacturing, so that the economy can run a permanent trade surplus.
Thus, in the medium and long-term, production shifts away from services towards manufacturing.
In parallel, there is reallocation within the manufacturing sector. The exporting cutoff falls relative
to the domestic cutoff, which leads to more manufacturing firms exporting, and existing exporting
firms expanding in size. The trade surplus required by debt repayment also implies lower domestic
consumption, and induces a real exchange depreciation. A depreciated currency, all else equal, reduces
the export productivity cut-off, and further promotes exports.
   The model shows that the size of a financial liberalization has long-run consequences in the allocation
of resources across and within sectors and, therefore, on the long-run aggregate productivity of the
economy. In fact, larger liberalizations trigger more capital inflows and potentially permanent debt
repayments and trade surpluses. Therefore, large liberalizations imply long-run steady states tilted
towards manufacturing production and with most resources among exporter firms. These economies
have depreciated exchange rates and high aggregate productivity when compared to less liberalized
economies. A full removal of capital controls increases the long-run share of manufacturing in GDP by
two percent, and long-run aggregate productivity by three percent, relative to the autarky long-run.
   Hence, our model shows that the short-term and long term dynamics of capital flows differ in their
implications for the sectoral composition of production and for firm-dynamics. In the short term,
increased consumption translates into an expansion of services and the entry of small firms but, in the
long term ­ when the economy stabilizes its external debt ­ production tilts to manufacturing, especially
towards the larger, most productive, exporting firms.
   The empirical identification of the effect of the financial liberalization is based on heterogeneous
capital and income elasticities across industries. To test that the observed effects correspond to the
liberalization and not something else, we conduct a full set of robustness tests. First, we show that
firms in sectors with different capital and income elasticities had similar growth trends prior to the
reform. Second, we demonstrate that the results are not driven by sector-specific trends as they are
robust to including sector-year fixed effects interacted. Third, we show that the expansion in services
is not driven by an ease of financial constraints in this sector, as results are robust to excluding firms
with bank credit, and to controlling for dependence on external finance of firms and suppliers. Fourth,
results are robust to controlling for export status, foreign ownership, and using different methods to
estimate the capital and the income elasticities. Fifth, the general context around the liberalization
and its timing minimizes reverse causality concerns, as it was part of a general program of fourteen
transition economies to join the European Union (EU). Importantly, by 2001, the deregulation of capi-
tal controls in Hungary was the only missing requirement to join the EU. The Hungarian economy was
already deeply integrated with the EU and trade and foreign direct investment (FDI) flows remained
constant around the reform. Additionally, other transition economies undergoing the same process of

                                                      5
joining the EU but with already deregulated financial accounts did not witness the same pattern of
inflows of Hungary. Finally, to test external validity, we use data for 163 countries over 1970 to 2016 to
assess whether financial liberalization associates with reallocation of resources towards services at the
cross-country level. Confirming our results for Hungary, we find that liberalizing countries experience
an increase in the value added share of services in the short term.


Related Literature. This paper adds to a long theoretical and empirical literature studying the impact of
capital inflows into capital-scarce economies (among recent contributions, see, for example, Gourinchas
and Jeanne 2006; Levchenko, Ranciere, and Thoenig 2009; Tille and van Wincoop 2010, Hoxha, Kalemli-
Ozcan, and Vollrath 2013; Broner and Ventura 2015). Gourinchas and Jeanne (2006) study the aggregate
macroeconomic effects of a financial liberalization in an open economy version of the neoclassical growth
model. Levchenko, Ranciere, and Thoenig (2009) use an industry-level panel data set to study the
growth and volatility effects of financial liberalization, as well as the drivers of these effects.
    A related empirical literature consists of cross-country studies documenting that, in middle-income
economies, expansions owing to capital inflows lead to resources shifting away from tradable activities
(see, for example, Tornell and Westermann 2005; Reis 2013; Benigno, Converse, and Fornaro 2015).
Building on these findings, Benigno and Fornaro (2013) develop a two-sector model with homogeneous
agents and show that capital inflows can undermine productivity growth, as they reallocate resources
from the tradable- productivity enhancing sector to the non-tradable stagnant sector.
    Our paper also relates to recent literature assessing the impact of capital flows within and across
firms (Gopinath, Kalemli-Ozcan, Karabarbounis, and Villegas-Sanchez 2017 and Varela 2018). This
research focuses on incumbent manufacturing firm-level evidence and studies the productivity and/or
mis-allocation effects of capital flows on these firms.
    Our paper extends the above country-level and industry-level research by providing firm-level evi-
dence on reallocation within sectors following a financial liberalization. Our paper extends the above
firm-level research by focusing on services firms ­ for the first time ­ in addition to manufacturing
firms. This enables us to study micro-level cross-sector reallocation over time.1 In addition, we pro-
vide new evidence on the extensive margin of firms. Our paper also establishes the importance of two
transmission channels, the input-cost channel, based on differences in the capital elasticity, and the
consumption channel, based on differences in the income elasticity, across firms and sectors over time.
Our quasi-natural experiment allows us to show empirically that, following an increase in aggregate
consumption, differences in sectoral income elasticities lead to a shift in spending and resources towards
services activities. This holds true even after controlling for firms' access to external finance. Our
dynamic model quantifies the magnitude of these channels, and allows us to study the short-term and
long-term allocation of resources, which depend on the degree of financial openness.
    Our paper relates to Acemoglu and Guerrieri (2008) in that we build from heterogeneous capital
elasticities across sectors to investigate capital accumulation We extend their analysis by introducing
non-homothetic preferences ­as in Herrendorf, Rogerson, and Valentinyi (2013); Boppart (2014) and
Comin, Lashkari, and Mestieri (2018) ­ in a small open economy model and evaluating the input cost
    1
      See Bernard, Redding, and Schott (2007) for a multi-sector Melitz-type trade model that is used to study theoretically
the micro-level cross-sector reallocation following a trade liberalization.


                                                             6
and consumption channels together in a unified framework.
    Our consumption channel suggests the importance of non-homotheticities in preferences, which we
build into our multi-sector model. Hence, our paper is related to the literature showing that differences
in income elasticities across sectors can lead, in response to a trade liberalization, for example, those
with higher incomes to shift their consumption basket toward services. This, in turn, affects the in-
come distribution further, reallocation across sectors, aggregate outcomes, and the long-term path of
economies (Cravino and Levchenko 2017; Cravino and Sotelo 2019; Borusyak and Jaravel 2018; Fieler
2011; Hubmer 2018, among others). Our paper also relates to Aghion, Zilibotti, Peters, and Burgess
(2019) who use micro data on expenditure shares on India to show that increases in income per capita
associates with higher in the employment share in consumer services. Our paper contributes to this
literature by assessing the impact of non-homotheticities in a dynamic open economy model with het-
erogenous firms, and by studying how they affect the extensive margin and reallocation within and
across sectors at the short and long horizons.2
    The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the financial liberalization in Hungary, and
Section 3 overviews the data we use. Section 4 presents our identification strategy and empirical re-
sults. Section 5 lays out our model and Section 6 presents our quantitative analysis. Section 7 concludes.




2       Financial Liberalization in Hungary
To analyze the effect of capital inflows on the reallocation of resources, we exploit the deregulation of
international borrowing in Hungary in 2001. This section presents briefly the capital controls that were
in place in Hungary prior to 2001, and describes the deregulation and its aggregate implications.
    Capital controls were implemented by the Act XCV of 1995, which employed two main tools to limit
international financial flows. The first tool restricted banks' international financial flows by banning all
foreign currency instruments -chiefly among them foreign currency swaps and forward contracts. These
instruments allow hedging the currency risk and, thus, are critical for banks to raise foreign funds. The
second tool required banks' exchange rate spot transactions to be pre-approved by the Central Bank,
which made the spot exchange rate market illiquid. As discussed in Varela (2018), these restrictions
substantially limited banks' ability to intermediate foreign funds and made them reluctant to borrow
internationally. As a result, banks based their credit supply on domestic savings, which led to a low
level of credit. In 2000, Hungary's credit-to-GDP ratio (0.27) was three times smaller than the OECD
average (0.86), and its credit-to-deposit ratio was a third lower (0.83 against 1.2 in OECD countries).3
    In 2001, the Act XCIII removed these regulations and allowed banks for intermediate international
financial flows freely.4 The reform had a large impact on capital inflows as shown in Figure 1. In

    2
      Our paper also relates to firm dynamics models emphasizing how different allocation of resources across firms can
affect aggregate productivity (Restuccia and Rogerson 2008; Hsieh and Klenow 2009; Peters 2020; Buera and Moll 2015;
Buera and Shin 2017, among others).
    3
      There were additional regulations that prevented domestically-owned firms from borrowing from abroad, by banning
them from holding bank accounts in foreign currency (see Varela 2018 for more details).
    4
      This reform was triggered by the accession to the European Union. To join the EU, all candidate countries have
to accomplish the Copenhagen Criteria of 1993. One of these criteria is that candidates have to ensure free movement


                                                          7
the years after the liberalization (2001-2008), net financial inflows increased by more than three-fold
compared to the pre-liberalization period (1995-2000) and rose from 2.5 to 8.2 billions of USD per
year. The net foreign asset position of Hungary deteriorated and dropped by 25 percentage points of
GDP between 1995-2000 and 2001-2008 (Figure C.2 in Appendix C). Banks started to raise foreign
funds and to use intensively financial derivatives. Both cross-border and local derivatives soared and,
by 2007, banks' stock of external debt had increased by nine-fold, from 5 billions U.S. dollars to 45
billions U.S. dollars (Figure C.1). These inflows translated into an expansion of the local credit supply
and a decrease in the domestic lending rate. The credit-to-GDP ratio doubled (from 25 to 49%) and
the domestic lending rate drop from 22% to 10% between 1995-2000 and 2001-2008. While there was
already a deceasing trend in the domestic rate in Hungary since the nineties, after controlling from this
pre-trend, the lending interest rate dropped by 3 percentage points in the years following the reform (see
Table 7). Capital inflows associated an increased in consumption, shown by the raise of consumption
expenditure over GDP by 3 percentage points within the five years before and after the reform.5




                                 Figure 1: Hungary: Net Capital Inflows



3    Data
To analyze the impact of financial liberalization at the micro level, we employ firm-level census data
for the period 1992-2008. The dataset ­APEH­ contains panel data on balance sheets reported to tax
authorities for all firms subject to capital taxation in agriculture, manufacture and services activities.
It reports information on firms' value added, sales, output, capital, employment, wages, materials and
exports that we employ to construct measures of labor productivity (value added per worker), capital
intensity (capital per worker), export shares (export over sales). To obtain real values, we use price
indexes at four-digit NACE industries for materials, investment, value added, and production.
    To identify the input cost and consumption channels, we need to obtain capital and income elastic-
ities. We estimate the capital elasticity at four-digit NACE industries using the Petrin and Levinsohn

of capital, the only missing requirement in Hungary. The reform completed the deregulation of international financial
flows. Importantly, this reform was not associated with an increase in trade (export nor imports) with the EU not with
an increase in foreign direct investment, as shown in Figures C.3, C.4 and C.6 and discussed in Section 4.1.
    5
      Table C.1 in Appendix C confirms these patterns by splitting the before and after into different these time horizons.


                                                            8
(2012) and Wooldridge (2009) method to obtain the elasticities of the production function. We compute
them for the pre-liberalization period (1992-2000) to avoid endogeneity concerns. We find that agricul-
tural and manufacturing firms are more capital intensive ­with capital elasticity of 0.36­ and service
firms are more labor intensive -with capital elasticity of 0.30 (Table C.2 in Appendix C). For robustness,
we estimate the capital elasticity with the Olley and Pakes (1996) methodology and re-estimate our
results using these elasticities. We employ the capital and labor elasticities to compute revenue total
factor productivity (RTFP). To proxy income elasticity at the sector level, we employ the Engel curves
produced by Bils, Klenow, and Malin (2013) who estimate product level Engel elasticities from the U.S.
Consumer Expenditure Survey for 70 categories between 1982-2010. Importantly, Bils, Klenow, and
Malin (2013) map the Engel elasticities estimated for consumers to producers using the EU-KLEMS
data. We employ this map to assign to each two-digit sector an income elasticity. The sector with the
highest elasticities is real estate with an elasticity higher than two, and the lowest is food, beverage and
tobacco with an elasticity of 0.4 (Table C.3 in Appendix C). The mean income elasticity of manufactur-
ing and services are 0.96 and 1.19. For robustness, we use the income elasticities estimated by Comin,
Lashkari, and Mestieri (2018), who use data for thirty nine developed and developing economies since
1947 to estimate this elasticity for ten sectors (Table C.4 in Appendix C).
    Our database covers the entire population of Hungarian firms between 1992 and 2008. We only
exclude from our data education, health and public administration activities, as in Hungary these are
mostly public and especially regulated activities. Since small firms are subject to measurement error
problems, we keep firms that have a minimum of three employees in their lifetime. Our analysis covers
approximately all employment in manufacturing and service activities ­95% and 93% respectively­ and
more than 98% and 85% of their value added compared to EU-KLEMS data.6 To better isolate the
impact of the reform, we restrict the analysis to the period 1995-2008.




4       Empirics
4.1      Identification Strategy
To illustrate our empirical analysis, we start by sketching the main features of our model. We then
present our identification strategy and discuss possible concerns regarding the analysis, such as differ-
ences in firms' initial characteristics and previous growth trends, sample selection, and reverse causality.


-Sketch of a Model
We identify the consumption and relative input-cost channels during capital inflows through the lens
of a heterogeneous firm-dynamics model with multiple sectors where the consumer has non-homothetic
preferences. We present the full model in Section 5 but, to illustrate our empirical analysis, we describe
below the main relationships that drive our identification strategy. Think of a small economy that

    6
     Although the database accounts for almost all employment in the agricultural sector (98%), its share of agricultural
value added reaches 54%. This smaller representativeness on agricultural value added does not significantly affect our
results as the these activities accounted only for 5% of GDP according to EU KLEMS data. Note that mis-reporting is
not uncommon in agricultural activities, see for example Herrendorf and Schoellman (2015).


                                                           9
produces a final good ­C ­ which is composed by multiple sectors j that differ in their income elasticity
ej . The representative household maximizes its intertemporal utility and has non-homothetic preferences
                                                                                                             1    ej -      -1
                                                                                                                    
à la Comin, Lashkari, and Mestieri (2018), with the following functional form 1 =                        j j Ct          Cj,t     ,
where  is the elasticity of substitution between sectors and j is constant weight parameter. Within each
sector j , there are monopolistically competitive firms that produce an infinite number of differentiated
varieties. These intermediate firms are heterogeneous in productivity à la Melitz (2003) and produce
                                                                                                
using a Cobb-Douglas technology based on capital and labor, q()t =  kt j lt j , where  is a firm's
productivity and the elasticities of capital and labor ­ j and j ­ are heterogenous across sectors.
                                                                                                                             j,t
As in Melitz (2003), firms' optimal price is a constant markup over their marginal costs, e.g.                                ,
                   k 
                  rt j wt j
where j,t         j    j        is the input-price bundle and 1/ is the markup. In equilibrium, the optimal
production of each firm ­qjt ()­ is given by

                                                             -
                                                       j            e     - 
                                          qjt () =               j Ct j Pj,t Pt .                                               (1)
                                                       

   Equation (1) illustrates how the relative input-cost and consumption channels impact a firm's pro-
duction. Intuitively, other things equal, a decrease in the relative price of capital (rk and, thus, j,t )
lowers the input price bundle and encourages production, especially in sectors with higher capital elas-
ticity (higher j ). Similarly, an increase in the final good consumption (C ) promotes the production
of firms in sectors with high income elasticity (higher ej ) relatively more.7 Hence, these two structural
parameters of the model ­ j and ej ­ allow us to identify the relative input-cost and consumption
channels on firms' production. In the rest of the paper, we exploit differences in these two structural
parameters to identify the impact of capital inflows across sectors.


-Identification Strategy
The identification strategy of the effect of the deregulation of capital flows in Hungary in 2001 is based
on three sources of variation: the reform as a source of time variation and the differences in capital
and income elasticities across sectors as sources of cross-sectional variation. We evaluate the relative
input-cost and consumption channels in three steps. First, we assess the relative input-cost channel
by estimating the differential impact of the reform across sectors with different capital elasticity, and
assess whether firms in more capital intensive sectors expand differentially upon the reform. Second,
we study the consumption channel by exploiting variations in terms of sector's income elasticity and
testing whether firms grow differentially according to the implied income elasticity in the sector. Third,
we conduct a horse race between the capital and income elasticities to assess whether the relative input
cost or consumption channel dominates.
   To identify the effect of the reform, it is important to determine whether firms differed in charac-
teristics that could involve heterogeneous patterns of investment and growth across sectors. If these
differences were not accounted for, the estimated coefficients could be biased. To assess this, we esti-


   7                                                                       log (qjt ())                  log (qjt ())
       As shown formally in Appendix B, the partial effects are given by         k /w )
                                                                           log (rt
                                                                                          = -j < 0 and    log (Ct )
                                                                                                                        = ej > 0.
                                                                                     t




                                                            10
mate firms' main characteristics according to sectors' capital and income elasticities in the pre-reform
period (1995-2000). Table C.5 in Appendix C shows that capital elasticity correlates positively with
firm size. In particular, firms in sectors with higher capital elasticity were ­on average­ larger (value
added, capital, employment), older and more productive, and had a higher capital-labor ratio. Inversely,
firms in sectors with higher income elasticity tend to be smaller, younger and less productive, and had
a lower capital-labor ratio. Because the difference in means in these variables is statistically significant,
we control for them in the reduced-form regressions.8
    A critical assumption of the empirical strategy is that firms shared similar growth trends before
the reform. To assess the parallel trend assumption, we check whether firms had different growth rates
across sectors in accordance with their capital and income elasticities. With this end, we compute firms'
yearly growth rates in the main variables analyzed ­value added, capital intensity and capital­ during
the pre-liberalization period (1995-2000) and test whether they correlate with the capital and income
elasticities. To control for sector-time invariant characteristics as well as sector-specific shocks, we
include in our regressions sector-fixed effects and sector-year fixed effects interacted, which are defined
at two-digit level for capital elasticity and at one-digit level for income elasticity. As we show in Table C.6
in Appendix C, neither the capital elasticity nor the income elasticity correlate with higher growth in the
pre-reform period. This result addresses concerns over pre-existing growth trends, however, as shocks
could affect sectors differently, in our reduced-form regressions, we control for year, and sector-year fixed
effects interacted together. Because capital elasticities are estimated at four-digit NACE industries and
income elasticities are at two-digit NACE industries, we define sector fixed effects at two-digit industries
when estimating regressions with the former and one-digit when estimating regressions with the latter.
    A critical hypothesis is that the sample is not subject to selection issues. If the survival probability
differed across sectors over time, the estimated coefficients would only be assessed with respect to the
surviving firms (see Heckman 1974 and Heckman 1979). To assess whether this missing data problem
challenges our estimations, we check whether there are differences in the probability of firms being
observed across sectors. In particular, we define a surviving firm if it existed the year before the reform
(2000) and did not exit in 2008. Next, we compute the survival ratio and regress it on sectors' capital and
income elasticities. Results show no statistically significant difference between the survival probability of
firms across sectors with different capital elasticities (Table C.7 in Appendix C). Interesting, in sectors
with high income elasticity, the survival probability decreases. This result is not surprising in light with
our findings pointing to a differential increase in entry upon the liberalization (Section 4.2.1). It would
not be surprising that entrants increase competitive pressure on existing firms and trigger some exit.
Our results on income elasticity should then be considered as an upper bound conditional on survival.
    The reform was driven by the accession of transition economies to the EU. The requirements to join
the EU were predetermined by the Copenhagen Criteria in 1993 and have been equal for all accessing
countries since then. In this sense, the content of the reform was exogenous to the country's political
choice. As the agenda was jointly determined by the European Council and the candidate countries, it


     8
       Table C.9 in Appendix C presents descriptive statistics for agriculture, manufacturing and services, and shows that
these difference in firms' size is present across these broadly defined sectors. Additionally, Table C.10 shows that the
difference in means is statistically significant among them.


                                                           11
is unlikely to have been driven by political pressure from Hungarian firms.9 The economy was growing
at a steady pace during the years prior to the liberalization. Notably, real external flows ­as trade and
foreign direct investment­ remained constant.10 Second, major reforms had already taken place during
the early 1990s, such as privatization of public companies, bank deregulation, and competition laws.11
Furthermore, the number of credit institutions did not change (Table C.8). Finally, the Hungarian
economy was already deeply integrated with the EU: exports to the EU already accounted for 80% of
total exports in 2001 (Figures C.3 and C.4). It is worth mentioning that the patterns of capital inflows
observed in Hungary cannot be attributed to the joining of the EU, as the timing does not coincide with
the accession, and other similar candidates with already deregulated financial accounts do not show the
pattern of capital inflows observed in Hungary (Figure C.7). Notice that Hungary did not join the Euro
zone and, hence, did not have to fulfill any monetary or fiscal criteria.



4.2     Firm-Level Analysis: Relative Input-Cost and Consumption Channels
In this section, we assess the relative input-cost and consumption effects implied in international financial
integration at the firm-level. We use our theoretical framework to guide our empirical analysis and
identify the effect of the financial liberalization through the structural parameters of the model. In
particular, we test whether upon the financial liberalization in Hungary, firms expanded differentially
according to the capital and income elasticity prevailing in the sector.
    To illustrate our analysis, consider equation (1) that indicates a firm's production in equilibrium.
After applying logs and rearranging terms, we can write this equation as follows (details of this derivation
are in Appendix B):

                                       k
                 log(qi,t ) = -j  log(rt /wt ) + em log(Ct ) + ( -  ) log(Pjt ) + µi + t + it ,                         (2)

where i denotes the firm, and µi and t are firm and year fixed effects. We denote the capital elasticity
at four-digit NACE industry level as j , and the income elasticity at two-digit NACE industry level as
m. Equation (2) shows how the relative input-cost and consumption channels affect firms' production.
In particular, a comparative static exercise illustrates that a decrease in the relative price of capital
increases a firm's production. Importantly, this effect is heterogeneous across sectors and is higher for
                                                             log(qi,t )
sectors with high capital elasticity (high j ), e.g.              k /w )
                                                             log(rt
                                                                           = -j  < 0. Equation (2) also illustrates
                                                                       t
the consumption channel. An increase in aggregate consumption expands differentially output of firms

   9
       It is worth mentioning that, given the speed of the reform, it is unlikely that firms anticipated it and undertook
investment in advance. In December 2000, the European Council defined the timing for the accession vote and the last
requirements to be met by each candidate. The reform had to take place before the accession vote in December 2002.
Soon after the European Council meeting, in March 2001, Hungary deregulated the remaining controls on financial flows.
    10
       During the years preceding and following the reform, FDI remained constant and even showed a small slowdown
following the deregulation (see Figure C.6). Moreover, Hungarian external trade did not seem to have particularly suffered
from the world recession in 2001. The volume of exports and imports continued to grow during that period (Figure C.5).
    11
       Major privatization programs occurred in the early 1990s, and by 1997, the share of public companies in manufacturing
value added was only 2%. The banking sector had already achieved a major transformation by 1997, and neither banking
concentration nor its efficiency changed around the liberalization. In particular, according to data from Beck, Demirguc-
Kunt, and Levine (2010), there were no changes in banks' concentration index, interest rate margin, overhead costs-to-assets
ratio, nor cost-income ratio (Varela 2018).


                                                            12
                                                              log(qi,t )
in sectors with higher income elasticity (high em ), e.g.     log(Ct )     = em > 0.
   Equation (2) is expressed at yearly basis, computing year-to-year variations. Yet, to estimate the
impact of a policy reform, we can re-write this equation as a difference-in-difference estimator. In
particular, we define a dummy variable FLt for the post-liberalization period (FLt = 1 if year  2001-
2008 and 0 otherwise), and estimate differences between before and after the liberalization. That is,

            log(qi,t ) = 1 (j x FLt ) + 2 (em x FLt ) + µi + t + log Pjt + sector x year FE + ijt .          (3)

The coefficients of interest are 1 and 2 that capture the impact of the reform across sectors with
different capital and income elasticities, respectively. Given that the financial liberalization decreased
the relative price of capital and increased consumption, we expect both be positive, e.g. 1 , 2 > 0. To
account for changes in the industry price level, we include as a control the investment price index at
four-digit NACE industries. Additionally, to control sector-specific shocks that could affect industries
differentially, we add in our regression sector and year fixed effects interacted. We cluster standard
errors at the firm-level.
   Similarly, we express firms' capital demand and capital-labor ratio as a function of the structural
parameters of the model, and obtain a similar expression as equation (3) (see Appendix B). In these
regressions, we control by the producer price index at four-digit NACE industries (instead of the in-
vestment price index) to avoid simultaneity concerns.

4.2.1   Empirical Results

We start by describing the effect of the financial liberalization within firms across sectors with different
capital and income elasticities in Hungary. The estimated coefficients are presented in Table 1, which
reports in Panel A the results on the relative input cost channel, in Panel B the results on the consump-
tion channel and in Panel C the horse race between the relative input-cost and consumption channels
together.
   Columns 1-3 in Panel A present the results on the cross-section of capital elasticities on firms' value
added. The estimated coefficients are highly significant in all specifications and indicate that sectors with
higher capital elasticity differently increase value added after the financial liberalization. In particular,
column 1 shows that a one standard deviation increase in the capital elasticity (0.045) associates with
a 2% expansion in firms' value added, after including firm and year fixed effects. This result implies
that a sector in the p75 of capital elasticity ­as machinery and equipment­ has a 3% higher increase in
value added than a sector in the p25 of capital elasticity ­such as retail trade. Column 2 adds sector
and year fixed effects interacted and column 3 controls by changes in the industry price index. After
the inclusion of all controls, the estimated coefficient implies that one standard deviation increase in
the capital elasticity associates with 1% higher expansion in value added.
   Columns 4-6 reports the results of capital intensity and show that all the estimated coefficients are
positive and highly statistically significant. In particular, sectors with high capital elasticity differentially
increase their capital intensity following the reform. After including all controls, the coefficient in column
6 indicates that one standard deviation increase in the capital elasticity leads to 2% expansion in capital-
labor ratio. This implies that a sector like machinery and equipment (p75) has a 2.3% higher increase

                                                       13
in the capital-labor ratio than retail trade (p25). The expansion in the capital intensity is driven by a
differential increase in firms' capital, shown in columns 7-9.

  Table 1: Relative Input Cost and Consumption Effects of Financial Liberalization


                                                      Log Value Added                              Log Capital Intensity                                 Log Capital

                                          (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)             (7)             (8)             (9)
                                                                                        Panel A. Capital Elasticity

   FL * Capital Elasticity                0.512***        0.199*          0.151**         0.435***        0.378***        0.369***        0.668***        0.470***        0.452***
                                          (0.098)         (0.107)         (0.070)         (0.075)         (0.062)         (0.062)         (0.104)         (0.132)         (0.132)
   R2                                     0.773           0.774           0.774           0.790           0.791           0.791           0.845           0.846           0.846

                                                                                        Panel B. Income Elasticity

   FL * Income Elasticity                 0.017**         0.026***        0.070***        -0.131***       -0.044**        -0.067***       -0.048***       -0.124***       -0.113***
                                          (0.008)         (0.009)         (0.010)         (0.011)         (0.018)         (0.018)         (0.012)         (0.008)         (0.008)
   R2                                     0.772           0.773           0.774           0.790           0.791           0.791           0.845           0.845           0.845

                                                                                Panel C. Capital and Income Elasticities

   FL * Capital Elasticity                0.538***        0.171***        0.116**         0.367***        0.223**         0.205*          0.636***        0.797***        0.757***
                                          (0.063)         (0.056)         (0.059)         (0.095)         (0.106)         (0.106)         (0.105)         (0.116)         (0.117)
   FL * Income Elasticity                 0.015*          0.016*          0.060***        -0.128***       -0.039**        -0.036**        -0.041***       -0.107***       -0.098***
                                          (0.008)         (0.009)         (0.010)         (0.012)         (0.018)         (0.018)         (0.012)         (0.018)         (0.018)
   R2                                     0.776           0.784           0.796           0.790           0.791           0.791           0.845           0.845           0.845

   Firm FE                                Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
   Year FE                                Yes                                             Yes                                             Yes
   Sector* Year FE                                        Yes             Yes                             Yes             Yes                             Yes             Yes
   Sector Price Index                                                     Yes                                             Yes                                             Yes
   N                                      1,211,051       1,211,051       1,211,051       1,187,372       1,187,372       1,187,372       1,187,372       1,187,372       1,187,372
   Notes: *, **, *** significant at 10, 5, and 1 percent. Std. errors are clustered at the firm-level. The capital elasticity is estimated using the Petrin and Levinsohn (2012)
   and Wooldridge (2009) methods used at four-digit NACE industries, and the income elasticity comes from Bils, Klenow, and Malin (2013), reported at two-digit NACE
   industries. Source: APEH.




   Panel B reports the estimated coefficients for the consumption channel and shows that sectors with
higher income elasticity see a differential expansion in their value added. After including all controls
in column 3, the estimated coefficient implies that a one standard deviation increase in the income
elasticity (0.42) raises firms' value added by 3%. This coefficient implies that, for example, a sector as
other business activities (p75) experiences a 3.5% higher increase in value added than retail (p25). The
estimated coefficient on capital intensity is negative indicating that firms decrease their capital-labor
ratio, after the inclusion of all controls in column 6. Columns 7-9 present the results for capital and
suggests that firms with high income elasticity decrease their capital.
   Panel C presents the results of equation (3) where both capital and income elasticities are included
together as regressors. Importantly, the estimated coefficients for both elasticities on value added are
statistically significant and very closed to the regressions estimated individually in Panels A and B. This
suggest that following the financial liberalization firms increase their value added in accordance with
their capital and income elasticities. In particular, after including all controls in column 3, the estimated
coefficient implies that firms' value added expands by 1% and 2.5% following a one standard deviation
increase in the capital and income elasticities, respectively. Column 6 reports the coefficient for capital
intensity after including all controls. As above, this coefficient indicates that sectors with higher capital
elasticity increase their capital-labor ratio differentially. This expansion is explained by the increase
firms' capital as a function of firms capital elasticity. To check whether the increased investment in

                                                                                          14
sectors with high capital elasticity corresponds to higher access to external finance after the reform ­as
the input-cost channel implies­, we regress equation (3) using leverage as dependent variable. Table
C.11 confirms that firms in high capital elasticity sectors increase their leverage relatively more.12
    We conduct a full set of robustness tests and extensions. First, to check that our results are not
driven by exporters, we exclude them from the analysis. Columns 1-3 in Table C.12 in Appendix C show
that, after including all controls, the estimated coefficients are similar in size for value added than in the
benchmark specification, but are larger for capital intensity and capital. These results suggest that non-
exporters with higher capital elasticity benefited most from the financial liberalization. Second, we assess
whether results are robust to excluding foreign-owned companies. Columns 4-6 in Table C.12 show that
the estimated coefficients are statistically significant, and higher, indicating that domestically-owned
firms benefited most from the financial liberalization. Third, we omit government-owned companies and
show that results are robust to this control (columns 7-9 in Table C.12). Together these results indicate
that the expansion upon the financial liberalization is mainly driven by non-exporters and domestic
firms. Fourth, in Table C.13, we estimate the capital elasticities using Olley and Pakes (1996) method
and use the income elasticities estimated by Comin, Lashkari, and Mestieri (2018) to show that our
results hold true under different methodologies to estimate these elasticities. Finally, Table C.14 shows
that results are robust to using the balanced panel of firms present between 1995 and 2008.
    An important assumption in the analysis is that sectors' characteristics do not correlate with dif-
ferential access to external finance. If ­ for example­ firms in sectors with high income elasticity were
more credit constrained, the estimated coefficients could be subject to omitted variable bias and capture
a relaxation of financial constraints, instead of the consumption channel. To check this possibility, we
employ the financial dependence index of Rajan and Zingales (1998) at four-digit industries level, and
re-estimate equation (3) augmented with an interaction variable of the financial dependence index with
the reform dummy. This interaction term captures whether more financially dependent sectors expand
more after the reform. Results ­ presented in Panel A of Table C.16 ­ show that this interaction term is
positive and statistically significant, but it does not overpower the relative input-cost and consumption
channels. The estimated coefficients for both capital and income elasticities remain similar in size and
highly statistically significant, which confirms the validity of these two channels.13 Additionally, we
conduct a second exercise to assess whether changes in credit conditions along the supply chain could
affect our results, we use the input-output matrix of Hungary in the pre-reform period (2000) and es-
timate the financial dependence index of the closest industry supplier. Then, we augment our previous
regression in Panel A of Table C.16 with the interaction of the financial dependent index of the supplier
and the reform dummy. Panel B in Table C.16 presents the results and confirms that the capital and
income elasticities remain highly statistically significant after these controls.
    To check whether the expansion in the consumption channel corresponds to increased demand and
  12
     Our measure of leverage is short-term debt over sales, as our data does not report long-term debt before 2005.
  13
     This index measures the amount of investment that cannot be financed through internal cash flows for U.S. listed
firms and is used as a proxy for sectors' technological needs for external finance. As capital markets are largely advanced
in the U.S. and listed firms are less likely to be credit constrained, this index tends to capture the technical needs for
external finance in the sector. As this index was originally built for manufacturing firms, we follow Rajan and Zingales
(1998) methodology to build this index for services at four-digit industry level. Note that using an index estimated for
U.S. firms avoids endogeneity concerns of financial frictions in Hungary. The correlation of the financial dependence index
and the capital and income elasticities is positive but small reaching 7.6% and 3.5%, respectively.


                                                            15
not to a differential ease of credit constraints for firms in high income elasticity sectors, we assess
whether this channel remains valid for firms without access to external finance in two steps. First, we
employ data from short-term loans with financial institutions between 1999 and 2008 to re-estimate
regression (3) for firms that do not employ this financing.14 Results ­ presented in column 1 of Table
C.17­ confirm that firms in sectors with high income elasticity expand differentially their value added,
even in the absence of short-term credit. Second, we use credit registry data from 2005 and conduct a
similar analysis for firms that do not report any type of credit between 2005 and 2008.15 Column 3 in
Table C.17 confirms our previous result and shows that firms in high income elasticity sectors expand
their value added more, even in the absence of credit. Lastly, it is worth remarking on the results
for capital intensity across industries with different capital elasticity ­ reported in columns 2 and 5 in
Table C.17­, which are non-statistically significant. These results indicate that firms in capital intensive
sectors without access to credit do not increase their capital intensity and, thus, confirm the relative
input-cost channel proposed in this paper.
    Results presented in this section indicate that capital inflows upon the financial liberalization in
Hungary associate with relative input-cost effects across sectors with high capital elasticity and con-
sumption effects towards goods with high income elasticity. In the next section, we evaluate the impact
of these forces at the industry level.



4.3     Industry-Level Analysis
Last section considered the impact of the financial liberalization within firms for sectors with different
capital and income elasticities. We now turn to assess its impact at the industry level. With this end,
we analyze the data at four-digit NACE industries and estimate the following regression:


                       log(yj,t ) = 1 (j x FLt ) + 2 (em x FLt ) + sector FE + t + j,t ,                                 (4)

where yjt represents the log number of firms, log firms' size (value added per firm), the log sectoral
RTFP and the log producer price index.16 We include year and sector fixed effects in all specifications.
    Column 1 in Table 3 reports the estimated coefficient for the mass of firms. The coefficients for
both capital and income elasticities are highly statistically significant, and indicate that the number of
firms decreases in sectors' capital elasticity and increases in sectors' income elasticity. The magnitude
of these changes is economically significant as well, following a one standard deviation increase in the
capital elasticity the number of firms drops by 8%. In contrast, a one standard deviation increase in
the income elasticity raises the number of firms by 16%. Moving from the p25 to the p75 of the capital
elasticity implies a differential decrease in the number of firms by 11%, while moving from the p25

  14
      Unfortunately, the APEH balance sheet data only reports short-term credit with financial institutions since 1999, but
it does not report long-term credit.
   15
      The credit registry data only begins in 2005. Nevertheless, it worth remarking that firms that access to credit tend to
keep it during the period (i.e. there is not much turn over in the access to credit within firms from one year to another).
   16
      Sectoral RTFP is computed as the sum of firms' individual productivities weighted by their respective value added
share in the sector. See for example Foster, Haltiwanger, and Syverson (2008) and Baqaee and Farhi (2017) for a similar
measure of RTFP.


                                                             16
to p75 of income elasticity leads to a 19% higher increase in the number of firms. These results are
parallel to changes in firms' size. The estimated coefficients in column 2 indicate that the value added
per firm increases in capital elasticity (5.4%), and decreases in income elasticities (5%). Together these
results could suggest an increase in the operational cut-off for producing in industries with high capital
elasticity, and a decrease in the cut-off in industries with high income elasticity.

                                                 Table 2: Industry-Level Analysis


                                                Log Number                Log Firm Size             Log Industry               Log Producer
                                                of Firms                  (VA x firm)               RTFP                       Price Index

                                                (1)                       (2)                    (3)                           (4)
                                                                                  Capital and Income Elasticities

         FL * Capital Elasticity                -1.816***                 1.212***                  0.768**                    -0.305***
                                                (0.239)                   (0.281)                   (0.331)                    (0.052)
         FL * Income Elasticity                 0.384***                  -0.111**                  -0.036                     0.061***
                                                (0.041)                   (0.048)                   (0.056)                    (0.009)
         R2                                     0.936                     0.900                     0.847                      0.941
         Year FE                                Yes                       Yes                       Yes                        Yes
         Sector FE                              Yes                       Yes                       Yes                        Yes
         N                                      3,605                     3,605                     3,605                      3,605
         Notes: *, **, *** significant at 10, 5, and 1 percent. Std. errors are clustered at the firm-level. The capital elasticity is estimated using the
         Petrin and Levinsohn (2012) and Wooldridge (2009) methods used at four-digit NACE industries, and the income elasticity comes from Bils,
         Klenow, and Malin (2013), reported at two-digit NACE industries. Source: APEH.




   An alternative manner to assess whether there are changes in the operational cut-off is to study
changes in industry's productivity. As in the standard Melitz's model, increases in the operational
cut-off associate with increases in industry's productivity because only high productivity firms produce.
In this line, column 3 shows that sectoral RTFP raises in industry's capital elasticity. The estimated
coefficient is statistically significant and implies that a one percent increase in the capital elasticity raises
the industry's RTFP by 3.5%. The coefficient for income elasticity is negative, albeit non-statistically
different from zero. In line with these changes, the producer price index decreases in industry's capital
elasticity and increases in income elasticity. A one standard deviation increase in the capital elasticity
decreases the producer price index by 1.4%, while its increases by 3% in income elasticity.



4.4    Extensive Margin
Results presented in the previous section suggest changes in the operational cut-off as a function of
industries' capital and income elasticities. In this section, we assess their implications in the entry of
new firms and their characteristics.
   We start by estimating equation (4) and employ the log number of net entrants (entry-exit) and
entrants as dependent variables. In line with a decrease in the operational cut-off as a function of
income elasticity, results in Table 3 indicate an increase in net entry in these industries. In particular,
a one standard deviation increase in the income elasticity raises the number of net entrants by 12%. In
contrast, the coefficient for capital elasticity on net entry is negative ­albeit non-statistically significant­
as the increase in the operational cut-off suggested above would imply. Column 2 confirms these

                                                                                17
results when the log of number of entrants is considered in the analysis. To evaluate the characteristics
of new entrants, we restrict our analysis to entrant firms and test whether they differ in observable
characteristics ­RTFP and value added ­ upon the financial liberalization. Columns 3 and 4 in Table
3 show that, in sectors with higher capital elasticity, entrants were more productive and larger, whilst,
in sectors with high income elasticity, entrants were less productive and smaller. These results provide
additional support for a decrease in the operational cut-off in high income elasticity industries and an
increase in high capital elasticity industries.

                                                      Table 3: Extensive Margin


                                                             Industry-Level Analysis                           Firm-Level Analysis
                                                   Log Net Entrants        Log Entrants             Log RTFP                Log VA

                                                   (1)                     (2)                      (3)                     (4)
             FL * Capital Elasticity               -0.110                  0.414                    0.702***                0.390*
                                                   (0.764)                 (1.123)                  (0.212)                 (0.215)
             FL * Income Elasticity                0.289***                0.676***                 -0.293***               -0.099***
                                                   (0.105)                 (0.163)                  (0.030)                 (0.026)
             Year FE                               Yes                     Yes                      Yes                     Yes
             Sector FE                             Yes                     Yes                      Yes                     Yes
             R2                                    0.904                   0.858                    0.081                   0.072
             N                                     3,605                   3,605                    93,149                  168,558
             Notes: *, **, *** significant at 10, 5, and 1 percent. The capital elasticity is estimated using the Petrin and Levinsohn (2012)
             and Wooldridge (2009) methods used at four-digit NACE industries, and the income elasticity comes from Bils, Klenow, and
             Malin (2013), reported at two-digit NACE industries. Source: APEH.




    To illustrate the expansion of entry as a function of the industry's income elasticity, we evaluate
the yearly number of net entrants and entrants per industry in the pre- and post-reform periods. In
particular, we estimate a regression: ym,t = 1 (em x FLt ) + 2 em + 3 (m x FLt ) + 4 m + m,t , where
ym,t is net entry or entry, and plot the predicted values for these variables before and after the reform.17
These values capture the relationship between entrants and income elasticity, once industry's capital
elasticity is controlled for. Figure 2 shows clearly that the number of net entrants and entrants is highly
and positively related with sector's income elasticity after the financial liberalization. The contrast with
the pre-liberalization period is stunning. Before the reform the relationship between entry and income
elasticity is almost flat, but after it is highly positive. After the reform, an industry with an income
elasticity of 1.8 ­as restaurants and bars­ had on average more than 1,500 new firms created per year,
which is 1,200 more firms than an industry with low income elasticity (such as agriculture).
    This figure confirms that the financial liberalization in Hungary associates with higher entry in those
sectors that high income elasticity and, hence, that experienced the highest increase in demand. We
now go one step further and show in Table 4 the top fifteen sectors defined at four-digit NACE industries
that experienced the highest number of net entrants in the post-liberalization period.
    Column 1 shows that all these sectors are in services and are dominated by real estate, construction,
  17
     Rt is a dummy variable that equals to 1 for the post-reform period (Rt  2001) and 0 otherwise. Therefore,
the coefficient 1 captures the relationship in the post-liberalization period, and 2 captures the relationship in the pre-
liberalization period (i.e. when Rt = 0). For robustness, Figure C.8 in Appendix C presents these relationships constructed
as simple difference in means (i.e. without regression analysis).


                                                                             18
                                    Number of Net Entrants                                                                    Number of Entrants


            1000




                                                                                                    2000
            800




                                                                                                    1500
            600




                                                                                                    1000
            400




                                                                                                    500
            200




                                          After (2007-2001)    Before (1995-2000)                                             After (2007-2001)          Before (1995-2000)
            0




                                                                                                    0
                   .4                .9                           1.4                   1.9                .4            .9                                 1.4                    1.9
                                                 Income Elasticity                                                                   Income Elasticity




                                                                                Figure 2: Net Entrants

                                    Table 4: Top 15 Industries in Net Entry (2001-2007)


Broad      Sector                                Industry            Description                                                                  Income               Net entry   Number of   Share agg.
Sector     (II digits)                           (IV digits)                                                                                      elasticity           per year    employees   employment
                                                                                                                                                                                               (in %)
(1)        (2)                                   (3)                 (4)                                                                          (5)                  (6)         (7)         (8)
Service    Real estate activities                7012                Buying and selling of own real estate                                        2.02                 982         2           0.08
Service    Construction                          4521                General construction of buildings and civil engineering works                0.89                 505         3           0.21
Service    Hotels and restaurants                5530                Restaurants                                                                  1.80                 480         3           0.13
Service    Other business activities             7414                Business and management consultancy activities                               1.35                 446         2           0.08
Service    Other business activities             7487                Other business activities n.e.c.                                             1.35                 439         3           0.10
Service    Retail trade                          5248                Other retail sale in specialized stores                                      0.83                 420         2           0.06
Service    Land transport                        6024                Freight transport by road                                                    2.02                 404         3           0.08
Service    Other business activities             7420                Architectural and engineering activities and related techni-                 1.35                 363         2           0.06
                                                                     cal consultancy
Service    Real estate activities                7020                Letting of own property                                                      2.02                 297         4           0.03
Service    Retail trade                          5211                Retail sale in non-specialized stores with food, beverages or                0.83                 271         4           0.11
                                                                     tobacco predominating
Service    Sale, maintenance and                 5010                Sale of motor vehicles                                                       0.85                 250         2           0.06
           repair of motor vehicles
Service    Hotels and restaurants                5540                Bars                                                                         1.80                 248         2           0.04
Service    Retail trade                          5263                Other non-store retail sale                                                  0.83                 229         2           0.02
Service    Construction                          4531                Installation of electrical wiring and fittings                               0.89                 212         3           0.05
Service    Other business activities             7411                Legal activities                                                             1.35                 211         2           0.04
Total                                                                                                                                                                  5,755                   1.68
Note: this table presents the yearly number of entrants in the post-liberalization period per four-digit NACE industries. Source: APEH.




restaurants and bars, retail trade, transport and business activities. The four-digit industries that have
seen larger number of net entrants are: buying and selling own real state, construction of buildings,
restaurants, consultancy and other business activities, which are sectors that have income elasticity
(columns 4-6). It is important to note that firms entering are typically very small and do not exceed
four employees on average (column 7). Finally, the importance of new entrants in aggregate employment
is not negligible. In the year of entry, they account for 1.7% of aggregate employment.18 By 2008, firms
that entry after the reform accounted for more than 15 percentage points of the share of value added
and employment in services (Figure C.9 in Appendix C).




  18
       For completeness, Table C.18 in Appendix C presents the top 30 sectors in net entry.


                                                                                               19
4.5         Implications for Broadly Defined Sectors
The previous section reported an increase in the net entry of sectors with high income elasticity fol-
lowing the financial liberalization in Hungary. Our empirical evidence also points to reductions in the
operational cut-off for producing in sectors with high income elasticity and increases in it in sectors
with high capital elasticity. These changes in cut-offs suggest the presence of reallocation forces across
sectors and, in particular, towards sectors with high income elasticity. To analyze the aggregate im-
plication of these forces, we consider broadly-defined sectors ­manufacturing and services­ and check
whether financial openness reallocates resources across them. As discussed in Section 3, our estimations
for capital and income elasticities imply that the manufacturing sector is capital intensive and has lower
income elasticity, while the service sector is labor intensive and has high income elasticity.
   To assess whether the relative input-cost and consumption channels imply reallocation forces be-
tween manufacturing and services, we compute the share of value added, employment and mass of firms
of services (on the total of manufacturing and service activities) and regress them on a time trend
and dummy variables for the years following the financial liberalization. More precisely, we estimate
                   2008
ys,t =             i=2001 i Di               + Timet + st , where s denotes the service sector and Di = 1 if year = i and 0
otherwise. The  coefficients capture whether the share of services increases differentially than the time
trend following the financial liberalization in 2001. Figure 3 plots the estimated coefficients for each
year and shows that upon the liberalization, the share of services in value added, employment and mass
of firms increases and is statistically different from the pre-liberalization trend. These results provide
suggestive evidence that, on the aggregate, the consumption channel dominates the relative input-cost
channel and resources reallocate toward services activities.19


                                                            Change in the Share of Services in the Economy
                                     Value Added                                                     Employment                                                  Mass of Firms
                                                                          .15
          .2




                                                                                                                                         .03
          .15




                                                                                                                                         .02
                                                                          .1
          .1




                                                                                                                                         .01
                                                                          .05
          .05




                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                         -.01
          0




                                                                          0




                2001   2002   2003    2004    2005   2006   2007   2008         2001   2002   2003    2004   2005   2006   2007   2008          2001   2002   2003   2004   2005   2006   2007   2008


        Note: 95% Confidence Interval




                                                            Figure 3: Reallocation across sectors




  19
       Figure C.10 shows the estimated coefficient for the manufacturing sector.


                                                                                                       20
Taking Stock and External Validity
Results presented above assessed the relative input-cost and consumption channels implied in financial
liberalization. We showed that, accordingly with the relative input-cost channel, firms in industries with
high capital elasticity differentially increased their value added and capital intensity. Additionally, we
provided evidence for the consumption channel, as firms in high income elasticity industries increased
their value added relatively more. Our results also point to large reallocation of resources within sectors.
In particular, they suggest that the productivity threshold to operate increases as a function of sectors'
capital elasticity. The decline in the number of producing firms and the rise in firms' size point to
this direction. Inversely, in sectors with high income elasticity, our results suggest a decline in the
productivity cut-off to operate. In these industries, we find an increase in the number of firms, a
decrease in firms' size, an increase in net entry and a decline in the size of entrants. On the aggregate,
our results suggest that the consumption channel dominates and resources shift toward services.
    A final question about the external validity of our results remains. The Hungarian financial liberal-
ization illustrates that after this reform resources shifted towards services, but does this fact hold true
for the cross-section of countries? We now assess this question by checking whether financial liberaliza-
tion correlates with increases in the share of value added in services in the cross-section of countries.
For expositional purposes, we present the details of this analysis in Appendix A and focus here on the
main results. We employ the Chinn and Ito (2008) index of capital account openness and World Bank
Data for 163 countries over the period 1970 to 2015, and assess this correlation in three steps. First,
we compute a simple correlation and show in Figure A1 that financial liberalization episodes correlate
with increases in the value added share of services. Second, we employ five years non-overlapping panel
data and confirm this correlation in an OLS estimator (Table A1 column 7). Finally, since the OLS
estimator could be subject to simultaneity bias, we estimate a GMM dynamic panel. After including a
full set of controls ­such as trade openness, government size, financial depth and financial crises­, we
confirm that financial liberalization episodes associate with reallocation of resources towards services.
The estimated coefficient is highly statistically significant and indicates that a one standard deviation
increase in the index of financial openness associates with a 2.1% increase in the value added share of
services within the five years after the reform (Table A1, columns 8 and 9). This expansion is also
economically significant and implies that ­ for the average country ­ the value added share of services
raises by 1.1 percentage points five years after the liberalization.20 In the next section, we build a het-
erogeneous firm dynamics model that rationalizes these findings, quantifies the aggregate implications
of the financial liberalization, and assesses whether the findings are permanent.




5     Model
This section develops a small economy model to study the macroeconomic and microeconomic impacts
of capital account liberalization. In the model, there are two sectors ­manufacturing and services­ each
  20
     These results are close to Benigno, Converse, and Fornaro (2015) who identify episodes of large capital inflows for 70
middle- and high-income countries and show that large inflows associate with increases in the value added share of services.


                                                            21
of which consists of heterogeneous firms à la Melitz (2003). Firms use capital and labor as factors of
production. The manufacturing good can be traded internationally, but services are non-traded. We
allow for capital control to prevent local households from perfectly accessing international funds. We
model a financial liberalization as an unexpected decrease in capital controls during the economy's
transition to its steady state. We employ the model to study the impact of financial liberalization on
consumption and saving patters, current account imbalances, entry and exit of firms, and the reallocation
of resources within and across sectors. For expositional simplicity, in this section, we present only the
main relationships of the model; all derivations are in the Appendix.

5.1    Representative Household
The domestic household has the following intertemporal preferences:
                                                                   1-
                                                               t (Ct  - 1)
                                               U=                          ,                                          (5)
                                                      t=0
                                                                    1-

where   (0, 1) is the discount factor and  determines the elasticity of intertemporal substitution. Ct
represents the consumption basket, or aggregate consumption, which consists of composite manufactur-
ing, CM t , and composite services, CSt , according to the implicitly defined function:

                                           1    eM -         -1       1     eS -     -1
                                                  
                                 1 = M Ct              CMt + S
                                                             
                                                               Ct             
                                                                                   CSt     ,                          (6)


where   (0, 1) is the elasticity of substitution between manufacturing and services goods, and j with
j = {M, S } are constant weight parameters. ej is the (constant) aggregate consumption elasticity of
demand for sectoral good Cjt . The above preferences draw from Comin, Lashkari, and Mestieri (2018),
and are a non-homothetic generalization of the CES aggregator. Equation (6) implies that, as aggregate
consumption Ct increases, sectoral consumption Cjt grows more than proportionately if ej > 1, and less
than proportionately if ej < 1. The usual homothetic CES preferences are a special case of the above
with ej  1.
                                                                                       D and foreign
    The manufacturing good CM t is, in turn, a CES aggregate of domestically produced CM t
                F according to:
imported goods CM t

                                                                                                  M
                                                      M -1                               M -1     M -1
                                      1                                   1
                                                D     M                         F        M
                        CM t = (D )   M
                                               CM t             + (F )    M
                                                                               CM t                       ,           (7)

                                                           D and C F , and  and  control the
where M  (0, 1) is the elasticity of substitution between CM t    Mt       D    F
                                           D are each a CES aggregate of a continuum of differentiated
importance of each good. Finally, CSt and CM t
varieties:                                                                                                       
                                          -1    -1                                                         -1    -1
                                d                                          D                    d
                CSt =          qSt ( )                      and           CM t =               qM t ( )
                                                                                                                      (8)
                           t                                                           t

where t is the (endogenous) time-varying set of individual varieties sold in the domestic market and
 > 1 is the elasticity of substitution across varieties which, for simplicity, is the same in both sectors.
Manufacturing varieties can be traded internationally, but services are non-tradable.

                                                               22
   The representative household accumulates capital over time (Kt ) by importing investment goods
(It ). Kt is rented to domestic manufacturing and services firms. The price of imported goods (including
 F and I ) is the numéraire of the economy (P F = 1). The household can issue foreign bonds (B )
CM t    t                                    Mt                                               t
that are traded internationally and priced at the domestic interest rate (rt ), where Bt < 0 implies
foreign debt. Importantly, the domestic interest rate includes capital controls that impose a tax  per
unit of foreign bond borrowing. This tax then is redistributed lump-sum to households via Tt .
   The household maximizes her utility in equation (5) subject to the following budget constraint:

    D    D      F                           k                     k
   PM t CM t + CM t + PSt CSt + Kt+1 - (1 -  )Kt + Bt+1 = wt L + rt Kt + (1 + rt )Bt + t + Tt ,               (9)

where w and rk are the wage and rental rate of capital, L denotes the country's labor endowment, which
is supplied inelastically, and  are economy-wide profits redistributed to households. The domestic
interest rate rt is endogenously determined and depends on the foreign interest rate (r ), the level of
capital controls, and the local risk premium:

                       rt = r +  {Bt < 0} -  {Bt > 0} +  (exp(-Bt ) - 1) .                                   (10)

We assume the risk premium depends on the stock of foreign debt, as in Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe
(2003), and  is a constant parameter guiding the risk premium elasticity. Note that, when   , the
economy is in financial autarky, Bt = 0 and trade must be balanced. For low enough  , the economy
is open to international financial flows, Bt could differ from zero, and there can be current account
and trade imbalances. Given our focus on a capital-scarce economy, we focus on the case in which the
economy receives capital inflows Bt < 0 and pays a tax.
   The household's optimal demand for manufacturing and service goods are:
                                       -                                                -
                               PS,t            eS                            PM,t              eM
                 CS,t =                     S Ct         and      CM,t =                    M Ct  ,          (11)
                                Pt                                            Pt
                                D       -M                                                  -M
                 D
                               PM,t                                   F             1
                CM,t =                          D CM t      and      CM,t =                      F CM t ,    (12)
                               PM t                                                PM t

and the demands for individual varieties are given by:

                                                 -                                                   -
                   d                  pSt ( )                      d              D       pM t ( )
                  qSt ( )   = CSt                        and      qM t ( )   =   CM t        D
                                                                                                         ,   (13)
                                       PSt                                                 PM   t

where Pt , Pjt , and pjt ( )   jt are the price of the aggregate consumption bundle, the sectoral
consumption bundles, and the prices of individual varieties. The household's maximization problem
gives the following Euler equations:

          1 = t,t+1 (1 -  k + rt
                               k
                                 +1 )           and      1 = t,t+1 (1 + rt+1 -  · Bt+1 · exp(-Bt+1 )) .      (14)




                                                           23
where the discount factor and the marginal utility of consumption are given by:
                                                                                                    -1
                                                              M -     -1              S -     -1
                                                         1                        1
                                            -                                                 
                     t+1                   Ct      M M Ct           CM t + S  S Ct          CSt    - 
          t,t+1 =             and    t =                                                                 .   (15)
                                                
                     t                     Pt                            1-
                                                                                                    



5.2      Production
There is a continuum of firms in each sector j  {S, M }. Firms are monopolistically competitive, so
that each variety  is produced by a single firm. Firms are heterogeneous in productivity (), which is
                                                                                         e . In order to
drawn from a sector-specific distribution Gj () after paying a one-time sunk entry cost fjt
                                                          d > 0) every period. Operating firms combine
keep operating, firms must pay a fixed operational cost (fj
labor (l) and capital (k ) in a Cobb-Douglas production function. The production function in sector
j  {S, M } is given by qjt () = kjt ()j ljt ()1-j .
   Manufacturing firms can also choose to export subject to paying an additional fixed exporting
       x ), in which case they face the following foreign demand: q x () = Ap
cost (fM                                                                            - , where A is
                                                                   Mt         M t ()
a constant reflecting that, in this small open economy, the non-price part of foreign demand is not
affected by Hungary's liberalization. For simplicity, we assume that foreign consumers have the same
price elasticity as domestic consumers.
   All fixed and variable costs are valued in units of the (sectoral ) composite price derived from the
                                                        j            (1-j )
                                                    k
                                                   rt          wt
optimal input demands for production: jt           j          1-j             . Firms choose their optimal price
given the household demands in (13) and the production technology. A firm in sector j charges a con-
                                                         jt
stant markup (1/) over its marginal costs pjt () =        .




5.3      Value Functions, Entry and Exit
The value function of type- firms operating in services is:

                                           d
                           VSt () = max 0, St () + (1 -  )t,t+1 VS,t+1 () ,                                  (16)

and in manufacturing is:
                                                   d        x
                                    VM t () = max VM t (), VM t () ,                                         (17)

where,
                            d               d
                           VM t () = max 0, M t () + (1 -  )t,t+1 VM,t+1 () ,                                (18)

                      x               d        x
                     VM t () = max 0, M t () + M t () + (1 -  )t,t+1 VM,t+1 () .                             (19)

                                d () = p () - c () q d () -  f d for j  {S, M }. Exporting
Domestic profits are defined by jt      jt     jt   jt      jt j
                                               x () = p                   x             x
profits for manufacturing firms are defined by M t      M t () - cM t () qM t () - M t fM . There-
                                                         d () +  x ().  is the exogenous exit rate.
fore, total profits for manufacturing firms are M t () = M t    Mt


                                                    24
The continuation value for service and manufacturing firms takes into account endogenous exit decisions:
                                                                                   
                                                                                     d               d         x
                     
                                                                                   
                                                                                    VM,t +1    if    M,t+1   < M,t+1
                                                                                   
                      VS,t+1              > d
                                                                                   
                                    if      S,t+1                VM,t+1 () =           x
                                                                                      VM,t             x
    VS,t+1 () =                                                                            +1 if       M,t+1
                                                                                   
                      0             otherwise,
                                                                                   
                                                                                      0             otherwise.
                                                                                   



    The operational productivity cut-offs d    d         x
                                          St , M t , and M t are defined implicitly by the following
marginal conditions: VSt (d          d    d              x    x
                          St ) = 0, VM t (M t ) = 0, and M t (M t ) = 0.
    In each period, there is a mass of potential entrants that draw their productivity from a cumulative
                                                                     e as the mass of potential entrants
distribution Gj () and a probability density function gj (). Denote Mjt
that pays a sector-specific entry cost to observe their permanent individual productivity. This entry cost
is composed of a fixed cost and a variable cost that depends on the current mass of potential entrant firms
                                                                          e = f e +  exp(M e - M ) - 1 ,            e
in the sector.21 In particular, in sector j , the entry cost is given by fjt   j          jt    j
where fej is the fixed entry cost and  is a constant governing the size of the variable cost. The
                 e
parameters M j are set to the long-run open economy ( = 0) steady state sector value of potential
entry to eliminate the variable cost component in the long-run. The free-entry condition implies that
the expected value of a firm in sector j should equal the sunk cost of entry in the sector:
                                                                    e     e
                                                  e
                               Vjt ()gj ()d = jt fj +  eMjt -M j - 1                      j  {S, M }                    (20)
                          d
                          jt


    The time-varying distribution of producers in each sector depends on the mass of surviving producers
(Mj,t ) and the mass of potential entrants. In particular,
                               
                                                     e
                                (1 -  )Mjt µjt () + Mj,t                              d
                                                        +1 gj ()              if
                               
                                                                                      j,t+1
       Mj,t+1 µj,t+1 () =                                                                            j  {S, M }         (21)
                                0
                               
                                                                                   otherwise

The law of motion that characterizes the mass of producers in sector j and time t + 1 is:
                                                                   
                                                        e
          Mj,t+1 = (1 -  )Mjt                µjt ()d + Mj,t+1             gj ()d                       j  {S, M }       (22)
                                     d
                                     j,t+1                        d
                                                                  j,t+1




5.4     Equilibrium Conditions
Labor and Capital market. The inelastic household supply of labor L equals labor demand for
production and entry costs used in both sectors. That is, L = LSt + LM t , where Ljt = Lprod
                                                                                        jt   + Lentry
                                                                                                jt


  21
     The variable entry cost is common in the firm dynamics literature and captures the congestion externalities or
competition for a fixed resource at entry, see Fattal Jaef and Lopez (2014) and Benguria, Saffie, and Urzua (2018).
Importantly, it does not affect the model's qualitative results and helps avoiding corner solutions and excess volatility in
the entry margin.


                                                            25
and j  {S, M }. Similarly, the equilibrium condition in the capital market is given by Kt = KSt + KM t ,
             prod    entry
where Kjt = Kjt   + Kjt    and j  {S, M }, where the capital supply is time-varying and predeter-
mined by the household's investment decision in the previous period.


Goods markets. Using the ideal price indexes we can write the market-clearing conditions for service as
                                  d ()µ ()d and for manufacturing as P D C D = M                                  d ()µ
PSt CSt = MSt         d    pSt ()qSt   St                             Mt Mt      Mt                  d    pM t ()qM t   M t ()d.
                      St                                                                             Mt



Balance of Payments. The small open economy's net foreign assets position evolves according to:22

                                              Bt+1 = (1 + rt -  )Bt + T Bt ,                                       (23)

where the trade balance ­ T Bt ­ can be written as:

                                                      F                  k
                                       T Bt = XM t - CM t - (Kt+1 - (1 -  )Kt ).                                   (24)

                                                                                                     F )
That is the trade balance is manufacturing exports (XM t ) less imports of final consumption goods (CM t
less imports of new capital goods.




6         Quantitative Analysis
This section calibrates the quantitative model to the Hungarian economy in order to explore how the
relative input-cost and consumption channels can shape the macro effects of a financial liberalization
in the medium and long run.

6.1         Calibration
We calibrate the model at an annual frequency to Hungarian micro and macro data, and to standard
parameters from the literature. We assume that Hungary reaches a financially open steady state char-
acterized by  = 0 in the year 2008, and solve the model targeting that equilibrium. The model has 31
parameters that we divide into two groups.
     Table 5 lists the first group of 17 parameters that are set directly to match the Hungarian data or to
standard values from the literature. We set the international interest rate (r ) to 4% and the discount
factor ( ) to 0.95. We choose standard values for the parameters governing risk aversion, substitution
between varieties, and depreciation of capital (, , M , , and  ). The exogenous exit rates of each
sector (S , M ) are set to the firm-level sectoral exit rate in the micro data. We set the capital intensity
of each sector (S , M ) to the sector level mean of the elasticity derived from the industry-specific
                                                                                  e , f e ) to unity, so
productivity estimation. We set the fixed entry costs parameters in each sector (fS    M
that the operation cost is a ratio relative to the entry cost. We set the average log-productivity for
the services productivity distribution (µS ) to 0, so that µM captures relative differences in average size


    22
         Assuming Bt  0 for all t. If the economy saves (Bt > 0), then: Bt+1 = (1 + rt +  )Bt + T Bt .


                                                              26
between sectors. For simplicity, the foreign demand scale of each variety (A) is set to unity.23 We set
the parameter governing the variable entry cost ( ) to 2 in order to avoid corner solutions (without
significant impact on the dynamics). Consistent with a fully open economy calibration, we set the
capital controls ( ) to zero.

                                Table 5: Externally-Calibrated Parameters

                    Parameter           Description         Value                  Source
                        r           World interest rate      0.04                Macro Data
                                      Discount Rate         0.95                 Literature
                                       Risk aversion           2     Corsetti, Dedola, and Leduc (2008)
                                   Substitution CM -CS      0.50    Comin, Lashkari, and Mestieri (2018)
                       M           Substitution CMD -C F    0.85     Corsetti, Dedola, and Leduc (2008)
                                                      M
                                 Substitution M varieties     3.8        Ghironi and Melitz (2005)
                        k         Depreciation of capital   0.12                 Macro Data
                       S          Exogenous exit rate M      0.11                Micro data
                       M          Exogenous exit rate S     0.08                 Micro data
                       S          Capital Share S Sector     0.30                Micro data
                       M         Capital Share M Sector     0.36                 Micro data
                       fSe          Fixed entry cost S         1                normalization
                       fMe          Fixed entry cost M         1                normalization
                                    Variable entry cost        2                   small24
                       µS            Mean prod dist S          0                normalization
                        A         Foreign demand for M         1                normalization
                                    Capital control tax        0                     na


    A second group of 14 parameters is internally calibrated, i.e., the parameters are chosen so that the
model matches particular moments or targets. Table 6 presents the result of the calibration. Although
every moment is affected by every parameter, we can point to some strong economic relationships
between particular moments and particular parameters. The consumption share of services disciplines
the weight of services in the aggregate basket (S = 1 - M ), and the share of domestic manufacturing
consumption is related to the weight of domestic manufacturing on the manufacturing basket (D =
1-F ).25 The mean of the log-productivity entry distribution in the manufacturing sector determines the
relative mass of firms between sectors. Intuitively, on average, manufacturing firms are larger and more
                                                                                                  d , f d)
productive; hence, few firms can produce a large share of production. The fixed operating costs (fM    S
along with the standard deviations of the log-productivity entry distribution (M , S ) determine the
distribution of value-added within and across sectors. In particular, we target inter-quantile ranges
and relative moments of this distribution. The fixed exporting cost in manufacturing (fx ) is used to
discipline the fraction of exporters in the manufacturing sector. The parameters governing the non-
homotheticity of the preferences ( S ,        M)   are used to target the average income elasticity for services
and manufacturing estimated by Bils, Klenow, and Malin (2013) for U.S. sectors. The pass-through of
debt to the spread ( ) determines the steady-state level of debt of the economy, and, hence, it is used
to target the trade surplus of the Hungarian economy. Labor supply (L   ¯ ) is set so that nominal GDP
equals unity in the steady state. The centrality parameters of the congestion externality in the entry

  23
      Because we target the trade balance and the fraction of exporters, other values for A just change the level of entry
cost into exporting and debt elasticity.
   25
      Because there are 8 times more services firms than manufacturing firms, a small S generates a large share of con-
sumption by services.


                                                            27
        e     e
cost (M S , M M ) are set internally to the open economy entry levels so that there are no congestion
externalities in the long-run absent any capital controls.

                  Table 6: Internally Calibrated Parameters: Open Steady State

              Parameter         Description        Value                   Target              Data   Model
                 S            Share CS in C         0.18             (PS · CS )/(P · C )       0.59    0.59
                 D           Share CMD in C         0.63             D · C D )/(P · C )
                                                                   (PM                         0.64    0.64
                                            M                              M     M      M
                 µM        Mean Prod. dist. M       2.32                  MS /MM               8.10    8.10
                  d
                 fS       Fixed operating cost M    0.03         log(V Ap 75
                                                                         S ) - log(V AS )
                                                                                         p50
                                                                                               1.10    1.10
                  d
                 fM       Fixed operating cost S    0.14         log(V AM ) - log(V Ap
                                                                         p75              50
                                                                                         M )   1.35    1.35
                                                                         p50             p50
                 S          Std. Prod. dist. S      1.08         log(V AM ) - log(V AS )       1.13    1.12
                 M          Std. Prod. dist. M      2.06         log(V Ap 25
                                                                         M ) - log(V AS )
                                                                                         p25
                                                                                               1.02    1.03
                  x                                                       1-G(x
                                                                              M)
                 fM       Fixed exporting cost M   13.03                  1-G(d
                                                                                               0.13    0.13
                                                                              M)
                   eS       Income Elasticity S     1.58    Bils, Klenow, and Malin (2013)     1.15   1.15
                   eM      Income Elasticity M      0.97    Bils, Klenow, and Malin (2013)     0.78   0.78
                              Debt-Elasticity       0.01          TB-to-GDP T B/Y              0.02   0.02
                    L          Labor supply        2.9e-4          Nominal GDP Y                 1      1
                     e
                   MS      Convex entry cost S     3.5e-4            Open SS Value              na     na
                     e
                   MM      Convex entry cost M     5.8e-4            Open SS Value              na     na


   Table 6 indicates that the manufacturing sector is more capital-intensive, but has a lower income
elasticity, compared to the service sector. Therefore, we would expect that the manufacturing sector
expands more from the increase in investment, but less from the front-loading of consumption.
   The reminder of this section explores the calibrated economy to study the medium-run and long-run
effects of financial liberalizations. In order to give the economy reasons to borrow, we select as the initial
condition an economy in which capital is practically at 60% of its long-run autarky level. Then, we set
 >¯, where ¯ is the smallest level of capital controls that prevents borrowing from the household along
the path, and solve for a transition with a closed current account, and balanced trade, in every period.
With this financial autarky baseline, we then study an unexpected financial liberalization, in which
capital controls are removed completely and permanently ­ setting  = 0. This allows the economy to
smooth consumption by supporting trade imbalances and borrowing in the long-run.




6.2    Model Validation
In order to validate the calibrated model, we compare the model's predictions with the Hungarian post-
financial liberalization experience (2001-2008). For the Hungarian data, we estimate differences with
respect to the trend by regressing the variable on a time trend and a dummy for the reform period, i.e.,
yt = FLt + Tt + t , where FLt = 1 if year  2001 and 0 otherwise, and T is a time trend. In the model,
we calculate the average difference between the liberalization path and the financial autarky path in
the seven periods following liberalization. Recall that the calibration does not use any information from
the Hungarian economy along its transition path. Table 7 compares the model and data along seven
non-targeted dimensions.
   The table shows that the model is able to replicate the increase in the share of services at the onset
of the reform in terms of value added, employment and consumption. The model also captures the

                                                            28
                                        Table 7: Non Targeted Moments


                                                                          Model                   Data
                                                                          (1)                     (2)

                Interest rate                                             -0.053                  -0.035*
                                                                                                  (0.019)
                Capital (log diff)                                        0.215                   0.064*
                                                                                                  (0.034)
                Share of consumption in services                          0.009                   0.009*
                                                                                                  (0.004)
                Share value added in services                             0.016                   0.038*
                                                                                                  (0.021)
                Share employment in services                              0.037                   0.039*
                                                                                                  (0.021)
                Relative entry rate (S/M)                                 0.004                   0.153**
                                                                                                  (0.063)
                Relative price index (S/M) (log diff)                     0.014                   0.047***
                                                                                                  (0.013)

                Note: *, **, *** significant at 10, 5, and 1 percent. Std. errors in parenthesis. Coefficients in
                column 2 are computed in a regression of the variable on a time trend and a dummy for the reform
                period: yt = FLt + Tt + t , where FLt = 1 if year  2001 and 0 otherwise. Relative consumption
                data comes from OECD expenditure of households data. Interest rate and wage data come from
                the World Bank data.




increase in the relative price of services. The macro moments of the model are also comparable with
the data, as capital increases and the interest rate decreases. Therefore, the model economy correctly
captures the main qualitative features of the reallocation of resources at the onset of the transition.
The next section describes the forces at play during the transition to the open economy steady-state,
and explores the micro and macro dynamics that a financial liberalization can trigger.



6.3    Macro and Micro Dynamics in the Short-Term
To study the impact of a reduction in capital controls, we start with an economy in financial autarky
that is transitioning to its steady state. The economy then does an unexpected and permanent decrease
in capital controls that lowers the tax on foreign borrowing to zero. This shock triggers dynamics at
both the macro and micro levels.
   At the macro-level, the reduction in capital controls promotes investment and consumption growth.
Investment increases because the reduction in the tax for foreign borrowing lowers the domestic interest
rate, which ­ becoming lower than the autarky rental rate ­ encourages the household to borrow
internationally to invest in physical capital. This is the relative input-cost channel that promotes capital
accumulation. Consumption increases for two reasons. First, the increased rate of capital accumulation
raises the permanent income of the economy. Second, the lower interest rate encourages an intertemporal
shift of consumption to the present. These two forces will also lead to higher international borrowing,


                                                                 29
in part because current income does not rise as much as permanent income. Hence, both higher capital
accumulation and higher consumption lead to increased international borrowing.
    These dynamics are plotted in Figure 4, which shows the dynamics of the domestic interest rate,
the net foreign asset position (NFA) as a share of GDP, the consumption level, and the capital level for
an economy in financial autarky that transitions to its steady-state, and for an economy that starts on
the autarky transition path, but then, in the third year, has the financial liberalization. The economy
in financial autarky is depicted by the solid blue line, which shows that ­ as the economy transitions
and accumulates more capital ­ the interest rate decreases and consumption increases. The dashed red
line shows the dynamic of the economy hit by the liberalization. Panel A shows that the liberalization
triggers international borrowing, and a deterioration of the net foreign asset position of the country.
The expansion in foreign borrowing is accompanied by a decrease in the domestic interest rate, higher
capital accumulation and consumption (panels B, C and D). Note that, in the year of the liberalization,
the domestic interest rate is lower than in the subsequent years after the reform. This rebound in the
interest rate is driven by the dynamic of the risk premium. When the economy opens to international
flows, its foreign debt is nil and, hence, the risk premium is zero (equation 10). As the economy borrows
internationally, the risk premium increases and, with it, the domestic interest rate. Yet, because the
interest rate is always lower than the financial autarky rate, there is capital accumulation at a faster
rate than under autarky.


                                0                                         14

                                                                          12
                               -20
                    % of GDP




                                                                          10
                                                                      %




                               -40
                                                                           8

                               -60
                                                                           6

                               -80                                         4
                                  0   2    4     6      8   10              0        2    4       6   8   10

                               a) NFA to GDP Ratio (B/Y )             b) Domestic Interest Rate (r)


                               1.6                                        1.15


                               1.4                                         1.1


                               1.2                                        1.05


                                 1                                             1


                               0.8                                        0.95
                                  0   2    4     6      8   10                0               5           10

                                      c) Capital (K )                              d) Consumption (C )

        Figure 4: Relative Input-Cost and Consumption Channels in the short term

Note: This figure shows the dynamics of the domestic interest rate (top left), the net foreign asset position over GDP
(top right), the consumption level (left bottom), and the capital level (right bottom). The blue and solid line corresponds
to an economy in financial autarky and the red and dashed line corresponds to a financially open economy.


                                                                 30
    The relative input-cost and consumption channels imply intricate dynamics at the micro level, and
trigger reallocation effects across sectors. The reduction in capital controls affects the manufacturing
                                                        M
input-bundle cost relative to that of services ­        S    ­ and lowers the relative cost of production of man-
ufacturing goods (Panel A in Figure 5). This lower relative production cost stems from the lower rental
rate of capital and higher wages owing to higher capital accumulation. Hence, the relative input-cost
channel favors the manufacturing capital-intensive sector. In parallel, increased aggregate consumption
raises demand relatively more for goods with a high income elasticity, encouraging production of service
goods. These two forces ­ relative input-cost and (non-homothetic) consumption forces ­ compete with
one another and can shift resources to manufacturing or services depending on which force dominates.
As Figure 5 shows, in the short-term, the consumption channel dominates and resources reallocate
towards services. Upon the liberalization, the consumption share of services increases, which is parallel
to an increase its production share (Panels B and C).


    1.01                                       1.05                                      1.2

                                               1.04                                     1.15
      1
                                               1.03
                                                                                         1.1
    0.99                                       1.02
                                                                                        1.05
                                               1.01
    0.98
                                                  1                                        1

    0.97                                       0.99                                     0.95
        0             5             10             0              5            10           0               5            10

    a) Relative Cost Ratio ( M
                             S
                               )              b) Consumption share of Services         c) Production share of Services
                                                            P S ×C S                                     P S ×C S
                                                             P ×C                               P S ×C S +PDM ×C D +XM
                                                                                                                  M


                     Figure 5: Reallocation across Sectors in the short term

Note: This figure shows the dynamics of the relative cost ratio (left), the consumption share of services (middle) and the
production share of services (right). The blue and solid line corresponds to an economy in financial autarky and the red
and dashed line corresponds to a financially open economy.

    This higher consumption of services raises the relative price of services and the ideal price index
(Panels A and B in Figure 6), which induce a real exchange rate appreciation.
    There are also reallocation effects within sectors. Higher consumption of services increases expected
profits and expands the extensive margin. As Panels A and B in Figure 7 show, there is a decrease in
                                     s    d
the relative cut-off for producing (  d ) and an increase in the relative entry rates in services. Conversely,
                                         M
in manufacturing, resources shift to large and productive firms. The higher demand for services, which
have a high income elasticity, shifts demand away from manufacturing products, which reduces the
market share of these goods. Among manufacturing firms, resources shifts towards domestic production.
Because foreign demand is constant in this small open economy, but domestic demand has increased,
manufacturing firms shift their production towards the domestic market. As Panel C in Figure 7, there
is an increase in the cut-off for exporting in the short term. This shift in production away from exports
is the flip side of a real exchange rate appreciation, which arises from the increase in wages and the
relative price of services.


                                                            31
                        1.05                                       1.15

                        1.04

                        1.03                                           1.1

                        1.02
                                                                   1.05
                        1.01

                            1
                                                                        1
                        0.99
                            0              5             10              0              5             10
                                                PS
                            a) Relative Price ( P D )                   b) Ideal Price Index (P )
                                                  M


                 Figure 6: Relative Price and Ideal Price Index in the short term

Note: This figure shows the dynamics of the relative price of service-to-manufacturing goods (left) and the ideal price index
(right). The blue and solid line corresponds to an economy in financial autarky and the red and dashed line corresponds
to a financially open economy.


    1.01                                       1.05                                         1.15

        1                                      1.04
                                                                                             1.1
                                               1.03
    0.99
                                               1.02                                         1.05
    0.98
                                               1.01
                                                                                              1
    0.97                                          1

    0.96                                       0.99                                         0.95
        0               5             10           0               5               10           0            5              10
                                                                               S
 a) Relative Domestic Production                b) Relative Entry Rate        (M   )        c) Relative Cut-offs within
                            d
                            S
                                                                                                                   x
                                                                                                                   M
              Cut-off       d
                                                                                                   Manufacturing   d
                            M                                                                                      M


                       Figure 7: Reallocation Within Sectors in the short term

Note: This figure shows the dynamics of the relative domestic production cut-offs (left), the relative entry rate (middle),
the relative cut-offs in the manufacturing sector (right). The blue and solid line corresponds to an economy in financial
autarky and the red and dashed line corresponds to a financially open economy.


    In sum, the liberalization leads to a short-term boost in capital accumulation, consumption and
foreign borrowing. Because the consumption channel dominates the relative input-cost channel, con-
sumption and production shift towards services. The liberalization, then, triggers resources reallocation
across sectors and towards services. There is also reallocation within sectors. The higher demand for
services allows expanding the extensive margin, encouraging the entry of small firms in the services
sector. Conversely, the lower relative demand for manufacturing goods increases the relative cut-off for
producing in this sector, which increases exit. Among surviving manufacturing firms, the real exchange
appreciation and increased domestic demand shift resources away from exports towards domestic pro-
duction. In Appendix F, we assess an economy that gradually opens to capital flows and show that these
short-term effects are more persistent in a sequential liberalization compared to a one-time reform.26

  26
       This sequential liberalization can be thought as mimicking an economy that only gradually takes advantage of access


                                                              32
6.4    Permanent Effects of Financial Liberalization
The size of the reduction of capital controls has implications for the characterization of the transition
path, as well as of the long-run steady state. A modest liberalization episode would induce an economy
to accumulate foreign debt along the transition, but the economy will return to financial autarky in the
long-run. However, a larger liberalization can result in long term foreign debt in the new steady-state.
    To understand this point, consider an economy that has a tax on foreign financial transactions high
enough such that the rental rate of capital net of depreciation is lower than the domestic interest rate
                k -  < r = r  +  . Therefore, the cost of borrowing from abroad is higher than the return
at t = 0, i.e. r0
of capital; the optimal decision for the household is not to issue foreign debt. Because the household
                                                k > r k , t > 0. Thus, this economy follows a path of
accumulates capital along the transition path, r0    t
financial autarky and balanced trade until it reaches its steady state.
    Now, consider two alternative levels of capital controls. First, define ¯ to be the tax rate that makes
the household marginally indifferent from issuing foreign bonds at t = 0 when B0 = 0:      k -  - r .
                                                                                      ¯ = r0
                                                                                      k - = 1 -1. Second,
Note that the long-run return to capital in any long-run steady state has to satisfy rss    
define  as the tax rate that makes the household marginally indifferent about holding debt in the long
run; that is:  = 1
                   -1-r                                                        k (K , M , µ , B = 0),
                          ¯. Then, for any initial condition characterized by r0   0   j0 j0   0
we can define three potential types of transition paths:

   1. Financial Autarky: ,   ¯ the economy is closed to international financial markets. In this
      case, t > 0, foreign bond holdings are Bt = 0.

   2. Transitional Debt (long-run financial autarky): ,    < ¯ the economy is closed to
      international financial markets in the long-run. In this case, t, T > t > 0, foreign bond holdings
      are Bt < 0, and Bt = 0 for t  T , with T being the final period of the transition.

   3. Long-Run Debt (full financial openness) , 0   <  the economy is open to international
      financial markets. In this case, t > 0, foreign borrowing Bt+1 adjusts to eliminate arbitrage
      opportunities. Hence, foreign borrowing is implicitly defined by:

                                                       -Bt+1
                            k
                       1 + rt      k
                              +1 -  = 1 + r +  +  · (e       - 1) - Bt+1 · e-Bt+1                                  (25)

      In particular, in the long-run bond holdings Bss are given implicitly by:

                                  1
                                    = 1 + r +  +  · (e-Bss - 1) - Bss · e-Bss                                      (26)
                                  

      When Bss < 0, trade is not balanced in the long-run steady-state, and the economy must run a
      trade surplus of -rss Bss .

    Figure 8 illustrates the three regions in ( - K0 ) space for given initial firm distributions and no
initial debt holding. The function ¯ (K0 ) maps the location of the level of capital control that leaves
an economy with initial capital K0 marginally indifferent between borrowing or not at the beginning

to international capital flows. For example, a mixture of consumption habit and capital adjustment costs can also smooth
the initial spike and make the short-run effects more persistent.


                                                          33
                                    


                                          ¯ (K0 )
                                          




                                                     1. Financial Autarky



                                       2. Transitional Debt
                                 
                                                      3. Long-Run Debt
                                                                                           K0
                                                                                     Kss


                 Figure 8: Initial Endowment, Capital Controls, and Borrowing
Note: This figure illustrates the function ¯(K0 ) fixing the other initial states. It also depicts the level of capital control
 below wish long-term borrowing is supported. These curves are used to show three regions: 1) financial autarky, 2)
Transitional Debt, and 3) Long-run Debt.


of the transition. The figure also shows the level  , independent of the initial conditions, above which
no long-run debt can be supported. Note that as the initial capital approaches its steady state level,
¯ (K0 ) converges to  . In addition, as capital approaches 0, ¯ (K0 ) increases to infinity and any level of
capital control can support transitional debt.
    To illustrate how these different regions imply heterogeneous transition paths and long-run equilibria,
we study the macroeconomic dynamics for two types of unexpected financial reforms. First, we study
a moderate financial liberalization that decreases capital control from  > ¯ to  =  . This reform
maximizes transitional borrowing dynamics without sustaining borrowing in the long-run. Second, we
study a large financial liberalization that sets  = 0 <  . This last reform generates transitional
and long-run borrowing dynamics, and results in a new steady state of the economy. The short-run
consequences of this reform was what we studied in the previous sub-section.
    Figure 9 shows the net foreign asset to GDP ratio, the domestic interest rate, physical capital, and
the consumption paths for these two alternative reforms and compares them with a transition under
financial autarky (the solid blue line). Consistent with Figure 8, the moderate liberalization ­ the dashed
black dashed line ­ does not support long-run borrowing (Panel A). Therefore, this economy reaches
exactly the same steady state as the financially closed economy. The moderate financial liberalization
only accelerates the transition and allows for consumption to tilt towards the initial periods. Panel A
also shows that the large liberalization (dotted red line) entails a new steady-state characterized by a
sustainable level of debt. After the sharp increase in borrowing that finances capital and consumption
growth, the debt level stabilizes at a new long-run level. At this new steady-state, the economy must
transfer resources to the rest of the world, i.e., run a trade surplus; hence, consumption, in particular,
and also capital, are lower than in the financial autarky steady state (Panels C and D).
    The large liberalization (dotted red line) case above is the maximum liberalization that can occur


                                                              34
                                0                                          14

                                                                           12
                               -20




                    % of GDP
                                                                           10




                                                                       %
                               -40
                                                                            8

                               -60
                                                                            6

                               -80                                          4
                                  0   20     40     60       80              0          20    40     60    80

                          a) Foreign Debt to GDP (B/Y )                b) Domestic Interest Rate (r)

                                 2                                          1.3

                               1.8                                         1.25

                               1.6                                          1.2

                                                                           1.15
                               1.4
                                                                            1.1
                               1.2
                                                                           1.05
                                 1
                                                                                1
                               0.8
                                  0    20     40        60   80                  0       20    40    60    80

                                      c) Capital (K )                                d) Consumption (C )

       Figure 9: Medium and Long-Term Adjustments of Macroeconomic Aggregates

Note: This figure shows the long-term dynamics of the domestic interest rate (top left), the net foreign asset position over
GDP (top right), the consumption level (left bottom), and the capital level (right bottom). The solid blue corresponds
to an economy in financial autarky; The dashed black line corresponds to the moderate liberalization economy, and the
dotted red line corresponds to the large liberalization economy.


( = 0). More broadly, any reform that brings capital controls below  will lead to long-run debt. The
lower the level of the post-liberalization capital control tax  , the higher the long-run debt, as given by
Equation (26). Servicing the long-run debt requires, of course, a positive trade balance in the long-run.
Because exporting is only possible in the manufacturing sector, this implies that the manufacturing
sector is larger in the long-run relative to that in an economy with no long-run debt (and balanced
trade). In addition to this between-sector reallocation, long-run debt also has consequences for within-
sector reallocation between firms. In particular, long-run debt reallocates resources towards exporters
within manufacturing.
    To further explore the between-sector and within-sector reallocation, we compare long-run steady
states with different sizes of capital control tax  . The results are shown in Figure 10. As stated above,
to sustain long-run borrowing, economies with larger reforms (lower  ) exhibit a larger long-run trade
balance (Figure 10a) and lower long-run consumption (Figure 10b). The lower income elasticity in
manufacturing, coupled with the slight decrease in long-run consumption, implies a modest shift of the
consumption basket towards manufacturing goods (Figure 10c). Because only manufacturing output is
tradable and the higher long-run debt is serviced by exporting, production is shifted further towards
manufacturing (Figure 10d). Consequentially, an economy with larger debt holding must also have more



                                                                  35
     2.5                                     1.03                                     1.0025

      2                                                                                1.002
                                             1.02
     1.5                                                                              1.0015
 %




      1                                                                                1.001
                                             1.01
     0.5                                                                              1.0005

      0                                        1                                           1
       0      0.005      0.01      0.015        0        0.005      0.01      0.015         0       0.005        0.01   0.015


  a) Trade Balance to GDP Ratio                     b) Consumption (C )               c) Consumption Share of Services
                                                                                                        ·CS
             (T B/Y )                                                                          ( P ·CPS
                                                                                                      +P D ·C D
                                                                                                                )
                                                                                                    S   S   M    M



  1.03                                      1.025                                     1.015

                                             1.02
  1.02                                                                                 1.01
                                            1.015

                                             1.01
  1.01                                                                                1.005
                                            1.005

      1                                        1                                          1
       0      0.005      0.01      0.015        0        0.005      0.01      0.015        0        0.005        0.01   0.015


  d) Production Share of Services            e) Relative Sectoral Firm Mass              f) Aggregate Price Index (P )
                  ·CS
              ( PSY   )                                 (MS /MM )

  1.01                                      1.025                                         1

 1.008                                       1.02
                                                                                       0.99
 1.006                                      1.015

 1.004                                       1.01
                                                                                       0.98

 1.002                                      1.005

                                                                                       0.97
      1                                        1
       0      0.005      0.01      0.015        0        0.005      0.01      0.015        0        0.005        0.01   0.015


  g) Relative sectoral operating           h) Manufacturing relative cutoffs                    i) Aggregate TFP
         cutoffs (¯S /¯d
                       M)                              (¯x
                                                         M /¯d
                                                             M)


                          Figure 10: Comparison of Long-Run Steady States

Note: In figures (b)-(i), the values in the open steady state with no capital control tax are normalized to 1.


firms in the manufacturing sector (Figure 10e). Importantly, the lower domestic demand reduces the
ideal consumption price, inducing a real exchange depreciation (Figure 10f). Smaller services sectors in
more open economies imply a larger services price index relative to manufacturing, which in turn im-
plies the services cutoff shifts left (relative to manufacturing) (Figure 10g). Along with the reallocation
towards manufacturing goods, there is reallocation within this sector towards exports. The reduction
in the domestic demand relative to the foreign demand, and the real exchange depreciation, imply
the export cutoff shifts left. More manufacturing firms export, and existing exporting firms expand.


                                                            36
(Figure 10h). Both of these reallocation exporting effects imply economy-wide long-run productivity
gains (Figure 10i). These gains can be sizable, as the fully open economy ends has 3% higher aggregate
productivity in the long run when compared to an economy with no long-run borrowing.




Taking Stock and Relationship with the Literature
Our model shows that capital flows imply non-trivial short-run and long-run dynamics in the allocation
of resources across and within sectors. At the onset of the liberalization, large capital inflows boost
consumption, and tilt consumption and production towards the sector with the higher income elastic-
ity, i.e. services. This reallocation leads to an increase in the extensive margin of services, allowing
less productive firms to join the market. The increase in entry of service firms, along with increased
consumption, raise the value added share of this sector.
    Over time, as the economy transitions to the new open steady-state, the dynamics evolve. In
particular, the accumulated debt must be serviced. If the reduction in capital controls is sufficiently
small, then all debt accumulated during the transition is repaid and the new steady-state is the same
as the one under financial autarky. Instead, if the reduction in capital controls is sufficiently large,
then there will be long-run debt in the new steady-state. The economy will continuously transfers
resources to foreigners, which implies that production must shift to exportable manufacturing goods.
This, in turn, leads to a decrease in the extensive margins in services relative to manufacturing and,
as described above, resources reallocating towards the most productive manufacturing firms in the
economy. Aggregate productivity increases and is higher than in financial autarky.
    These long-run effects complement other forces that can also generate long-run effects following a
financial liberalizations. For example, Benigno and Fornaro (2013) consider a two-sector economy in
which productivity growth depends on the size of the domestic tradable sector. In their model, financial
liberalization tilts domestic consumption towards the nontradable sector, because the economy borrows
internationally to import tradable goods. As a result, the long-run technology gap between the economy
and the world frontier increases with financial openness. In contrast, following a large liberalization, our
model generates endogenous movements in aggregate productivity through reallocation effects within
and across sectors (without relying on productivity externalities). In this respect, the effect in our model
can be related to the study of commodity cycles in Alberola and Benigno (2017). In their model, be-
cause of debt repayment forces, a wealth shock (changes in the price of the commodity good) can trigger
permanent differences in the allocation of resources between non-tradable and tradable sectors even in
the absence of growth externalities in manufacturing. Both of these papers used perfect competition and
representative firm models, ignoring by design the reallocation within manufacturing between exporters
and non-exporters.27 This reallocation among heterogeneous firms is key to rationalize the entry and
selection dynamics studied in Section 4. Moreover, firm selection generates permanent productivity
effects after a financial liberalization that are independent of any endogenous growth externality.


   27
      Benguria, Saffie, and Urzua (2018) do not focus on capital inflows, but their model does generate permanent changes
in the allocation of resources between and within sectors after a commodity boom.


                                                           37
7    Conclusion
In our paper, we demonstrate that services play an integral role in the short-run and long-run adjustment
of an economy following the capital inflows that accompany a financial liberalization. Services tend to
have higher expenditure elasticities, lower capital elasticities, and less tradability, than manufactured
goods. Using the census of firms in Hungary, we are able to trace out the dynamics of manufacturing
and services firms' adjustment following Hungary's financial liberalization in 2001. A key part of the
adjustment is the two channels we have highlighted ­ the consumption channel, which stems from
different expenditure elasticities across firms and sectors, and the input cost channel which stems from
different capital elasticities across firms and sectors. Owing to the higher expenditure elasticities,
existing services firms grow, and there is increased entry. The latter force is sufficiently strong that
value-added per firm in services declines. The forces affecting services are stronger, overall, then the
forces that affect manufacturing. The input-cost channel favors manufacturing firms, as they are more
capital elastic, and existing firms grow. But, there is also less entry, and the mass of firms declines.
Overall, the share of services (manufacturing) in employment and value-added increases (decreases).
    Our calibrated model delivers the above short and medium-term firm and sector-level dynamics,
even as it also implies at the macroeconomic level that the domestic interest rate falls, the net foreign
asset position becomes negative, and consumption and capital accumulation increase. In addition, the
relative price of services rises, and the real exchange rate appreciates. We examine our model's implica-
tions for the long-run, as well. If the liberalization is sufficiently large, then there will be long-run debt
that must be sustained via a trade surplus, in the long-run. This long-run surplus implies another set of
dynamics, which, reverses much of the short and medium-term dynamics. For example, in the long-run
the trade surplus must occur in manufacturing. As part of the adjustment, the manufacturing exporting
cutoff falls; more firms export and existing exporters become larger. There is reallocation to manufac-
turing, and to manufacturing exporters in particular. A real exchange rate depreciation facilitates this
reallocation. Overall, the manufacturing sector becomes larger, and the services sector smaller. Finally,
there are important shifts in productivity. Productivity in the manufacturing sector, and aggregate
productivity, increase in the long-run, and the increase is larger, the larger the liberalization.
    Our model, then, shows how the micro-level and sector-level heterogeneity have implications for the
macro-dynamics, and vice versa, and that these micro-macro interrelationships differ in the short-run
and the long-run. In the long-run, in particular, aggregate productivity increases only because of the
selection effects induced within and across firms.
    We have emphasized two important ways in which services firms differ from manufacturing firms.
But, there is much more heterogeneity across these firms. Two sources of heterogeneity are skill intensity
differences and differences in tradability. Home health care services, for example, have low tradability,
while corporate legal services have high tradability. Studying how these sources of heterogeneity serve
as transmission mechanisms following a financial liberalization would be useful for future work.




                                                     38
References
Abiad, A., E. Detragiache, and T. Tressel (2010): "A New Database of Financial Reforms," IMF Staff Papers,
  57(2), 281­302.

Acemoglu, D., and V. Guerrieri (2008): "Capital Deepening and Nonbalanced Economic Growth," Journal of Political
  Economy, 116(3), 467­498.

Aghion, P., F. Zilibotti, M. Peters, and R. Burgess (2019): "Structural Change and Service-led Growth in India,"
  2019 Meeting Papers 393, Society for Economic Dynamics.

Alberola, E., and G. Benigno (2017): "Revisiting the commodity curse: a financial perspective," Journal of Interna-
  tional Economics, 108, S87­S106.

Arellano, M., and S. Bond (1991): "Some Tests of Specification for Panel Data: Monte Carlo Evidence and an
  Application to Employment Equations," The Review of Economic Studies, 58(2), 277­297.

Baqaee, D. R., and E. Farhi (2017): "Productivity and Misallocation in General Equilibrium.," Working Paper 24007,
  National Bureau of Economic Research.

Beck, T., A. Demirguc-Kunt, and R. Levine (2010): "Financial Institutions and Markets across Countries and over
  Time: The Updated Financial Development and Structure Database," The World Bank Economic Review 24, The
  World Bank.

Bekaert, G., C. Harvey, and C. Lundblad (2011): "Financial Openness and Productivity," World Development,
  39(1), 1­19.

Bekaert, G., C. R. Harvey, and C. Lundblad (2005): "Does financial liberalization spur growth?," Journal of
  Financial Economics, 77(1), 3­55.

Benguria, F., F. Saffie, and S. Urzua (2018): "The Transmission of Commodity Price Super-Cycles," Working Paper
  24560, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Benigno, G., N. Converse, and L. Fornaro (2015): "Large capital inflows, sectoral allocation, and economic perfor-
  mance," Journal of International Money and Finance, 55, 60 ­ 87, Macroeconomic and financial challenges facing Latin
  America and the Caribbean after the crisis.

Benigno, G., and L. Fornaro (2013): "The Financial Resource Curse*," The Scandinavian Journal of Economics,
  116(1), 58­86.

Bernard, A. B., S. J. Redding, and P. K. Schott (2007): "Comparative Advantage and Heterogeneous Firms," The
  Review of Economic Studies, 74(1), 31­66.

Bils, M., P. J. Klenow, and B. A. Malin (2013): "Testing for Keynesian Labor Demand," NBER Macroeconomics
  Annual, 27(1), 311­349.

Blundell, R., and S. Bond (1998): "Initial conditions and moment restrictions in dynamic panel data models," Journal
  of Econometrics, 87(1), 115 ­ 143.

Bonfiglioli, A. (2008): "Financial integration, productivity and capital accumulation," Journal of International Eco-
  nomics, 76(2), 337­355.

Boppart, T. (2014): "Structural Change and the Kaldor Facts in a Growth Model With Relative Price Effects and
  Non-Gorman Preferences," Econometrica, 82(6), 2167­2196.

Borusyak, K., and X. Jaravel (2018): "The Distributional Effects of Trade: Theory and Evidence from the United
  States," 2018 Meeting Papers 284, Society for Economic Dynamics.


                                                         39
Broner, F., and J. Ventura (2015): "Rethinking the effects of financial globalization," Economics Working Papers
  1128, Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Buera, F. J., and J. P. Kaboski (2009): "Can Traditional Theories of Structural Change Fit the Data?," Journal of
  the European Economic Association, 7(2-3), 469­477.

Buera, F. J., and B. Moll (2015): "Aggregate Implications of a Credit Crunch: The Importance of Heterogeneity,"
  American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 7(3), 1­42.

Buera, F. J., and Y. Shin (2017): "Productivity Growth and Capital Flows: The Dynamics of Reforms," American
  Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 9(3), 147­85.

Chinn, M., and H. Ito (2008): "A New Measure of Financial Openness," Journal of Comparative Policy Analysis, 9,
  309­322.

Comin, D., D. Lashkari, and M. Mestieri (2018): "Structural Change with Long-run Income and Price Effects,"
  CEPR Discussion Papers 12458, C.E.P.R. Discussion Papers.

Corsetti, G., L. Dedola, and S. Leduc (2008): "International risk sharing and the transmission of productivity
  shocks," The Review of Economic Studies, 75(2), 443­473.

Cravino, J., and A. A. Levchenko (2017): "The Distributional Consequences of Large Devaluations," American
  Economic Review, 107(11), 3477­3509.

Cravino, J., and S. Sotelo (2019): "Trade-Induced Structural Change and the Skill Premium," American Economic
  Journal: Macroeconomics, 11(3), 289­326.

Fattal Jaef, R., and J. I. Lopez (2014): "Entry, trade costs, and international business cycles," Journal of International
  Economics, 94(2), 224 ­ 238.

Fieler, A. C. (2011): "Nonhomotheticity and Bilateral Trade: Evidence and a Quantitative Explanation," Econometrica,
  79(4), 1069­1101.

Foster, L., J. Haltiwanger, and C. Syverson (2008): "Reallocation, Firm Turnover, and Efficiency: Selection on
  Productivity or Profitability?," American Economic Review, 98(1), 394­425.

Ghironi, F., and M. J. Melitz (2005): "International trade and macroeconomic dynamics with heterogeneous firms,"
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(3), 865­915.

Gopinath, G., S. Kalemli-Ozcan, L. Karabarbounis, and C. Villegas-Sanchez (2017): "Capital Allocation and
  Productivity in South Europe," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132(4), 1915­1967.

Gourinchas, P.-O., and O. Jeanne (2006): "The Elusive Gains from International Financial Integration," Review of
  Economic Studies, 73(3), 715­741.

Heckman, J. J. (1974): "Shadow Prices, Market Wages, and Labor Supply," Econometrica, 42(4), 679­94.

         (1979): "Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error," Econometrica, 47(1), 153­61.

Henry, P. B. (2007): "Capital Account Liberalization: Theory, Evidence, and Speculation," Journal of Economic Liter-
  ature, 45(4), 887­935.

Herrendorf, B., R. Rogerson, and A. Valentinyi (2013): "Two Perspectives on Preferences and Structural Trans-
  formation," The American Economic Review, 103(7), 2752­2789.

        (2014): "Chapter 6 - Growth and Structural Transformation," in Handbook of Economic Growth, ed. by P. Aghion,
  and S. N. Durlauf, vol. 2 of Handbook of Economic Growth, pp. 855 ­ 941. Elsevier.

                                                           40
Herrendorf, B., and T. Schoellman (2015): "Why is measured productivity so low in agriculture?," Review of
  Economic Dynamics, 18(4), 1003 ­ 1022.

Hoxha, I., S. Kalemli-Ozcan, and D. Vollrath (2013): "How big are the gains from international financial integra-
  tion?," Journal of Development Economics, 103, 90 ­ 98.

Hsieh, C.-T., and P. Klenow (2009): "Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and India," Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 124(4), 1403­1448.

Hubmer, J. (2018): "The race between preferences and technology," Unpublished Working Paper.

Jorgenson, D. W., and M. P. Timmer (2011): "Structural Change in Advanced Nations: A New Set of Stylised Facts*,"
  The Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 113(1), 1­29.

Lane, P., and G. M. Milesi-Ferretti (2018): "The External Wealth of Nations Revisited: International Financial
  Integration in the Aftermath of the Global Financial Crisis," IMF Economic Review, 66(1), 189,Äì222.

Levchenko, A. A., R. Ranciere, and M. Thoenig (2009): "Growth and risk at the industry level: The real effects of
  financial liberalization," Journal of Development Economics, 89(2), 210­222.

Melitz, M. J. (2003): "The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry Productivity,"
 Econometrica, 71(6), 1695­1725.

Olley, G. S., and A. Pakes (1996): "The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecommunications Equipment Industry,"
  Econometrica, 64(6), 1263­97.

Peters, M. (2020): "Heterogeneous Mark-Ups and Endogenous Misallocation," Econometrica (forthcoming).

Petrin, A., and J. Levinsohn (2012): "Measuring aggregate productivity growth using plant-level data," The RAND
  Journal of Economics, 43(4), 705­725.

Rajan, R. G., and L. Zingales (1998): "Financial Dependence and Growth," American Economic Review, 88(3),
  559­586.

Reinhart, C. M., and K. S. Rogoff (2014): "This Time is Different: A Panoramic View of Eight Centuries of Financial
  Crises," Annals of Economics and Finance, 15(2), 1065­1188.

Reis, R. (2013): "The Portuguese Slump and Crash and the Euro Crisis," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, pp.
  143­193.

Restuccia, D., and R. Rogerson (2008): "Policy Distortions and Aggregate Productivity with Heterogeneous Plants,"
  Review of Economic Dynamics, 11(4), 707­720.

Tille, C., and E. van Wincoop (2010): "International capital flows," Journal of International Economics, 80(2),
  157­175.

Tornell, A., and F. Westermann (2005): Boom-Bust Cycles and Financial Liberalization. CESifo Book Series.

Varela, L. (2018): "Reallocation, Competition, and Productivity: Evidence from a Financial Liberalization Episode,"
  Review of Economic Studies, 85(2), 1279­1313.

Wooldridge, J. M. (2009): "On estimating firm-level production functions using proxy variables to control for unob-
 servables," Economics Letters, 104(3), 112­114.




                                                        41
Empirical Appendices
Appendix A              Cross-Country Analysis
In this section we assess whether international financial integration associates with sectoral allocation
across countries. In particular, we test if financial liberalization episodes ­measured with the Chinn and
Ito (2008) index of capital account openness­ associates with changes in the share of value added in
agriculture, manufacturing and services, using World Bank Data for 163 countries over 1970 to 2015.28
    A first glance at the data suggests that, indeed, financial liberalization episodes correlate with
reallocation of resources towards services to the expense of agriculture and manufacturing. Figure A1
shows that, within the three years before and after the reform, capital account liberalization associates
with an increase share of value added share of services activities (blue line on the right axis), and with
a parallel decrease in the value added share in agriculture activities (green-dashed line, left axis) and,
to a lesser extent, a drop in manufacturing (red-dotted line, left axis).

                                 Sectoral Share on GDP upon Financial Liberalization
                           17




                                                                                                                                                                 54
                           16




                                                                                                                                                                 53
                           15




                                                                                                                                                                 52
                           14




                                                                                                                                                                 51
                           13
                           12




                                                                                                                                                                 50




                                t-3                 t-2                 t-1                    t                 t+1                  t+2                  t+3

                                                   Agriculture (left)                   Manufacture (left)                     Services (right)
                                Note: in %, t= year of Financial liberalization, 163 countries, 1970-2015. Source: World Bank and Chinn-Ito Index of FL.




                 Figure A1: Financial Liberalization: A Cross-Country Analysis

    Yet this correlation could certainly be omitting other factors and mislead the real effect of finan-
cial liberalization. As extensively discussed in the international economics literature, capital account
openness often associates with other reforms, such as trade liberalizations or banking deregulations (see
Henry 2007, Bonfiglioli 2008 and Varela 2018 for example). To account for these factors, one could
estimate this relationship econometrically by regressing:

                                        log sjit =  log sijt-1 + F Lit + Xit + ijt ,                                                                                  (A.1)

   28
      The Chinn and Ito index uses the Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions produced by
the International Monetary Fund to create a measure accounting for restrictions on capital account and current account
transactions. This measure goes from -1.9 to 2.35 ­with a standard deviation of 1.52­ for closed to fully open economies.


                                                                                            42
where j, i, t represent sector (agriculture, manufacturing, services), country and year, respectively; s is
the value added share in the sector, F L is the measure of financial liberalization; and Xit is a vector of
controls including trade openness (export+ import/ GDP), government size (government expenditure/
GDP), financial depth (private credit/GDP) and a dummy for financial crisis. Our control data comes
from the World Development Indicators of the World Bank and the indicator for financial crisis from
Reinhart and Rogoff (2014). The variable log sijt-1 is the sector's previous year value added share that
controls for the sector's specific trend. The variable of interest is  , which captures the effect of financial
liberalization on the value added share of each sector.
   Nevertheless, estimating equation (A.1) with OLS poses two econometric concerns: simultaneity
bias ­if sectoral reallocation induces countries to deregulate their capital accounts­ and inconsistent
estimators due to the presence of lagged dependent variable. To address these issues, we follow the
literature on capital account openness (Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundblad 2005 and Bekaert, Harvey, and
Lundblad 2011, and Bonfiglioli 2008) and estimate a GMM dynamic panel (Arellano and Bond 1991
and Blundell and Bond 1998), where we employ five years past information of endogenous variables as
instrument for current variables. We employ five years non-overlapping panel data to avoid endogeneity
issues. The identification assumption is that the five year lags of the sectoral shares are valid instruments
for the lagged dependent variable and the financial liberalization measure. In particular, we estimate
the following system:

                        d log sjit =  d log sijt-5 +  dF Lit +  dXit + dt + dijt ,                        (A.2)

                      log sjit =  log sijt-5 + F Lit-5,t +  dXit-5,t + µi + t + ijt ,                     (A.3)

where d log sijt-5 is the log difference between t and t - 5, variables indexed by (t - 5, t) are averages
over the period t - 5 and t, and µi and t are country and year fixed effects. The identification
strategy is to estimate differences of the endogenous and the pre-determine variables in equation (A.2)
with lagged levels, and levels in equation (A.3) with differenced variables. We estimate the system by
the two-step Generalized Method of Moments with moments conditions E [log sjit-5s (it - it-5 )] = 0
and E [log zit-5s (ijt - ijt-5 )] = 0 for s  2 on the predetermined variables z for equation (A.2); and
E [d log sijt-5 ijt ] = 0 and E [dzit-5 ijt ] = 0 for equation (A.3). We treat both the financial liberalization
measure and controls as pre-determined. Instruments would be valid whenever the residuals from
equation (A.2) are not second order serially correlated. Then, the coefficients are efficient and consistent
where both the moment conditions and the no-serial correlation are satisfied. In order to test for no-
serial correlation of the residuals, we employ the Sargan test of over-identifying restrictions. To ensure
the consistency of results, we keep countries that report at least ten years of consecutive data.
   Table A1 presents the results. Column 1 shows the OLS coefficient of equation (A.1) for the agri-
cultural sector. The estimated coefficient is negative and highly statistically significant, suggesting
that financial liberalization associates with a decrease in the value added share of agriculture activities.
Columns 2 and 3 confirm this correlation when estimating the dynamic panel. After the inclusion of all
controls in column 3, the coefficient implies that one standard deviation increase in the index of financial
liberalization (1.52) associates with a 3.9% decrease in the value added share in agriculture activities.



                                                      43
                       Table A1: Financial Liberalization: A Cross-Country Analysis


                                                                                     Log share in value added
                                              Agriculture                                  Manufacturing                                     Services

                               OLS                        GMM                 OLS                       GMM                 OLS                       GMM
                               (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)             (6)            (7)            (8)               (9)
 FL Index                      -0.020***       -0.028*        -0.026***       0.007          0.032**         -0.000         0.010**        0.007**           0.014***
                               (0.007)         (0.015)        (0.008)         (0.008)        (0.015)         (0.017)        (0.004)        (0.003)           (0.005)
 Trade Openness                                               -0.363**                                       -0.136                                          0.100***
                                                              (0.143)                                        (0.315)                                         (0.022)
 Government Size                                              0.337***                                       0.132                                           -0.109***
                                                              (0.127)                                        (0.264)                                         (0.019)
 Financial Depth                                              -0.041*                                        -0.017                                          0.032***
                                                              (0.021)                                        (0.062)                                         (0.006)
 Financial Crisis                                             0.034**                                        -0.103**                                        0.033***
                                                              (0.015)                                        (0.051)                                         (0.006)
 Lag Dep. Var.                 1.006***        0.983***       1.004***        0.877***       0.827***        0.709***       0.817***       0.807***          0.704***
                               (0.009)         (0.040)        (0.027)         (0.027)        (0.047)         (0.132)        (0.037)        (0.028)           (0.023)
 Year FE                       Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes               Yes
 Country FE                    Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes               Yes
 N                             914             914            342             914            914             342            914            914               342
 Countries                     163             163            62              163            163             62             163            163               62
 Sargan (pvalue)                               0.410          0.821                          0.313           0.220                         0.208             0.265
 Notes: *, **, *** significant at 10, 5, and 1 percent. All regressions include a constant term. Period 1970-2015. Chinn and Ito (2016) index of Financial
 Liberalization. Source: World Bank, IMF, Chinn and Ito (2016).




This result implies that, upon the financial liberalization, the value share in agriculture decreases 0.7
percentage points in the average country. Columns 4-6 present the results for the manufacturing sec-
tor. Interestingly, the estimated coefficient of the dynamic panel is close to zero and non-statistically
significant after the inclusion of all controls in column 6. This insignificant effect is not surprising given
that the value added share in manufacturing usually displays a hump shape on country's income per
capita (Buera and Kaboski 2009; Jorgenson and Timmer 2011; Herrendorf, Rogerson, and Valentinyi
2014, among others). Lastly, columns 7-9 confirm the increase in services following financial liberal-
ization episodes. In particular, a one standard deviation increase in the level of international financial
integration associates with a 2.1% increase in the share of service activities. This expansion implies an
increase of 1.1 percentage points for the average country.
    We present below several robustness tests and extensions. First, we show in Table A2 that the
expansion in value added share of services remains significant in a shorter horizons using a GMM of
3 non-overlapping year panel (columns 1-3). Second, in columns 4-6, we use data from Abiad, Detra-
giache, and Tressel (2010) who construct a narrowly defined measure of financial openness by focusing
on restrictions on capital flows and show that the increase in the share of services change remains true
when using this measure.29 Third, to assess whether the effect of financial integration for manufacturing
varies according with the country's level of economic development, in Table A3, we split countries by
below and above the median income per capita and re-estimate column 6. For less developed economies,
the coefficient is positive and statistically significant suggesting that financial liberalization enhances
   29
      In particular, Abiad, Detragiache, and Tressel (2010) create an index indicating: whether the exchange rate system
is unified, whether banks are allowed to borrow from abroad, and whether capital outflows are allowed to flow freely.


                                                                                    44
the manufacturing sector in countries with a low income per capita. The effect is non-significant in de-
veloped economies. Finally, Table A3 uses the employment shares as dependent variables and confirms
the increase in the share of services following financial openness. Columns 3 and 5 report the decrease
in the employment share in agriculture and the increase in this share in services.30



         Table A2: Financial Liberalization: A Cross-Country Analysis-Robustness


                                                       Log VA Share (3 years)                                     IMF- Index of FL
                                           Agriculture       Manufacturing Services               Agriculture        Manufacturing Services
                                           (1)               (2)                (3)               (4)                (5)               (6)
            FL Index                       -0.018            0.013              0.007*            -0.111***          0.000             0.014***
                                           (0.015)           (0.015)            (0.004)           (0.022)            (0.014)           (0.005)
            Trade Openness                 -0.232            -0.021             -0.015            0.478***           0.049             -0.153**
                                           (0.171)           (0.238)            (0.054)           (0.143)            (0.223)           (0.074)
            Government Size                0.228             0.036              0.007             -0.388***          -0.052            0.112*
                                           (0.176)           (0.211)            (0.052)           (0.086)            (0.204)           (0.064)
            Financial Depth                -0.039            0.024              0.018*            -0.002             -0.001            0.038***
                                           (0.031)           (0.049)            (0.011)           (0.015)            (0.029)           (0.009)
            Financial Crisis               0.03              -0.003             0.003             0.028              0.001             0.014*
                                           (0.031)           (0.030)            (0.007)           (0.036)            (0.054)           (0.007)
            Lag Dependent Variable         0.926***          0.842***           0.747***          0.991***           0.751***          0.795***
                                           (0.042)           (0.127)            (0.060)           (0.013)            (0.098)           (0.052)
            Year FE                        Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes
            Country FE                     Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes
            N                              602               602                602               229                229               229
            Countries                      62                62                 62                48                 48                48
            Sargan (pvalue)                0.638             0.796              0.898             0.318              0.116             0.147
            Notes: *, **, *** significant at 10, 5, and 1 percent. All regressions include a constant term. Period 1970-2015. Source: World
            Bank, IMF, Chinn and Ito (2008) and Abiad, Detragiache, and Tressel (2010).




  30
     Note that sectors have a slightly different classification in the employment data of World Bank. In particular, the
World Bank uses data from International Labour Organization, ILOSTAT database, which defines industry (instead of
manufacturing) as manufacturing, construction and utilities (electricity, gas and water). In consequence, the service data
excludes construction and utilities.


                                                                               45
Table A3: Financial Liberalization: A Cross-Country Analysis-Extensions


                                       Log share in value added                    Log share in employment
                                              Manufacturing              Agriculture Industry            Services

                                       (1)             (2)               (3)             (4)             (5)
        FL Index                       0.041*          0.003             -0.009*         -0.015          0.003*
                                       (0.022)         (0.064)           (0.005)         (0.014)         (0.002)
        Trade Openness                 -0.613          -0.936***         0.348***        -0.256          -0.086***
                                       (0.950)         (0.313)           (0.085)         (0.195)         (0.029)
        Government Size                0.735           0.862***          -0.292***       0.256           0.028
                                       (1.018)         (0.328)           (0.087)         (0.169)         (0.026)
        Financial Depth                0.018           0.015             -0.214***       0.043           0.026***
                                       (0.077)         (0.075)           (0.010)         (0.029)         (0.006)
        Financial Crisis               -0.033          -0.023            0.024**         -0.047          0.022***
                                       (0.054)         (0.048)           (0.010)         (0.043)         (0.003)
        Lag Dep. Var.                  0.613**         0.792***          0.872***        0.732***        0.840***
                                       (0.278)         (0.216)           (0.007)         (0.057)         (0.015)
        Year FE                        Yes             Yes               Yes             Yes             Yes
        Country FE                     Yes             Yes               Yes             Yes             Yes
        N                              209             127               187             187.000         187
        Countries                      31              27                63              63              63
        Sargan (pvalue)                0.314           0.648             0.236           0.110           0.100
        Notes: *, **, *** significant at 10, 5, and 1 percent. All regressions include a constant term. Period 1970-2015.
        Chinn and Ito (2016) index of Financial Liberalization. Industry: includes construction and utilities (electricity,
        gas and water) as reported in the WDI. Source: World Bank, IMF and Chinn and Ito (2008) .




                                                               46
Appendix B             Structural Estimation
-Value Added. To assess the impact of the financial liberalization on firms' value added, we consider the
                               j    j 
production function qijt =  kijt lijt and use the optimal capital and labor demand employed in domestic
production. In particular, recall that optimal capital and labor demands for variable domestic costs are
                                 -           -        e                                                 -             -       e
             j        pj,t ()         Pj,t        j Ct j                          j           pj,t ()          Pj,t       j Ct j
kdj,t () =      
              k j,t
                                                           and      ldj,t () =       j,t                                         .
             rt        Pj,t           Pt                                          wt           Pj,t            Pt           

Replacing them into the production function, we obtain

                                                               -             -
                                                    pj,t ()          Pj,t            e
                                      qjt () =                                   j Ct j
                                                     Pj,t            Pt
Applying logs and re-arranging terms,

                log(qijt ) =                   k /w ) + e log(C ) + ( -  ) log(P ) +
                                      -j  log(rt   t     j     t                jt


                                 log() - [ (j + j ) log(wt ) -  log(Pt )] + log(j ) + B ,
                                 Firm FE                   Year FE                        Sector FE   Const.


where B is a log constant of parameters. We can re-write equation (B.1) in a panel regression form as

                                       k
                 log(qijt ) = -j  log(rt /wt ) + ej log(Ct ) + ( -  ) log(Pjt ) + µi + t + ijt ,

where µi and t are firm and year fixed effects, and firm-fixed effects absorb all firm and industry time-
invariant characteristics.


-Capital. We can employ a similar procedure for capital to derive firms' optimal demand for capital for
local variable production. Applying logs in the optimal demand for capital and re-arranging terms, we
obtain



           log(kdj,t ()) =                            k /w ) + e log(C ) + ( -  ) log(P ) +
                                  -(1 - j + j  ) log(rt   t     j     t                jt


                                ( - 1) log() - [ (j + j ) log(wt ) -  log(Pt )] + log(j ) + C ,
                                   Firm FE                         Year FE                     Sector FE    Const.


where C is a log constant of parameters. Writing this equation in a panel regression form gives

                                             k
         log(kdj,t ()) = -(1 - j + j  ) log(rt /wt ) + ej log(Ct ) + ( -  ) log(Pjt ) + µi + t + ijt .

   This equation shows that, other things equal, a decrease in the relative input prices raises firms'
                                                                                                                   log(ki,t )
optimal demand for capital, specially more in sectors with higher capital elasticity, e.g.                              k /w )
                                                                                                                   log(rt
                                                                                                                                  =
                                                                                                                            t
-(1 - j + j  ) < 0. Furthermore, increased consumption increases as well the demand for capital,



                                                              47
                                                                 log(ki,t )
especially in sectors with higher income elasticity, e.g.        log(Ct )      = em > 0. We next re-write this
equation in a difference-in-difference estimator form and obtain an equivalent expression for equation
(3) with capital as a dependent variable.
                                                                                                              ki,t
   Combining firms' capital and labor demand, we can compute a capital intensity of a firm, as               lidj,t   =
j wt
   k.
j rt    This expression shows that a decrease in the relative price of capital raises the capital labor
                                                                (k/l)i,t       j
ratio, particularly in sectors with high capital elasticity:          k)
                                                                (wt /rt
                                                                           =   j   > 0. To estimate the differential
impact of the financial liberalization according to firms with different capital elasticity, we follow a
similar analysis as above and express this ratio as a difference-in-difference estimator. Since firms'
capital intensity is not affected by the income elasticity, after the liberalization firms should not vary
their capital intensity as a function of it.




                                                      48
Appendix C            Additional Figures and Tables

                                             BOP: Derivatives                                    Daily Turnover in HUF/FX Market




               4




                                                                                    4
                              Assets                                                              Total
                              Liabilities
                                                                                                  Swaps


               2




                                                                                    3
               0




                                                                                    2
               -2




                                                                                    1
               -4




                                                                                    0
                     1997         1999           2001     2003      2005                 1997      1999      2001      2003       2005


                                            Banks' External Debt                                     Banks' Net Capital Inflows
               45




                                                                                    6
               35




                                                                                    4
               25




                                                                                    2
               15




                                                                                    0
                                                                                    -2
               5




                     1997         1999         2001     2003     2005      2007          1997      1999      2001      2003       2005

           Note: in billions of US Dollars. Source: NBH and IMF.




       Figure C.1: Capital Flows and Financial Liberalization in Hungary



                                                        Net Foreign Asset Position to GDP Ratio
                    -.6
                    -.7
                    -.8
             in %
                    -.9
                    -1
                    -1.1




                           1997                    1999                 2001                    2003                2005             2007


    Figure C.2: Hungary: Evolution of Net Foreign Asset Position over GDP




                                                                               49
                                        Export and Imports with the EU



     .85
                                                                                Exports
                                                                                Imports

     .8
     .75
     .7
     .65




           1997              1999               2001        2003         2005        2007
            Note: in % of total trade. Source: OECD.



   Figure C.3: Hungary: Total Exports and Imports with the EU




                                 Manufacturing Sector: Trade with the EU
     .84




                                                                                 Exports
                                                                                 Imports
     .81
     .78
     .75
     .72




           1997              1999               2001        2003         2005        2007
            Note: In % of total trade. Source: OECD.



Figure C.4: Hungary: Manufacturing Trade and Exports with the EU




                                                       50
Volume
1995=100
Exports
Imports
2
0
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
100
 Developing
 Developed
 00
800
300
600
400
200         of Imports and Exports
                   Volume of Imports and Exports
                                                 1995=100

                            Exports                                              Imports

  400




                                                             800
                                                             600
  300




                                                             400
  200




                                                             200
  100




                                                             0
         1994        1996   1998    2000      2002                 1994   1996   1998    2000      2002

                      Developed            Developing                       Developed           Developing




                        Figure C.5: Hungary: Volume of Trade




                                              Hungary: FDI to GDP
         10
         8
  in %
         6
         4
         2




              1997                 1999                  2001                     2003                 2005


Figure C.6: Hungary: Evolution of Foreign Direct Investment




                                                        51
                                                                                Net Capital Inflows
                                                    Transition Economies                                                                             SOE




                                                                                                                20
                        6
                        4




                                                                                                                10
                        2
                        0




                                                                                                                0
                        -2




                                                                                                                -10
                        -4




                             1997          1999         2001          2003          2005         2007                  1997        1999      2001             2003       2005          2007

                                         Hungary             Czech Republic                 Poland                                 Hungary                 Brazil               Portugal


                      Note: In billions US dollars. Source: IMF


 Figure C.7: Net Capital Inflows to Transition and Small Open Economies

                               Number of Net Entrants                                                                                                Number of Entrants
                                                                                                                1200
600




                                                                                                                1000
500




                                                                                                                800
400




                                                                                                                600
300




                                                                                                                400
200




                                                                                                                                                     After (2007-2001)    Before (1995-2000)
                                                                                                                200




                                    After (2007-2001)     Before (1995-2000)


      .4                       .9                            1.4                           1.9                         .4                       .9                           1.4                    1.9
                                           Income Elasticity                                                                                                Income Elasticity




                                                                        Figure C.8: Net Entrants

                 Services: Share on Aggregate Value Added                                                                         Services: Share on Aggregate Value Added
.75




                                                                                                                .75




                                                                   Entrant before          Entrant after                                                                           Entrant before   Entrant after
.6




                                                                                                                .6
.45




                                                                                                                .45
.3




                                                                                                                .3
.15




                                                                                                                .15
0




                                                                                                                0




           1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008                                            1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008




            Figure C.9: Entrants Before and After the Financial Liberalization


                                                                                                           52
                                                                                     Manufacturing
                     Share in Value Added                                            Share in Employment                                             Share in Mass of Firms




                                                                                                                                .01
0




                                                                0
-.05




                                                                                                                                0
                                                                -.05




                                                                                                                                -.01
-.1




                                                                -.1




                                                                                                                                -.02
-.15




                                                                                                                                -.03
-.2




                                                                -.15




       2001   2002    2003   2004   2005   2006   2007   2008          2001   2002    2003   2004   2005   2006   2007   2008          2001   2002    2003   2004   2005   2006   2007   2008




                     Figure C.10: Reallocation across sectors: Manufacturing Sector




                                                                                              53
                   Table C.1: Financial Liberalization and Net capital Inflows


                                                   Before           After                   Before                        After
                                                   1995-2000        2001-2008        1995-1998 1998-2000          2001-2004 2005-2008

                                                   (1)              (2)              (3)            (4)           (5)            (6)
Financial account (net)*                           2.5              8.2              1.2            3.8           6.1            10.4
NFA/GDP                                            -62              -87              -57            -67           -79            -95
Credit-to-GDP ratio                                25               49               23             27            39             59
Lending interest rate                              22               10               27             16            11             9
Consumption/GDP                                    74               77               74             74            77             76

Note: in %. *In billions of USD dollars. Before is 2000 and after is 2004. Source: NBH, IMF, Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2018).




                   Table C.2: Capital Elasticities of the Production Function


                                                    Agriculture           Manufacturing      Services
                                                    (1)                   (2)                (3)
               Mean                                 0.29                  0.36               0.33
               Median                               0.28                  0.36               0.31
               Weighted average                     0.36                  0.36               0.30
               Notes: Elasticities of the production function are estimated at four-digit NACE industries following Wooldridge
               (2009) and Petrin and Levinsohn (2012) methodology for the period 1992-2000. Weighted average is weighted by
               firms' value added. of the Source: APEH.




                                                                    54
         Table C.3: Income Elasticity (Bils, Klenow, and Malin 2013)


Sector          Description                                                                                       Income
                                                                                                                  elasticity
1               Agriculture, hunting and related services                                                         0.44
2               Forestry, logging and related services                                                            0.44
10              Mining of coal and lignite; extraction of peat                                                    0.57
11              Extraction of crude petroleum and natural gas                                                     0.57
12              Mining of uranium and thorium ores                                                                0.57
13              Mining of metal ores                                                                              0.57
14              Other mining and quarrying                                                                        0.57
15              Manufacture of food products and beverages                                                        0.44
16              Manufacture of tobacco products                                                                   0.44
17              Manufacture of textiles                                                                           1.1
18              Manufacture of wearing apparel; dressing and dyeing of fur                                        1.1
19              Tanning & dressing of leather; manufacture of luggage, handbags, saddlery, harness and footwear   1.1
20              Manufacture of wood & wood products & cork and straw & plaiting materials                         0.82
21              Manufacture of pulp, paper and paper products                                                     1.35
22              Publishing, printing and reproduction of recorded media                                           1.35
23              Manufacture of coke, refined petroleum and nuclear fuel                                           0.66
24              Manufacture of chemicals, and chemical products                                                   0.9
25              Manufacture of rubber and plastic products                                                        0.8
26              Manufacture of other non-metallic mineral products                                                0.8
27              Manufacture of basic metals                                                                       1.04
28              Manufacture of fabricated metal product, except machinery and equipment                           1.04
29              Manufacture of machinery and equipment n.e.c                                                      0.96
30              Manufacture of office machinery and computers                                                     1.03
31              Manufacture of electrical machinery and apparatus n.e.c                                           0.98
32              Manufacture of radio, television and communication equipment and apparatus                        0.98
33              Manufacture of medical, precision and optical instruments, watches and clocks                     0.98
34              Manufacture of motor vehicles, trailers                                                           0.89
35              Manufacture of other transport equipment                                                          0.89
36              Manufacture of furniture; manufacturing n.e.c                                                     1.18
37              Recycling                                                                                         0.49
40              Electricity, gas, steam and hot water supply                                                      0.49
41              Collection, purification and distribution of water                                                0.49
45              Construction                                                                                      0.89
50              Sale, maintenance & repair of motor vehicles; retail sale of automotive fuel                      0.85
51              Wholesale trade & commission trade, except of motor vehicles & motorcycles                        0.85
52              Retail trade, except of motor vehicles and motorcycles; repair of personal & household goods      0.83
55              Hotels and restaurants                                                                            1.8
60              Land transport; transport via pipelines                                                           2.02
61              Water transport                                                                                   1
62              Air transport                                                                                     1.41
63              Supporting & auxiliary transport activities; activities of travel agencies                        1.41
64              Post and telecommunications                                                                       0.6
65              Financial intermediation, except insurance and pension funding                                    1.44
66              Insurance and pension funding, except compulsory social security                                  1.44
67              Activities auxiliary to financial intermediation                                                  1.44
70              Real estate activities                                                                            2.02
71              Renting of machinery & equipment without operator & of personal & household                       0.82
72              Computer and related activities                                                                   1.35
73              Research and development                                                                          1.35
74              Other business activities                                                                         1.35
85              Health and social work                                                                            1.25
90              Sewage and refuse disposal, sanitation and similar activities                                     0.69
91              Activities of membership organization n.e.c.                                                      1.79
92              Recreational, cultural and sporting activities                                                    1.79
93              Other services activities                                                                         1.18
Notes: Income elasticity from Bils, Klenow, and Malin (2013).




                                                                55
Table C.4: Income Elasticity (Comin, Lashkari, and Mestieri 2018)


                                                                                Income Elasticity
         Agriculture                                                            0.32
         Mining                                                                 0.41
         Public Utilities                                                       1.59
         Construction                                                           1.03
         Wholesale and Retail                                                   1.62
         Transport, storage, communications                                     1.44
         Finance, insurance, real estate                                        2.17
         Community, social and personal services                                1.18
         Notes: sectoral elasticities computed relative to manufacturing, which is normalized to 1.
         Sample: 39 developed and developing economies since 1947. Source: Comin, Lashkari, and
         Mestieri (2018).




              Table C.5: Firms' Characteristics across Sectors


                                         Mean                  Capital Elasticity             Income Elasticity
                                         (1)                   (2)                            (3)
  Log value added                        7.165                 7.408***                       -0.399***
                                                               (0.225)                        (0.018)
  Log capital                            7.103                 6.211***                       -0.227***
                                                               (0.249)                        (0.019)
  Log capital-labor ratio                5.839                 5.138***                       -0.069***
                                                               (0.214)                        (0.019)
  Log RTFP                               5.139                 1.146***                       -0.125***
                                                               (0.159)                        (0.013)
  Log age                                1.319                 1.058***                       -0.127***
                                                               (0.068)                        (0.005)
  Log export share                       0.036                 0.415***                       -0.007***
                                                               (0.014)                        (0.001)
  Number of firms                        255,008               255,008                        255,008
  Notes: *, **, *** significant at 10, 5, and 1 percent. This table reports the estimated coefficients from a regression of the
  log of each variable on the capital and income elasticities for the pre-reform period (1995-2000). The capital elasticity is
  estimated using the Petrin and Levinsohn (2012) and Wooldridge (2009) methods and the income elasticity is obtained
  from Bils, Klenow, and Malin (2013). Source: APEH. Source: APEH.




                                                              56
                                   Table C.6: Growth Rate in the Pre-Reform Period


                                                         Value Added Growth              Capital Intensity Growth                 Capital Growth
                                                       (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)               (5)              (6)
               Capital Elasticity                      -0.210           -0.182           0.050            0.050             -0.061           -0.012
                                                       (0.142)          (0.095)          (0.051)          (0.051)           (0.121)          (0.037)
               Income Elasticity                       -0.003           0.007            -0.010           -0.011            0.038            0.035
                                                       (0.013)          (0.015)          (0.039)          (0.005)           (0.072)          (0.070)
               Sector FE                               Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes
               Sector * Year FE                                         Yes                               Yes                                Yes
               N                                       313,512          313,512          335,895          335,895           335,895          335,895
               Notes: *, **, *** significant at 10, 5, and 1 percent. This table reports the estimated coefficients from a regression of the growth rate of
               each variable on the capital and income elasticities for the pre-reform period (1995-2000). Columns 1, 3 and 5 include sector fixed effect.
               Columns 2, 4 and 6 add sector-year fixed effects interacted. The capital elasticity is estimated using the Petrin and Levinsohn (2012) and
               Wooldridge (2009) methods, and the income elasticity is obtained from Bils, Klenow, and Malin (2013). Source: APEH.




                                   Table C.7: Identification Strategy: Survival Ratio


                                                                              Capital Elasticity            Income Elasticity
                                                                              (1)                           (2)
                               Survival Ratio                                 0.036                         -0.064***
                                                                              (0.033)                       (0.007)
                               N                                              103,555                       103,555
                               Notes: *, **, *** significant at 10, 5, and 1 percent. This table reports the estimated
                               coefficients from a regression of the survival rate between 2000 and 2007 on the capital
                               and income elasticities. The capital elasticity is estimated using the Petrin and Levinsohn
                               (2012) and Wooldridge (2009) methods used at four-digit NACE industries, and the income
                               elasticity comes from Bils, Klenow, and Malin (2013). All regressions include a constant
                               term. Source: APEH.




                                             Table C.8: Number of Banks in Hungary


                       1995         1996          1997           1998          1999         2000         2001          2002           2003         2004       2005
Number of banks        43           43            43             45            45           45           45            44             44           44         44
Source: National Bank of Hungary.




                                                                                    57
               Table C.9: Firms' Characteristics across Sectors


                                                Agriculture         Manufacture          Services
                                                (1)                 (2)                  (3)
         Value Added*                           2,058               3,029                1,008
         Capital*                               5,200               2,140                1,038
         Capital Intensity*                     1,150               386                  358
         Employment                             5                   6                    3
         Log RTFP                               5.40                5.53                 5.10
         Age                                    5                   5                    4
         Export Share**                         0.19                0.31                 0.19
         Number of firms                        6,925               23,231               115,949
         Notes: *in thousands of Forints. ** Conditional on Exporting/Importing. Median values.
         Average over 1995-2000. Source: APEH.




Table C.10: Firms' Characteristics across Sectors: Difference in Means


                                          Agriculture              Manufacturing             Services
    Log value added                       7.618                    8.057                     6.933
    F-stat                                177.69                                             4541.20
    pvalue                                0.00                                               0.00
    Log capital                           8.361                    7.624                     6.805
    F-stat                                471.15                                             2054.66
    pvalue                                0.00                                               0.00
    Log capital Intensity                 6.821                    5.775                     5.685
    F-stat                                1212.91                                            34.19
    pvalue                                0.00                                               0.00
    Log employment                        1.889                    1.979                     1.180
    F-stat                                19.50                                              5867.70
    pvalue                                0.00                                               0.00
    Log TFP                               5.209                    5.498                     5.060
    F-stat                                154.60                                             1452.39
    pvalue                                0.00                                               0.00
    Log age                               1.345                    1.305                     1.197
    F-stat                                17.21                                              446.86
    pvalue                                0.00                                               0.00
    Log export share                      0.025                    0.082                     0.029
    F-stat                                872.38                                             2608.26
    pvalue                                0.00                                               0.00
    Log import share                      0.023                    0.098                     0.042
    F-stat                                773.73                                             1424.46
    pvalue                                0.00                                               0.00
    Notes: estimated coefficients of a regression of each variable on sectoral dummies in the pre-reform period
    (1995-2000). In particular, y = 1 Agriculture + 2 Manufacturing + 3 Services. F-statistics and p-value
    come from the test of equality of coefficients with respect to manufacturing firms. Source: APEH.




                                                        58
                                                                       Table C.11: Leverage


                                                                                                             Log Leverage

                                                                           (1)                       (2)                                (3)
                          FL * Capital Elasticity                          0.454**                   0.824***                           0.730**
                                                                           (0.226)                   (0.313)                            (0.314)
                          FL * Income Elasticity                           -0.110***                 -0.117**                           -0.105**
                                                                           (0.027)                   (0.052)                            (0.052)
                          Firm FE                                          Yes                       Yes                                Yes
                          Year FE                                          Yes
                          Sector* Year FE                                                            Yes                                Yes
                          Sectoral Price Index                                                                                          Yes
                          R2                                               0.469                     0.469                              0.469
                          N                                                986,018                   986,018                            986,018
                          Notes: *, **, *** significant at 10, 5, and 1 percent. Std. errors are
                          clustered at the firm-level. Source: APEH.




                               Table C.12: Substitution and Income Effects: Robustness


                                                Non-Exporters                                    Domestically-Owned Firms                                 Non-Government Firms

                               Log   Value       Log Capital        Log Capital       Log   Value        Log Capital        Log Capital       Log   Value        Log Capital        Log Capital
                               Added             Intensity                            Added              Intensity                            Added              Intensity

                               (1)               (2)                (3)               (4)                  (5)              (6)               (7)                (8)                (9)
FL * Capital Elasticity        0.106**           0.396***           0.889***          0.129**            0.427***           0.990***          0.100**            0.202***           0.763***
                               (0.054)           (0.058)            (0.127)           (0.058)            (0.060)            (0.129)           (0.047)            (0.054)            (0.117)
FL * Income Elasticity         0.042***          -0.052***          -0.070***         0.081***           -0.052***          -0.091***         0.063***           -0.035***          -0.099***
                               (0.009)           (0.010)            (0.020)           (0.010)            (0.009)            (0.019)           (0.008)            (0.009)            (0.018)
Firm FE                        Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes                  Yes              Yes               Yes                Yes                Yes
Sector* Year FE                Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes                Yes
Sectoral Price Index           Yes               Yes                Yes                Yes                 Yes              Yes               Yes                Yes                Yes
R2                             0.773             0.784              0.834             0.774              0.792              0.839             0.813              0.790              0.845
N                              1,082,601         1,061,499          1,061,499         1,072,824          1,043,081          1,043,081         1,198,173          1,177,768          1,177,768
Notes: *, **, *** significant at 10, 5, and 1 percent. Std. errors are clustered at the firm-level. Columns 1-3 exclude multinational firms (where MNC are firms with 10% foreign
ownership). Columns 4-6 exclude exporters. Columns 7-9 exclude government firms (firms with more than 10% local and state shares). The capital elasticity is estimated using
the Petrin and Levinsohn (2012) and Wooldridge (2009) methods used at four-digit NACE industries, and the income elasticity comes from Bils, Klenow, and Malin (2013),
reported at two-digit NACE industries. Source: APEH.




                                                                                            59
Table C.13: Substitution and Income Effects: Robustness Capital and Income
                                 Elasticities


                                                   Capital Elasticity                                      Income Elasticity
                                                Olley and Pakes (1996)                            Comin, Lashkari, and Mestieri (2018)

                                   Log   Value        Log Capital         Log Capital       Log   Value        Log Capital           Log Capital
                                   Added              Intensity                             Added              Intensity

                                   (1)                (2)                 (3)               (4)                (5)                   (6)
     FL * Capital Elasticity       0.156***           0.103*              0.217**           0.160**            0.208**               0.804***
                                   (0.035)            (0.059)             (0.090)           (0.076)            (0.105)               (0.115)
     FL * Income Elasticity        0.015*             -0.031**            -0.106***         0.309***           -0.109***             -0.181***
                                   (0.009)            (0.013)             (0.018)           (0.036)            (0.031)               (0.047)
     Firm FE                       Yes                Yes                 Yes               Yes                Yes                   Yes
     Sector* Year FE               Yes                Yes                 Yes               Yes                Yes                   Yes
     Sector Price Index            Yes                Yes                 Yes               Yes                Yes                   Yes
     R2                            0.749              0.681               0.845             0.801              0.791                 0.845
     N                             1,197,521          1,176,736           1,176,736         1,188,332          1,170,171             1,170,171
     Notes: *, **, *** significant at 10, 5, and 1 percent. Std. errors are clustered at the firm-level. Columns 1-3 employ capital elasticities
     computed with Olley and Pakes (1996) method and income elasticity from Bils, Klenow, and Malin (2013). Columns 4-6 employ capital
     elasticity estimated using the Petrin and Levinsohn (2012) and Wooldridge (2009) methods and income elasticity from Comin, Lashkari, and
     Mestieri (2018). Source: APEH.




         Table C.14: Substitution and Income Effects: Balanced Panel


                                                                                  Balanced Panel (1995-2008)

                                                                    Log         Value    Log     Capital      Log Capital
                                                                    Added                Intensity

                                                                    (1)                  (2)                  (3)
                      FL * Capital Elasticity                       0.196***             0.282*               0.981***
                                                                    (0.074)              (0.151)              (0.170)
                      FL * Income Elasticity                        0.065***             -0.035               -0.134***
                                                                    (0.014)              (0.028)              (0.028)
                      Firm FE                                       Yes                  Yes                  Yes
                      Sector* Year FE                               Yes                  Yes                  Yes
                      Sector Price Index                            Yes                  Yes                  Yes
                      R2                                            0.805                0.761                0.836
                      N                                             353,279              353,279              353,279
                      Notes: *, **, *** significant at 10, 5, and 1 percent. Std. errors are clustered at the firm-level. Balanced
                      panel of firms between 1995 and 2008. The capital elasticity is estimated using the Petrin and Levinsohn
                      (2012) and Wooldridge (2009) methods and the income elasticity comes from Bils, Klenow, and Malin
                      (2013). Source: APEH.




                                                                          60
                         Table C.15: Controlling for Imports


                                              Log Value Added          Log Capital Intensity           Log Capital

                                              (1)                      (2)                             (3)
FL * Capital Elasticity                       0.345***                 0.231**                         0.683***
                                              (0.059)                  (0.098)                         (0.102)
FL * Income Elasticity                        0.035***                 -0.003                          -0.046***
                                              (0.010)                  (0.017)                         (0.016)
Log Imports                                   -0.044***                0.004***                        -0.037***
                                              (0.000)                  (0.001)                         (0.001)
Firm FE                                       Yes                      Yes                             Yes
Sector* Year FE                               Yes                      Yes                             Yes
Sectoral Price Index                          Yes                      Yes                             Yes
R2                                            0.799                    0.824                           0.877
N                                             986,776                  950,303                         950,303
Notes: *, **, *** significant at 10, 5, and 1 percent. Std. errors are clustered at the firm-level. Source: APEH.




                             Table C.16: Financial Dependence


                                              Log Value Added          Log Capital Intensity           Log Capital

                                              (1)                      (2)                             (3)
                                                                                 Panel A
FL * Capital Elasticity                       0.099**                  0.325***                        0.825***
                                              (0.045)                  (0.057)                         (0.124)
FL * Income Elasticity                        0.067***                 -0.069***                       -0.119***
                                              (0.008)                  (0.009)                         (0.019)
FL * Financial Dependence                     0.012***                 0.030***                        0.019***
                                              (0.002)                  (0.003)                         (0.006)
R2                                            0.841                    0.792                           0.847
                                                                                 Panel B
FL * Capital Elasticity                       0.100**                  0.328***                        0.827***
                                              (0.045)                  (0.057)                         (0.124)
FL * Income Elasticity                        0.068***                 -0.074***                       -0.118***
                                              (0.008)                  (0.009)                         (0.019)
FL * Financial Dependence                     0.015***                 0.027***                        0.018***
                                              (0.002)                  (0.003)                         (0.006)
FL * Financial Dependence Supplier            -0.039***                0.041***                        0.021*
                                              (0.005)                  (0.006)                         (0.012)
Firm FE                                       Yes                      Yes                             Yes
Sector* Year FE                               Yes                      Yes                             Yes
Sector Price Index                            Yes                      Yes                             Yes
R2                                            0.841                    0.792                           0.847
N                                             1,072,401                1,049,205                       1,049,205
Notes: *, **, *** significant at 10, 5, and 1 percent. Std. errors are clustered at the firm-level. Balanced panel of firms
between 1995 and 2008. The capital elasticity is estimated using the Petrin and Levinsohn (2012) and Wooldridge (2009)
methods and the income elasticity comes from Bils, Klenow, and Malin (2013). Financial Dependence is the Rajan and
Zingales (1998) index estimate at four-digit NACE industries. We use the input-output table reported by the OECD
for Hungary 2000 to construct the financial dependence index of the larger industry supplier. Panel A uses the financial
dependence index of the firms' industry. Panel B includes the financial dependence index of the larger industry supplier.
Source: APEH.




                                                            61
                                              Table C.17: Firms without Debt


                                                                                       Firms Without Debt

                                            Log   Value       Log Capital        Log Capital       Log   Value       Log Capital       Log Capital
                                            Added             Intensity                            Added             Intensity

                                            (1)               (2)                (3)               (4)               (5)               (6)
FL * Capital Elasticity                     -0.009            0.170              0.556***          -0.453***         0.098             0.241
                                            (0.133)           (0.251)            (0.142)           (0.092)           (0.159)           (0.158)
FL * Income Elasticity                      0.077***          0.022              -0.006            0.118***          0.016             -0.001
                                            (0.022)           (0.029)            (0.021)           (0.015)           (0.024)           (0.022)
Firm FE                                     Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
Sector* Year FE                             Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
Sectoral Price Index                        Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
R2                                          0.793             0.769              0.813             0.754             0.803             0.849
N                                           641,476           599,383            599,383           641,515           595,683           595,683
Notes: *, **, *** significant at 10, 5, and 1 percent. Std. errors are clustered at the firm-level. Columns 1-3 exclude firms that report short-term debt
between 1999-2008. Columns 4-6 exclude firms that report any type of debt with banks between 2005-2008. Source: APEH and credit registry.




                                                                          62
                                     Table C.18: Top 30 Sectors: Net Entry (2001-2007)


Activity   Broad sector               Sector        Description                                                     Income       Net entry   Number of   Share agg.
           (II digits)                (IV digits)                                                                   elasticity   per year    employees   employment
                                                                                                                                                         (in %)
(1)        (2)                        (3)           (4)                                                             (5)          (6)         (7)         (8)
Service    Real estate activities     7012          Buying and selling of own real estate                           2.02         982         2           0.08
Service    Construction               4521          General construction of buildings and civil engineering works   0.89         505         3           0.21
Service    Hotels and restau-         5530          Restaurants                                                     1.80         480         3           0.13
           rants
Service    Other business activ-      7414          Business and management consultancy activities                  1.35         446         2           0.08
           ities
Service    Other business activ-      7487          Other business activities n.e.c.                                1.35         439         3           0.10
           ities
Service    Retail trade               5248          Other retail sale in specialized stores                         0.83         420         2           0.06
Service    Land transport             6024          Freight transport by road                                       2.02         404         3           0.08
Service    Other business activ-      7420          Architectural and engineering activities and related techni-    1.35         363         2           0.06
           ities                                    cal consultancy
Service    Real estate activities     7020          Letting of own property                                         2.02         297         4           0.03
Service    Retail trade               5211          Retail sale in non-specialized stores with food, beverages or   0.83         271         4           0.11
                                                    tobacco predominating
Service    Sale,    maintenance       5010          Sale of motor vehicles                                          0.85         250         2           0.06
           and repair of motor
           vehicles
Service    Hotels and restau-         5540          Bars                                                            1.80         248         2           0.04
           rants
Service    Retail trade               5263          Other non-store retail sale                                     0.83         229         2           0.02
Service    Construction               4531          Installation of electrical wiring and fittings                  0.89         212         3           0.05
Service    Other business activ-      7411          Legal activities                                                1.35         211         2           0.04
           ities
Service    Retail trade               5242          Retail sale of clothing                                         0.83         201         2           0.06
Service    Computer and re-           7222          Other software consultancy and supply                           1.35         199         2           0.04
           lated activities
Service    Construction               4533          Plumbing                                                        0.89         197         3           0.04
Service    Sale,    maintenance       5020          Maintenance and repair of motor vehicles                        0.85         189         2           0.03
           and repair of motor
           vehicles
Service    Activities auxiliary       6720          Activities auxiliary to insurance and pension funding           1.44         182         1           0.02
           to financial inter
Service    Real estate activities     7011          Development and selling of real estate                          2.02         176         2           0.01
Service    Other business activ-      7460          Investigation and security activities                           1.35         170         6           0.11
           ities
Service    Other services activ-      9302          Hairdressing and other beauty treatment                         1.18         151         2           0.02
           ities
Service    Retail trade               5246          Retail sale of hardware, paints and glass                       0.83         143         2           0.03
Service    Other business activ-      7440          Advertising                                                     1.35         141         2           0.03
           ities
Service    Recreational,      cul-    9262          Other sporting activities                                       1.79         131         2           0.01
           tural and sporting
           activities
Service    Activities auxiliary       6713          Activities auxiliary to financial intermediation n.e.c.         1.44         123         2           0.01
           to financial inter
Service    Computer and re-           7220          Software consultancy and supply                                 1.35         121         2           0.03
           lated activities
Service    Other business activ-      7470          Industrial cleaning                                             1.35         121         7           0.08
           ities
Service    Construction               4544          Painting and glazing                                            0.89         112         2           0.03
Total                                                                                                                            8109                    1.68




                                                                                  63
Theory Appendices
Appendix D           Steady State System

                                D
Endogenous(39) = {P, PS , PM , PM , w, rk , r, j } = 8
                                   D    F
                  = {C, CS , CM , CM , CM , B, T B, K, XM , Y, T BY } = 11
                           e
                  = {Mj , Mj , d   d   x
                               S , M , M } = 5
                                    d      x     d     x                    d      x
                  = {cj (), pj (), qj (), qM (), j (), M (), VS (), VM (), VM (), VM (), µj ()} = 11
                      d      x      d      x
                  = {kj (), kM (), lj (), lM ()} = 4

Appendix D.1         Household
                                                                          1
                                      D 1-M
                             PM = D (PM )         F
                                            + F (PM = 1)1-M             1-M
                                                                                              (G.1)

                                                                         1
                                       1- eM -1       1- eS -1          1-
                                P = M PM C      + S P S C                                     (G.2)

                                                          -
                                                    PS
                                          CS =                S C eS                          (G.3)
                                                    P

                                                          -
                                                 PM
                                         CM =                 M C eM                          (G.4)
                                                  P

                                                  D       -M
                                         D       PM
                                        CM =                   D CM                           (G.5)
                                                 PM

                                                 F =1      -M
                                       F        PM
                                      CM =                       F CM                         (G.6)
                                                 PM

                                                    1
                                             rk =     - 1 + k                                 (G.7)
                                                    


                                    1 =  1 + r -  · Bt+1 · e-Bt+1                             (G.8)


                                        r = r +  (e-B - 1) +                                  (G.9)




                                                     64
Appendix D.2     Production
Appendix D.2.1   Composite price, costs, prices, demands, profits, inputs demands
                                      j                1-j
                                rk          w
                         j =                                   j  {S, M }           (G.10)
                                j         1 - j

                                              j
                                 cj () =               j  {S, M }                   (G.11)
                                              

                                          1
                               pj () =      cj ()       j  {S, M }                  (G.12)
                                          
                                                               -
                                   d                   pS ()
                                  qS () = CS                                        (G.13)
                                                        PS
                                                               -
                                  d            D       pM ()
                                 qM ()    =   CM          D
                                                                                    (G.14)
                                                        PM

                                      x
                                     qM () = A (pM ())-                             (G.15)

                     d                     d         d
                     j () = pj () - cj () qj () - j fj                j  {S, M }    (G.16)

                        x                     x         x
                        M () = pM () - cM () qM () - M fM                           (G.17)

                                          d ()
                          d            j qj       d
                         kj () = j             + fj            j  {S, M }           (G.18)
                                      rk    
                                                  x ()
                                               M qM
                                x                         x
                               kM () = M               + fM                         (G.19)
                                              rk   
                                              d ()
                        d                  j qj       d
                       lj () = (1 - j )            + fj            j  {S, M }       (G.20)
                                          w     
                                                       x ()
                                                    M qM
                            x                                  x
                           lM () = (1 - M )                 + fM                    (G.21)
                                                   w    

Appendix D.2.2   Value Functions and Cut-Offs
                                                          Sd ()
                               VS () = max 0,                                       (G.22)
                                                       1 -  (1 -  )

                                            d      x
                               VM () = max VM (), VM ()                             (G.23)


                                                          Md ()
                               d
                              VM () = max 0,                                        (G.24)
                                                       1 -  (1 -  )




                                                  65
                                                             d () +  x ()
                                                             M
                                      x                                M
                                     VM () = max 0,                                                         (G.25)
                                                              1 -  (1 -  )


                                                      VS (d
                                                          S) = 0                                            (G.26)

                                                   d
                                                  VM (d
                                                      M) = 0                                                (G.27)

                                       x
                                      VM (x
                                          M) = 0               x
                                                               M (x
                                                                  M) = 0                                    (G.28)

Appendix D.2.3       Stationary distribution, mass of firms, and free-entry condition
                               
                                    g ()
                               
                                  1-G(d
                                                 if      d
                                                         j
                                         j)
                     µj () =                                                           j  {S, M }           (G.29)
                                0
                               
                                                      otherwise

                     Mj = 1 - G(d    e
                                j ) Mj                                                 j  {S, M }           (G.30)

                                                               e-M     e
                                                              Mj
                                            e                      j
                 Vj ()g ()d = j            fj   +  exp             e           -1           j  {S, M }      (G.31)
            d
            j
                                                                Mj

Appendix D.2.4       Aggregation
                                                          
                                       Lprod
                                        S    = MS              d
                                                              lS ()µS ()d
                                                         d
                                                         S


                                                                               
                     Lprod
                      M    = MM             d
                                           lM ()µM ()d + MM                         x
                                                                                   lM ()µM ()d
                                       d
                                       M                                   x
                                                                           M


                                                      e-M                      e
                                         j e         Mj    j
        Lentry
         j       =    e
                     Mj   ·  (1 - 1j ) ·   fj +  exp     e                          -1         j  {S, M }
                                         w              Mj

                                     Lj = Lprod
                                           j    + Lentry
                                                   j               j  {S, M }


                                                  L = LM + LS                                               (G.32)


                                        prod
                                       KS    = MS  k d ()µS ()d
                                                  d S     S


                                                                               
                      prod                  d                                       x
                     KM    = MM            kM ()µM ()d + MM                        kM ()µM ()d
                                      d
                                      M                                    x
                                                                           M


                                                    e-M                    e
           entry          e           j e          Mj    j
          Kj         =   Mj   · 1j   · k fj +  exp     e                          -1        j  {S, M }
                                      r               Mj



                                                         66
                             prod    entry
                       Kj = Kj    + Kj               j  {S, M }


                                  K = KM + KS                     (G.33)

Appendix D.3   Markets Clear
                                     
                                                d
                        PS CS = MS        pS ()qS ()µS ()d        (G.34)
                                     d
                                     S


                                     
                       D D                      d
                      PM CM = M M         pM ()qM ()µM ()d        (G.35)
                                     d
                                     M


                                     
                                               x
                       XM = MM           pM ()qM ()µM ()d         (G.36)
                                     x
                                     M


                                             TB
                                  B=-                             (G.37)
                                           (r -  )

                                           F
                               T B = XM - CM - k K                (G.38)


                                  T BY  T B/Y                     (G.39)

                                                D D
                    Y  P C + K + T B = PS CS + PM CM + XM         (G.40)




                                          67
Appendix E           Dynamic System

                                D
Endogenous(42) = {P, PS , PM , PM , w, rk , r, , , j } = 10
                                  D    F
                 = {C, CS , CM , CM , CM , B, T B, K, XM , Y, T BY } = 11
                          e
                 = {Mj , Mj , d   d   x
                              S , M , M } = 5
                                   d      d      x     d     x                    d      x
                 = {cj (), pj (), qS (), qM (), qM (), j (), M (), VS (), VM (), VM (), VM (), µj ()} = 12
                     d      x      d      x
                 = {kj (), kM (), lj (), lM ()} = 4

Appendix E.1        Household
                                                                                        1
                                      D 1-M       F       1-M                         1-M
                           PM t = D (PM t)  + F (PM t = 1)                                         (G.1)

                                                                                      1
                                         1- eM -1      1- eS -1                      1-
                               P t = M P M t Ct   + S PSt Ct                                       (G.2)

                                                                -
                                                        PSt            eS
                                          CSt =                     S Ct                           (G.3)
                                                        Pt

                                                                -
                                                       PM t            eM
                                         CM t =                     M Ct                           (G.4)
                                                        Pt

                                                        D     -M
                                         D             PM t
                                        CM t      =                  D CM t                        (G.5)
                                                       PM t

                                                       F =1     -M
                                        F             PM t
                                       CM t   =                        F CM t                      (G.6)
                                                       PM t
                                                                                               
                               -
                              Ct                                1-
                        t =                                                                        (G.7)
                                                                                               
                               Pt             1   M -      -1          1      S -     -1
                                                                                               
                                                                                      
                                       M M Ct           CM t +       S S Ct         CSt    -
                                                                t+1
                                                  t,t+1 =                                          (G.8)
                                                                t


                                         1 = t,t+1 (1 -  k + rt
                                                              k
                                                                +1 )                               (G.9)


                                1 = t,t+1 1 + rt+1 -  · Bt+1 · e-Bt+1                             (G.10)


                                       rt+1 = r +  (e-Bt+1 - 1) +                                 (G.11)




                                                         68
Appendix E.2     Production
Appendix E.2.1   Composite price, costs, prices, demands, profits, inputs demands
                                 k    j                 (1-j )
                                rt          wt
                        jt =                                      j  {S, M }         (G.12)
                                j         1 - j

                                              jt
                                 cjt () =               j  {S, M }                   (G.13)
                                              

                                          1
                               pjt () =     cjt ()        j  {S, M }                 (G.14)
                                          
                                                                  -
                                  d                     pSt ()
                                 qSt () = CSt                                        (G.15)
                                                         PSt
                                                                   -
                                 d             D        pM t ()
                                qM t ()   =   CM t         D
                                                                                     (G.16)
                                                         PM   t

                                      x                   -
                                     qM t () = A (pM t ())                           (G.17)


                    d                        d           d
                    jt () = pjt () - cjt () qjt () - jt fj              j  {S, M }   (G.18)


                       x                           x             x
                       M t () = pM t () - cM t () qM t () - M t fM                   (G.19)

                                           d ()
                          d            jt qjt      d
                         kjt () = j     k
                                                + fj              j  {S, M }         (G.20)
                                       rt    
                                                     x ()
                                                M t qM
                               x                       t     x
                              kM t () = M       k
                                                          + fM                       (G.21)
                                               rt     
                                              d ()
                       d                  jt qjt      d
                      ljt () = (1 - j )            + fj               j  {S, M }     (G.22)
                                          wt    
                                                         x ()
                                                    M t qM
                            x                              t     x
                           lM t () = (1 - M )                 + fM                   (G.23)
                                                   wt     

Appendix E.2.2   Value Functions and Cut-Offs
                                     d
                     VSt () = max 0, St () + (1 -  )t,t+1 VS,t+1 ()                  (G.24)


                                             d        x
                              VM t () = max VM t (), VM t ()                         (G.25)


                     d               d
                    VM t () = max 0, M t () + (1 -  )t,t+1 VM,t+1 ()                 (G.26)




                                                   69
                      x               d        x
                     VM t () = max 0, M t () + M t () + (1 -  )t,t+1 VM,t+1 ()                                  (G.27)


                                                    VSt (d
                                                         St ) = 0                                               (G.28)

                                                    d    d
                                                   VM t (M t ) = 0                                              (G.29)

                                         x    x                      x    x
                                        VM t (M t ) = 0              M t (M t ) = 0                             (G.30)

Appendix E.2.3          Stationary distribution, mass of firms, and free-entry condition
                          
                                                e
                           (1 -  )Mjt µjt () + Mj,t                                  d
                                                   +1 g ()                   if
                          
                                                                                     j,t+1
    Mj,t+1 µj,t+1 () =                                                                            j  {S, M }    (G.31)
                           0
                          
                                                                                  otherwise


                                                                     
                                                  e
    Mj,t+1 = (1 -  )Mjt                µjt ()d + Mj,t+1                  g ()d                    j  {S, M }    (G.32)
                               d
                               j,t+1                             d
                                                                 j,t+1




                                                  e -M           e
                                                 Mjt
                                 e                     j
        Vjt ()g ()d = jt        fj   +  exp               e             -1                               j  {S, M }
   d
   jt
                                                     Mj
                                                                                                                (G.33)

Appendix E.2.4          Aggregation
                                                              
                                         Lprod
                                          St = MSt
                                                                  d
                                                                 lSt ()µSt ()d
                                                          d
                                                          St


                                                                                  
                    Lprod
                     M t = MM t
                                             d
                                            lM t ()µM t ()d + MM t
                                                                                        x
                                                                                       lM t ()µM t ()d
                                       d
                                       Mt                                         x
                                                                                  Mt


                                                         e -M                     e
                                           jt e         Mjt   j
           Lentry
            jt      =    e
                        Mjt   · (1 - j ) ·    fj +  exp     e                          -1         j  {S, M }
                                           wt             Mj

                                       Ljt = Lprod
                                              jt   + Lentry
                                                      jt                 j  {S, M }

                                                  L = LM t + LSt                                                (G.34)

                                                              
                                         prod                     d
                                        KSt   = MSt              kSt ()µSt ()d
                                                          d
                                                          St


                                                                                  
                     prod                    d                                          x
                    KM t = MM t             kM t ()µM t ()d + MM t                     kM t ()µM t ()d
                                       d
                                       Mt                                         x
                                                                                  Mt




                                                              70
                                             e -M             e
           entry    e          jt e         Mjt   j
          Kjt    = Mjt · j ·    k
                                  fj +  exp     e                 -1         j  {S, M }
                               rt             Mj

                                     prod    entry
                              Kjt = Kjt   + Kjt             j  {S, M }

                                          Kt = KM t + KSt                                 (G.35)

Appendix E.3     Markets Clear
                                                 
                                                           d
                            PSt CSt = MSt           pSt ()qSt ()µSt ()d                   (G.36)
                                              d
                                              St


                                                 
                           D    D                           d
                          PM t CM t = M M t         pM t ()qM t ()µM t ()d                (G.37)
                                              d
                                              Mt


                                              
                                                         x
                            XM t = MM t          pM t ()qM t ()µM t ()d                   (G.38)
                                           x
                                           Mt



                                  Bt+1 = (1 + rt -  )Bt + T Bt                            (G.39)

                                           F                  k
                            T Bt = XM t - CM t - (Kt+1 - (1 -  )Kt )                      (G.40)

                                          T BYt  T Bt /Yt                                 (G.41)

               Yt  Pt Ct + (Kt+1 - (1 -  k )Kt ) + T Bt = PSt CSt + PM
                                                                     D    D
                                                                       t CM t + XM t      (G.42)




                                                    71
Appendix F                       Sequential Liberalization
We consider an alternative form of financial liberalization where the capital control tax  is reduced
to 0 sequentially over 3 periods, in contrast to a one-time reduction as in the main text. The path of
the capital control tax  is depicted in Figure C.11, which is revealed to the agents in the economy
unexpectedly when the initial shock arrives (period 3 in the figure).

                                                 0.06

                                                 0.05

                                                 0.04

                                                 0.03

                                                 0.02

                                                 0.01

                                                     0
                                                      0                  5                  10

                                                              a)  Schedule

                                          Figure C.11: Schedule of  Reduction




                                0                                            14

                                                                             12
                               -20
                    % of GDP




                                                                             10
                                                                         %




                               -40
                                                                              8

                               -60
                                                                              6

                               -80                                            4
                                  0   2    4     6        8    10              0        2        4       6   8   10

                               a) NFA to GDP Ratio (B/Y )                    b) Domestic Interest Rate (r)

                               1.8                                            1.2

                               1.6                                           1.15

                               1.4                                            1.1

                               1.2                                           1.05

                                 1                                                1

                               0.8                                           0.95
                                  0   2    4     6        8    10                0                   5           10

                                      c) Capital (K )                                 d) Consumption (C )

      Figure C.12: Relative Input-Cost and Consumption Channels in the short term

Note: This figure shows the dynamics of the domestic interest rate (top left), the net foreign asset position over GDP
(top right), the consumption level (left bottom), and the capital level (right bottom). The blue and solid line corresponds
to an economy in financial autarky and the red and dashed line corresponds to a financially open economy.


                                                                    72
    In a sequential liberalization, the economy accumulates foreign debt more slowly relative to a one-
time liberalization, reaching the peak of borrowing 4 periods after the initial shock (Figure C.12a). As
a result, the adjustment of the interest rate is more sluggish (Figure C.12b). Compared to a one-time
liberalization episode, capital accumulation is spread out over multiple periods (Figure C.12c) and so
is the increase in aggregate consumption (Figure C.12d).


    1.01                                      1.05

                                              1.04                                       1.1
      1
                                                                                        1.08
                                              1.03
                                                                                        1.06
    0.99                                      1.02
                                                                                        1.04
                                              1.01
    0.98                                                                                1.02
                                                1
                                                                                           1
    0.97                                      0.99
        0             5             10            0              5             10           0               5            10

    a) Relative Cost Ratio ( M
                             S
                               )            b) Consumption share of Services           c) Production share of Services
                                                           P S ×C S                                      P S ×C S
                                                            P ×C                                P S ×C S +PDM ×C D +XM
                                                                                                                  M


                   Figure C.13: Reallocation across Sectors in the short term

Note: This figure shows the dynamics of the relative cost ratio (left), the consumption share of services (middle) and the
production share of services (right). The blue and solid line corresponds to an economy in financial autarky and the red
and dashed line corresponds to a financially open economy.


    Mirroring the gradual decline in the rental rate of capital, the marginal cost in manufacturing relative
to services also decreases gradually in the periods following the liberalization shock (Figure C.13a). As
aggregate consumption increases with capital inflows, the consumption share of services goods increase
due to non-homotheticity in household preference (Figure C.13b). A decline in manufacturing exports
and increase in demand for consumption good due to liberalization raise the production share of services
at the onset of liberalization, which then slowly reverts as the economy increases manufacturing exports
to services interest on foreign debt (Figure C.13c).




                                                           73
                       1.05                                         1.1

                       1.04                                        1.08

                       1.03                                        1.06

                       1.02                                        1.04

                       1.01                                        1.02

                          1                                          1

                       0.99                                        0.98
                           0              5              10            0             5              10
                                              PS
                          a) Relative Price ( P D )                  b) Ideal Price Index (K )
                                                  M


              Figure C.14: Relative Price and Ideal Price Index in the short term

Note: This figure shows the dynamics of the relative price of service-to-manufacturing goods (left) and the ideal price index
(right). The blue and solid line corresponds to an economy in financial autarky and the red and dashed line corresponds
to a financially open economy.


    Again, as in the case of the one-time liberalization, there is a increased in the relative price index
of the services sector and an increase in the aggregate price index following liberalization, but the
adjustment is more sluggish with sequential reduction in  (Figure C.14a, C.14b).




                                                              74
                      1.01                                       1.06

                                                                 1.05
                         1
                                                                 1.04
                      0.99
                                                                 1.03
                      0.98                                       1.02

                      0.97                                       1.01

                                                                   1
                      0.96
                          0               5            10           0              5             10
                                                                                          S
                    a) Relative Domestic Production              b) Relative Entry Rate ( M )
                                              d
                                              S
                                Cut-off       d
                                              M



                       1.1                                       1.02

                                                                   1

                      1.05                                       0.98

                                                                 0.96

                         1                                       0.94

                                                                 0.92

                      0.95                                        0.9
                          0               5            10            0             5             10

                       c) Relative Cut-offs within                 d) Aggregate Efficiency
                                                  x
                                                  M
                             Manufacturing        d
                                                  M


                   Figure C.15: Reallocation Within Sectors in the short term

Note: This figure shows the dynamics of the relative domestic production cut-offs (left), the relative entry rate (right),
the relative cut-offs in the manufacturing sector (bottom left), and the aggregate productivity of the economy (bottom
right). The blue and solid line corresponds to an economy in financial autarky and the red and dashed line corresponds to
a financially open economy.


    Following liberalization, the economy experiences an increase in the entry rate in the services sector
relative to the manufacturing sector, which is sustained over multiple periods in contrast with the
one-time liberalization case (Figure C.15b). Similar to the one-time liberalization, capital inflow is
associated with is a reduction in aggregate TFP, yet the reduction is sustained over a longer period in
the case of sequential liberalization (Figure C.15d).




                                                            75
