                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    INVENTING THE ENDLESS FRONTIER:
THE EFFECTS OF THE WORLD WAR II RESEARCH EFFORT ON POST-WAR INNOVATION

                                         Daniel P. Gross
                                        Bhaven N. Sampat

                                       Working Paper 27375
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27375


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2020




 We thank Ashish Arora, Pierre Azoulay, Wes Cohen, Jon Gruber, Adam Jaffe, Simon Johnson,
 Tom Nicholas, Scott Stern, and audiences at the HBS Faculty Research Symposium and the
 Urban Economics Association meetings (discussant Alex Whalley) for helpful comments. We
 also thank Hayley Pallan, Greg Saldutte, and Innessa Colaiacovo for outstanding research
 assistance, and the Harvard Business School Division of Faculty and Research Development and
 NBER Innovation Policy grant (2016) for financial support. All errors are our own. The views
 expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
 Bureau of Economic Research.

 NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
 peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
 official NBER publications.

 © 2020 by Daniel P. Gross and Bhaven N. Sampat. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
 to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
 including © notice, is given to the source.
Inventing the Endless Frontier: The Effects of the World War II Research Effort on Post-war
Innovation
Daniel P. Gross and Bhaven N. Sampat
NBER Working Paper No. 27375
June 2020
JEL No. H56,N42,N72,O31,O32,O33,O38,R11

                                         ABSTRACT

During World War II, the U.S. government launched an unprecedented effort to mobilize science
for war: the newly-established Office of Scientific Research and Development (OSRD) entered
thousands of R&D contracts with industrial and academic contractors, spending one to two orders
of magnitude more than what the government was previously investing in science. In this paper,
we study the long-run effects of the OSRD-supported research effort on U.S. invention. Using
data on all OSRD contracts, we show that these investments had large effects on the direction and
location of U.S. invention and high-tech industrial employment, setting in motion agglomeration
forces which shaped the technology clusters of the postwar era. Our results demonstrate the
effects of a large, mission-driven government R&D program on the growth of domestic
technology clusters and long-run technological progress.


Daniel P. Gross
Harvard Business School
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
dgross@hbs.edu

Bhaven N. Sampat
Department of Health Policy and Management
Columbia University
722 W 168th Street, Room 486
New York, NY 10032
and NBER
bns3@columbia.edu
World War II was a momentous time for U.S. science and technology, perhaps unrivaled by any
other. In preparation for war, President Roosevelt authorized the creation of the National Defense
Research Committee (NDRC) in 1940, which later expanded into the Office of Scientific Research
and Development (OSRD). Led by Vannevar Bush, the OSRD was responsible for managing re-
search and development (R&D) in science and technology which was considered important to win-
ning the war, including weapons development, communications and radar, electrical engineering,
jet propulsion, optics, chemistry, medicine, and atomic fission. The OSRD entered into over 2,200
R&D contracts with industrial and academic contractors during the war, with a cumulative value
of nearly $8 billion current (2020) dollars ­ one to two orders of magnitude larger than what the
U.S. government was previously investing in scientific research.

In this paper, we study how the large shock to federal research spending in World War II affected
the postwar U.S. innovation economy. Using newly-collected archival data on the universe of
OSRD research contracts, we study the impact of this research effort on the direction of U.S.
invention, the development of domestic technology clusters, and real economic outcomes in the
regions where the research took place. We show that OSRD-supported research had large, long-
lasting effects on the direction and the location of U.S. invention, powering the take-off of technology
clusters around the country. The results appear to be driven by clusters which were already
patenting more heavily before 1940, which despite not being on a differential growth path before
the war, experienced explosive growth in the postwar period. In other words, the effect of the war
effort was to set in motion agglomeration forces which widened existing differences in inventive
productivity across regions -­ a phenomenon which has contributed to increasing polarization of
economic performance across different regions of the country ever since. We then show that these
forces in turn shaped the geography of high-tech industries. We are currently evaluating a number
of mechanisms that might explain these remarkably persistent effects of the OSRD shock, with the
goal of demonstrating and explaining the long-run effects of big-push investments in innovation and
place-based innovation policies (e.g., Gruber and Johnson 2019) on local economies and ultimately
U.S. national competitiveness in the latter half of the 20th century.

To study the effects of the OSRD-supported research effort, we compile a new dataset of the
universe of OSRD contracts from archival records, including detailed information on the contractors,
contracts, and all inventions, patents, and scientific publications they produced. We merge these
records with data on the complete U.S. patent record, international patenting, universities and
federally-funded research centers, military R&D contracts, and industrial employment, which allow
us to not only study the effects of the OSRD shock, but also understand the channels through
which it propagated into the postwar period. Our workhorse empirical design will compare pre-


                                                   1
and post-war patenting in technology areas shocked by the war effort (i) in the U.S. versus foreign
countries, and (ii) domestically, across U.S. counties. We then drill into the electronics industry,
which blossomed after the war, and compare postwar industry employment in counties with higher
or lower OSRD-supported patenting in related technology areas.

We begin with the aggregate view. Comparing patenting over time in more- versus less-intensively
treated technology classes at the USPTO versus at other Allied countries' patent authorities (e.g.,
Great Britain and France), we see a clear divergence take place after the war, without pre-trends,
persisting to at least 1970 (when our estimation window ends). The magnitudes indicate that in
the top quartile of treated classes, U.S. patenting was >50% higher by 1970 than in Great Britain
or France, relative to their respective pre-war levels. These differences attenuate in technology
classes with lower treatment intensity. When we examine just USPTO filings by inventors in the
U.S. versus in foreign countries, we likewise find similar effects.

We then turn our attention inwards, to the war's effects on the geography of domestic invention.
Comparing patenting in more- versus less-intensively treated county-classes, we show that patent-
ing in the most intensively-treated county-classes (i) was not growing statistically differently prior
to the war, (ii) surged during the war, (iii) contracted back to pre-war levels when the war ended,
and (iv) subsequently experienced a long-lived take-off, persistently growing through the end of
our analysis window. These patterns show up in other views of the data, including when com-
parisons are conditioned to within county-years or category-years. When we break the effects out
across six aggregate technology fields, we find that the results are primarily driven by invention in
the "Electrical & Electronics" and "Mechanical" categories, both of which were more intensively-
treated during the war ­ suggesting potential nonlinearities in the effects of research investments.
Moreover, the results appear to be driven by counties which were already patenting more heavily
in these classes before 1940 ­ suggesting that although the scientific war effort did not create these
technology clusters per se, it set in motion forces which led to growing agglomeration and widening
disparities in the inventive output of different parts of the country.

The question is then not just what happened, but why it led to decades of sustained technological
progress in the post-war era. Although a complete answer to this question is beyond the scope of
just one paper, in ongoing research (not yet reported) we are studying intermediate mechanisms
that may have contributed to the persistence of these effects. We first establish that the post-war
take-off in patenting is not driven by direct follow-on invention (as measured in the citation record),
nor by patents from firms and inventors involved in the war effort itself. Rather, it appears entire
local research ecosystems sprung up in the locations and technology areas where OSRD activity was
concentrated ­ including universities, federally-funded research centers, and private invention. The

                                                   2
long-lived effects of the OSRD may in turn be reflected in higher-order patent citation linkages, and
supported by university spillovers to local invention, federally-funded research centers, Cold War
defense R&D spending, or other local research activities ­ all of which we are exploring in ongoing
research. As it stands, the evidence suggests the OSRD built up local scientific and technological
capabilities that allowed local innovation to thrive after the war.

Our final set of results explores how the OSRD affected not just inventive output, but entire local
economies. Using U.S. County Business Patterns (CBP) data, we take our analysis to county-level
manufacturing employment in industries closely tied to the wartime research effort. We show that
in counties with more OSRD-supported patents in electronics technology classes, employment in the
Communications and Electronics industries is substantially higher after the war ­ even conditional
on total related patenting. Empirically, a doubling of OSRD patents in the 1940s is associated with
60-65% higher employment in these industries in the 1970s. Our interpretation is that the OSRD
not only deepened local technology clusters and increased local invention over the long-run, but
also created jobs in associated manufacturing industries.

There is widespread recognition that World War II was a sea-change event in government-science
relations and in science and technology policy. Impressed by its immediate results, President Roo-
sevelt asked Bush to draw lessons from this "unique experiment" to harness science in peacetime
to increase economic growth, improve national security, and develop new medical treatments (Roo-
sevelt 1944). Bush's response, Science: The Endless Frontier (Bush 1945, published 75 years ago
this July) is often considered the ideological blueprint for postwar science policy (Mowery 1997,
Nelson 1997). While many of the specific institutional recommendations in the Bush Report were
not adopted, the enthusiasm it generated and the public perception that science won the war helped
launch a massive postwar expansion of U.S. federal funding for research.

Although policymakers and scholars from Bush (1945) to Gruber and Johnson (2019) have ap-
pealed to the wartime effort as a paradigmatic example of the benefits of federal research funding,
there has been limited empirical assessment of the OSRD itself. Moreover, whereas most existing
evidence on the effects of federal research funding is drawn from studies of incremental changes in
funding for basic science at institutions at the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and National
Science Foundation (NSF), the OSRD is distinctive in its large scale, broad scope, and emphasis
on technology development. Our setting thus presents an unique opportunity to study the impacts
of a major shock to federal research spending ­ the largest ever at the time, and in relative terms,
perhaps the largest to this day ­ on the U.S. innovation system.

A historical lens such as the one the OSRD affords is especially important for understanding the


                                                  3
long-run impact of such investments on U.S. innovation. The long view can help us to understand
the persistent effects of R&D funding on not only aggregate technological progress, but also on
regional disparities in the current innovation system, a key question in policy debates today that
was anticipated in the debates near the end of the war (the so-called "Bush-Kilgore debates") about
the best way to allocate postwar research funding. This paper also provides evidence tying research
funding to employment growth in related industries, deepening our understanding of how these
investments may spill over to the rest of the economy.

Most importantly, the historical experience may also present an opportunity to draw lessons for
the present and future. This paper highlights the persistent effects that the World War II research
effort had on U.S. innovation. As we continue our research on the causes of this persistence, we
aim to provide suggestive evidence of what it would take for similar effects to be reproduced today.
As important as the funding itself is, success may also hinge on the implementation ­ and the devil
is often in the details. Reflecting this proverb, in a concurrent essay (Gross and Sampat 2020), we
describe how the OSRD mobilized U.S. science for war and use the historical episode to identify
key questions that organizers of crash innovation programs must answer.

We proceed as follows. In Section 1 we review the history of the World War II mobilization of U.S.
science, describe the OSRD's work and legacy, and discuss related literature. Section 2 introduces
our data and presents the distribution of OSRD research across regions, firms and institutions, and
technology areas. Section 3 estimates the effects of the shock on the direction of U.S. invention,
comparing U.S. and foreign patenting before and after the war. Section 4 examines the effects on
the location of domestic innovation and growth of U.S. technology clusters. Across all of these
analyses, we find persistent effects of the OSRD shock. In Section 5, we explore whether the OSRD
shock extended beyond invention and into the local industrial economy. Section 6 concludes and
shares lessons for open and long-running policy debates today.



1     OSRD Background and Related Literature

1.1   Historical Background

Before World War II, there was very little federal funding of research outside of agriculture. Most
academic research was funded by foundations (Rockefeller and Carnegie, in particular) and industry.
There was if anything an aversion among academics to public funding, reflecting concerns that this
may distort the direction of research and restrict scientific freedom.

World War II changed this. Even before the attack on Pearl Harbor and the United States' official

                                                  4
entry into the conflict, scientists, the military, and politicians anticipated that the development and
application of technology would be critical for an Allied victory, that existing U.S. military research
and development effort was insufficient, and that coordination would be required to mobilize the
scientific and technological capabilities that had developed during the interwar era.1

In June 1940, Vannevar Bush (the former vice president and dean of engineering at MIT, president
of the Carnegie Institution of Washington, and chairman of the National Advisory Committee for
Aeronautics) together with other members of the U.S. scientific and technological establishment2
convinced President Roosevelt to establish the National Research Defense Committee (NRDC) to
"correlate and support scientific research on the mechanisms and devices of warfare" (Pursell 1979).
The NRDC was to supplement existing military research (by the Departments of War and Navy)
related to warfare "by extending the research base and enlisting the co-operation of institutions
and scientists" (James Conant, NDRC member, quoted in Stewart (1948)).

Perhaps as important as any of the technologies it helped to develop, the wartime research effort
was a major innovation in the way science was supported.3 While the first World War disrupted
universities and firms by drawing scientists out of laboratories, and previously U.S. government
agencies themselves had some done research internally, the NDRC effort primarily funded research
"extramurally" through contracts. This helped bring university and industry leaders on board
in support of the effort. Impressed by its early successes, the NDRC organization was expanded
in a 1941 Executive Order to include more development work (beyond just research), to solidify
links with military agencies conducting research, and to take over wartime medical research and
development. The new organization, the Office of Scientific Research and Development (OSRD),
was also eligible for annual Congressional budget appropriations. The New York Times wrote that
this effectively made Vannevar Bush "the czar of research."4

The OSRD itself comprised three constituent bodies: the NDRC, which continued to contract for
R&D on instruments of war; the newly-added Committee on Medical Research (CMR), which sup-
ported research in military medicine; an advisory council, which coordinated research activities
across the OSRD, military, and other civilian agencies; and an engineering and transition office,
which advised on the production and use of devices developed under OSRD research. The NDRC
remained the chief organ of the OSRD, with 19 major divisions (e.g., Division 1, "Ballistics Re-
1
  Most famously, in 1939 Albert Einstein warned President Roosevelt about Nazi advances in uranium research, and
  urged a U.S. atomic R&D program. Development of radar technology was another top priority.
2
  Including Karl Compton, president of MIT; James Conant, president of Harvard; and Frank Jewett, president of
  the National Academies, vice president of AT&T, and director of Bell Labs.
3
  Scholars have since described the arrangement as having "portended the beginning of a new relationship between
  the federal government and the nation's universities" (Geiger 1993, page 3).
4
  In addition to Bush, Compton, Conant, and Jewett, the civilian leaders of OSRD included Richard Tolman (President
  of the California Institute of Technology) and Conway Coe (USPTO Commissioner).


                                                        5
search"; Division 11, "Chemical Engineering", Division 14, "Radar") and several special sections,
including the top secret S-1 section, which organized early research on controlled nuclear reactions
and was subsequently spun out into the Manhattan Project atomic weapon development program.
The OSRD entered into >2,200 R&D contracts with industrial and academic contractors over the
course of the war with a cumulative value of $7.4 billion current dollars, which, as indicated, was
orders of magnitude larger than the government had previously supported.

This effort helped develop a range of technologies that were crucial to the Allied victory. Radar,
mass-produced penicillin, and the atomic bomb are among its most memorable achievements, but
the OSRD also produced significant advances in rocketry, jet propulsion, radio communications,
and electronic computing, plus treatments for malaria, pesticides like DDT, and more ­ all of which
developed commercial applications after the war. The research activity was heavily concentrated
in a network of research labs hastily organized at the start of the war, in part based on Vannevar
Bush's personal network and that of his NDRC deputies. Each had a distinct technological focus
and worked in tandem with corporate R&D labs which helped develop samples and prototypes,
whereas basic research was typically contracted to academic researchers around the country.5 These
early "national labs" attracted scientists and engineers from around the country,6 many of whom
dispersed at the end of the war ­ though some also stayed.7

Even before the war was over, there was broad agreement that the government should be involved
in funding research at universities after the war. Perhaps ironically, the initial attempts to create
a structure for postwar funding came from a critic of the OSRD, Senator Harley Kilgore (D-W.
Va.). Kilgore, a New Deal Democrat, was concerned about the concentration of OSRD funding in




5
  For example, radar development was centered at the MIT Radiation Laboratory (the "Rad Lab"), and radar coun-
  termeasures at the nearby Harvard Radio Research Lab (RRL). Rocket and jet propulsion research was based at the
  CalTech Jet Propulsion Lab (JPL), and proximity fuze development at the Johns Hopkins Applied Research Lab
  (APL). Early, NDRC-supported research on uranium fission took place at academic labs at the University of Chicago
  (led by Arthur Compton, Enrico Fermi), UC Berkeley (Ernest Lawrence, Robert J. Oppenheimer), Columbia Uni-
  versity (Harold Urey) before spinning out into the Manhattan Project, which was based in Los Alamos, New Mexico,
  supported by project sites around the country. These labs were the predecessors of postwar national labs in these
  locations, most of which persist to this day, many with the same name as during the war.
6
  By the fall of 1941, OSRD research had already involved 78% of top American physicists and 52% of top chemists,
  as measured by the publication American Men of Science (Stewart 1948).
7
  For example, Rad Lab record show that a large number of its junior staff became MIT PhD students after the
  war. Prominent labs like the Rad Lab are now known for having attracted and incubated some of the country's
  top engineering talent: for example, David Gale's (of the Gale-Shapley deferred acceptance algorithm) first job out
  of college was as a Rad Lab technician. The war effort also incubated a generation of science administrators: Lee
  DuBridge, director of the Rad Lab, would later go on to be the president of CalTech. Fred Terman, director of the
  Harvard RRL, would later be Stanford's provost and colloquially, the father of Silicon Valley.


                                                         6
big business and a handful of universities (Kevles 1977).8,9 Kilgore had other concerns about the
OSRD model, including that many of the contracts allowed the recipients to retain patent rights ­
making the intellectual output of government-supported research private property ­ and that there
was a lack of representation from small business, independent inventors, and non-elite universities
in the wartime effort. He believed each of these feautures of OSRD hurt the rate of technological
development during the war and also led to concentration of the benefits of federal funding in a
few research fields, institutions and regions (Kevles 1977, Kleinman 1995). In a series of bills in-
troduced during the war, culminating in a 1944 proposal of a new "National Science Foundation",
Kilgore attempted to forge a peacetime research policy that would fund basic and applied research
in response to specific socio-economic problems, with a mandate for broad geographical and insti-
tutional distribution of funds, wide dissemination of research results (including public ownership
of any resulting patents), and political accountability of researchers.

Vannevar Bush's seminal report Science: The Endless Frontier (Bush 1945), written at the request
of President Roosevelt and published near the end of the war, was a rejoinder to this approach
to organizing science.10 Like Kilgore's proposal, Bush recommended a single agency (a "National
Research Foundation"), but with a focus on basic research, run by scientists, with broad scientific
autonomy, and aimed at stimulating high-quality research by the best institutions and scientists.
In making the case for federal funding of fundamental research at universities, the Bush Report
also anticipated the "market failure" theory of federal funding11 (e.g., Arrow 1962) and the "linear"
model of science and innovation12 (Mowery 1997, Nelson 1997).

Although the Bush Report had a strong ideological impact on U.S. policy, its specific proposals
met a cool reception, including from Kilgore and other liberals, who preferred a more egalitarian
peacetime approach to supporting science and technology, and from President Truman, who insisted
on a politically-appointed director. In the five years after the war, NSF legislation reflecting the
Bush, Kilgore, and compromise visions was introduced and debated. By the time the National
Science Foundation Act was passed in 1950, many of the remaining wartime research contracts had

8
  Kilgore was more generally concerned about cartels and concentration of economic power in the U.S., and became
  interested in the science policy issues as a member of the Senate Military Affairs Committee. Various witnesses
  testified before the Committee that wartime mobilization of scientists and business was not taking full advantage of
  the nation's resources beyond elite institutions and large big businesses (Maddox 1981).
9
  As we will show below, 64 percent of OSRD funding went to just 10 institutions, and nearly 50 percent to MIT,
  Harvard, and CalTech alone ­ all universities represented by OSRD leadership.
10
   Kevles (1977) documents that although the Report was framed as a response to President Roosevelt's November
   1944 letter asking Bush to draw lessons from the OSRD experiment for peacetime science policy, Bush himself was
   instrumental in drafting the initial letter and coordinating the Presidential request.
11
   "[W]e cannot expect industry adequately to fill the gap ... basic research is essentially noncommercial in nature ...
   it will not receive the attention it requires if left to industry."
12
   "[B]asic research is the pacemaker of technological progress."


                                                           7
been transferred to mission agencies (the Atomic Energy Commission, the National Institutes of
Health, the Office of Naval Research), precluding the single-agency approach Bush (and Kilgore)
had envisioned. Though the NSF was in large part "a triumph for Bush" (Kevles 1977) ­ primarily
focused on basic research, administered by scientists ­ its budget was small.13

While each of the other major postwar R&D funding agencies had their own rules and procedures
(regarding patent rights, allocation mechanisms, indirect cost recovery, etc.), a striking feature of
federal research funding in the decades that followed was its continued geographic and institutional
concentration. By and large, most agencies used merit review throughout the 1950s and 1960s
(Graham et al. 1997), which may have contributed to continued concentration of federal resources.
Beginning in the 1960s, a variety of legislative initiatives and programs (e.g., the 1979 EPSCOR
program) attempted to widen the geographic distribution of funding, channeling Kilgore's criticism
of the OSRD and concerns about extending the OSRD model in peacetime. Opponents of these
programs typically argue that funding should be directed to the best and brightest researchers, as
determined by the scientific community, echoing Vannevar Bush.


1.2       Previous Research

Our work is informed by a large body of existing scholarship on the OSRD and postwar U.S. science.
Much of this work focuses on specific research projects supported by the OSRD and its role in the
war effort (e.g., Rhodes 2012, Swann 1988, Bud 2007, Rasmussen 2002a, Hoyt 2006), its effects on
U.S. universities (Geiger 1993), its organizational features (e.g., patent clauses, indirect cost rates,
distribution of funding, who should govern science), and the politics of the OSRD and links to later
debates in postwar science policy (Hart 1998, Kevles 1977, Kleinman 1995). Some of this historical
work provides quantitative evidence on the distribution of contracts across time, geography, and
field (Owens 1994), which we build on in our analyses below. While many view the war as a sharp
break from the previous status quo, there is also an influential body of scholarship arguing that
there were important continuities between the war effort and prewar developments in science and
technology (Lowen 1991, Geiger 1993, Owens 1994, Rasmussen 2002b).

Our work is also influenced by decades of empirical research in economics assessing the impact of
public sector investments on private sector research and innovation. In making the case for an
expanded federal role in R&D funding, the Bush Report asserted that advances in science drive
technological innovation. Economists studying science and technology have since attempted to test
13
     Geiger (1993) notes that though both Bush and Kilgore recommended a single federal research funding agency, and
     nearly all witnesses on legislation on postwar science policy agreed, at the end of the day "instead of dominating
     the federal science matrix" the NSF "would inherit the remaining unoccupied spaces."


                                                            8
this hypothesis and quantify the magnitudes. While details vary, this research typically relates
variation (e.g., over time, space, fields) in research funding to outcomes. A perennial challenge is
endogeneity: public sector investments may themselves reflect changes in scientific and technological
opportunities or demand, making it difficult to causally attribute changes in outputs and outcomes
to changes in levels or direction of public sector investment (Jaffe 2008). Many recent papers use
quasi-experimental variation to attempt to overcome this problem (e.g., Jacob and Lefgren (2011),
Azoulay et al. (2019), Moretti et al. (2019)), but the problem remains challenging. While absent
a true random experiment we cannot fully circumvent this problem, one advantage to studying
World War II is that it was a large, mission-driven technology shock, and specific military demands
(together with considerations of scientific feasibility) dictated funding decisions rather than pure
scientific value.14

In studying the effects of the OSRD on the geography of innovation, our work connects back to
the Bush-Kilgore debates, scholarship on postwar concentration of research activity (Graham et al.
1997), and modern discussion of place-based policies for innovation (Gruber and Johnson 2019,
Glaeser and Hausman 2020). Our work is also connected to the empirical literature on knowledge
spillovers and the extent to which economic benefits of publicly funded research are geographically
localized (e.g., Jaffe et al. 1993). Unlike the majority of previous research in economics on this
topic, our historical setting allows us to observe agglomeration and localized spillovers over a long
timeline, and to explore potential mechanisms behind our results.

Finally, this paper links to scholarship on war, innovation, and economic growth. Ruttan (2006)
argues that military procurement has been a major driver of innovation in a range of industries,
and particularly important for development of general purpose technologies. Other economic his-
torians have taken the opposite view, arguing that war has a modest or even negative impact on
productivity and innovation (Mowery 2010, Field 2008). The two World Wars have also served as
laboratories for specific questions about intellectual property rights and innovation, including the
effects of compulsory invention secrecy (Gross 2019), the effects of compulsory licensing of foreign-
owned invention (Moser and Voena 2012, Baten et al. 2017), and the effects of reduced access to
foreign science on research output (Iaria et al. 2018).




14
     For example, Stewart (1948) noted of the OSRD Committee on Medical Research that "the shift in emphasis and
     even in direction was enormous," as many subjects "of minor importance in peacetime [e.g., tropical medicine or
     human physiology at high altitudes] became of controlling importance in war."


                                                          9
2    Data

While a complete empirical assessment of the effects of OSRD would have previously been difficult,
we have created a new dataset of the universe of OSRD contracts, which were preserved at the
National Archives (NARA) in College Park, MD. We have collected, transcribed, and harmonized a
complete record of all 2254 OSRD contracts (to 461 distinct contractors), and the 7910 inventions,
2763 patents, and 2470 scientific publications which they produced. For each contract, we observe
many features: the contractor (with locations), OSRD division which wrote the contract (indicating
subject matter), total value and value obligated, security classification, patent clause (short or long
form, giving the government versus the contractor the right to patent inventions developed under
contract) and termination date. The OSRD records further identify 7879 OSRD-supported inven-
tions reported by contractors, on which 3382 patents were filed and 2659 granted. We supplement
these records with an automated, text-based search for continuations and divisions of these patent
applications, which identifies another 104 OSRD-supported patents.

We link the data on OSRD contractors and patenting to the U.S. patent record. To do so, we
separately collected data on all U.S. patents granted between 1920 and 1979, merging a USPTO
master file of patents with patent number, patent class, and issue date (Marco et al. 2015) with
data on (i) serial numbers and filing dates (FPO); (ii) the full network of front-page (historically,
final-page) citations (FPO); (iii) harmonized assignee names (Derwent Innovation, supplemented
by our own effort) and assignee types; and (iv) inventor locations (HistPat). We also identify all
pre- and post-war patents of individuals listed on the rosters of two of the major OSRD-supported
research labs (the Radiation Lab at MIT, and the Radio Research Lab at Harvard), to explore
the role of individual inventors. In order to compare trends in U.S. and foreign patenting we also
collected data from the European Patent Office (EPO) PATSTAT database on granted patents in
the U.S., Great Britain, and France over the same period, which includes similar information to
that of the base layer in the USPTO data: patent number, patent class (IPC), and grant date. See
Appendix A for complete details of the patent data preparation.

In Section 5, we measure county-level employment using the U.S. Census Bureau County Business
Patterns (CBP), focusing on 2- and 3-digit industries related to technology areas which were a focus
of OSRD research, especially Communications equipment (SIC 366), Electronic Components and
Accessories (SIC 367), and Professional, Scientific, and Controlling Instruments (SIC 38), and also
collecting manufacturing sector and aggregate employment. We use the 1947, 1959, 1970, and 1980
editions of the CBP to measure these outcomes at roughly 10-year intervals. The CBP data present
a few unique challenges, including data suppression in small cells and (modest) changes to the SIC


                                                  10
classification over time, which we address with imputation and reclassification, respectively. We
discuss these issues and their resolution in depth in the appendix.


Distribution of OSRD funding across space and subject matter

The OSRD contracted for research in a wide range of subject areas, and with a broad array of
contractors, including major firms and research laboratories like Bell Labs, General Electric, RCA,
and DuPont and universities like Harvard, MIT, and CalTech, which hosted programmatic research
labs to work on OSRD projects. Table 1 list the top 10 OSRD divisions, and Table 2 lists top OSRD
industrial and university contractors, by the total value of their contracts.


                                    [Tables 1 and 2 about here]


Although particular research efforts were concentrated in specific locations ­ like radar research at
the MIT Radiation Lab and Harvard Radio Research Lab, or proximity fuze research at the Johns
Hopkins Applied Physics Lab ­ OSRD-sponsored research projects spanned the country. Figure 1
maps locations in the continental U.S. with OSRD-supported patents filed between 1941 and 1948,
demonstrating the geographic scope of the research effort.


                                       [Figure 1 about here]


Table 3 reports the top 10 2-digit NBER categories with OSRD patents, sorted by the fraction of
all patents filed between 1941 and 1948 in those classes which were OSRD patents. At the top of
this list is nuclear energy. The next eight categories are broadly related to electrical, electronic,
and communications equipment, including technologies such as radar, cryptography, and early
computing, highlighting how much progress was being made on electronics research during the war,
with applications far beyond warfighting ­ an observation which motivates our focus in Section 5
on the growth of industrial clusters in the electronics industry.


                                        [Table 3 about here]



3    Direction of U.S. Invention after WWII

Given the scale of the World War II shock, our first question is whether the wartime research
effort shifted the overall direction of U.S. invention in the aggregate. We take two approaches to

                                                 11
answering this question: we first compare patent filing at the USPTO versus at foreign patent
authorities in technology classes which were more- or less-heavily supported by the OSRD during
the war. To do so, we aggregate to the 2-digit IPC level (131 classes in total) and compare patenting
at the USPTO to that in the British and French patent offices. Using our data on the location
of inventors on U.S. patents, we also aggregate USPTO filings to 2-digit patent categories (39 in
total) and compare filings by domestic versus foreign inventors.

In this as well as later sections, our OSRD treatment measures is the fraction of U.S. patent
applications in the given technology class filed from 1941 to 1948 which were OSRD-supported
(henceforth, the "OSRD rate"). Under this definition, a given technology area is "shocked" if large
fraction of its patents from this period resulted from OSRD research. We can measure the OSRD
rate in levels, in logs (to account for skew), or in terms of its distribution (quantiles). Results
throughout the paper are similar with any of these measures.

Here we take the latter approach: our first specification is effectively a triple-difference, comparing
U.S. and foreign log patent filings, before and after war, in classes in different quartiles of the
OSRD rate (calculated for classes with 1 OSRD patent) and an omitted category for classes with
no OSRD patents. This specification is estimated over a sample of country-IPC-years from 1930
to 1970, omitting the years 1940 to 1945 (inclusive), as follows:

                                 4
          Ln(P atents)ict =            q · (Country i = US) · (Class c  quartile q ) · (t > 1945)
                                q =1

                                  + Countryi × Classc + Countryi × P ostt + Classc × P ostt + ict                   (1)


where i, c, and t index countries, technology classes, and years, the latter terms represent interacted
fixed effects, and standard errors are clustered at the country-class level.15

Figure 2 plots the estimates (with 95% confidence intervals), first for a comparison against Great
Britain (left panel), and then against France (right panel). U.S. filings in the most heavily-treated
classes are nearly 40 percent higher after the war than in Britain, and 60 percent higher than in
France, both highly significant. The effects for the third quartile of treated classes are attenuated
(roughly 25 percent and 40 percent, respectively), but still large and statistically significant, and
in lower quartiles near zero and only marginally significant.

                                                 [Figure 2 about here]
15
     Because historical PATSTAT data only provide grant (not filing) dates, t indexes grant years for the U.S. versus
     foreign patent authority comparisons, where we also restrict to patents with a family size of one (to ensure we are
     measuring the primary location), although the results are generally not sensitive to this restriction. For domestic
     versus foreign USPTO patents, we measure filing dates, and t indexes filing years.


                                                            12
We also estimate a variant of Equation 1 with annual coefficients, which allows us to explore both
pre- and post-treatment trends. Figure 3 presents the estimates for differences in patenting in the
top quartile of treated classes over time, following the same format as the previous figure. The
figure reveals no particularly notable differences between the U.S. and Great Britain prior to the
war, a spike of a difference during the war, a post-war dip, and then a take-off. The pattern is
similar against France, with differences even more pronounced. We will see this same empirical
pattern in several other contexts throughout the rest of the paper.


                                        [Figure 3 about here]


In Appendix Figure B.1, we repeat this estimation for lower treatment quartiles, with similar but
attenuated effects. We also re-estimate the regressions in Figures 2 and 3 excluding weapons-related
classes such as firearms, ordnance, and explosives (Appendix Figures B.2 and B.3, respectively),
to confirm that the results aren't mechanically driven by the World War II and Cold War military
buildups ­ in both cases finding quantitatively similar results.

We then re-estimate these specifications on a distinct sample, using U.S. patents filed by domestic
and foreign inventors in 2-digit NBER patent categories with a higher or lower OSRD rate in the
1940s. Appendix Figures B.4 and B.5 provide counterpart results to the figures above (binning
two untreated patent categories into the lowest treatment quartile). We find qualitatively similar
effects: pre-war patenting by U.S. inventors in the most-heavily treated classes shows no particular
differential trends relative to patenting by foreign inventors, but it jumps after the war ­ with no
such differences in untreated classes. These results are similar when estimated for log patents (as
specified), citation-weighted patents, or inverse hyperbolic sine patents, and remain similar at the
level of USPC patent classes (>400) rather than NBER patent categories.



4    Growth of Domestic Technology Clusters

The shift in the overall direction of U.S. inventive activity is just the tip of the iceberg in docu-
menting the effects that the war had on American science and technology. As Section 1 recounted,
the OSRD experience not only deepened the country's military-scientific capabilities, but perhaps
even more importantly, it laid a foundation for post-war science policy and scientific institutions.
Our attention now shifts to understanding whether, and through what channels, the wartime re-
search effort altered the country's technological landscape ­ quite literally, what was being invented,
where, and by whom ­ and how broadly and quickly it changed.


                                                  13
Massachusetts turns out to be an instructive microcosm for this question. Figure 4 shows the time
series of patents filed across the 12 largest Massachusetts counties from 1935 to 1965. Middlesex
County ­ home to Harvard and MIT ­ was more inventive in levels but not on a noticeably different
time trend relative to other counties prior to WW2. It then experienced a spike in patenting around
the war, much of which was resulted from OSRD-funded radar research. After the war, patenting
returned to near pre-war levels, and then subsequently took off.


                                                  [Figure 4 about here]


We set out to perform these comparisons in a more systematic way across the country. To do so,
we compare patenting over time in counties and technology areas with higher versus lower levels
of OSRD investment, on the grounds that technology clusters are often technologically specialized,
and it was not entire local economies per se which were shocked, but specific research areas in these
particular places, which we measure as counties crossed by 2-digit NBER patent categories. Our
baseline estimating equation throughout this section is as follows:

                                         1970
                   Ln(P atents)ict =              t · Ln(OSRD Rate)ic · Y eart + ic + t + ict                     (2)
                                        t=1931


where i indexes counties, c indexes patent categories, and t indexes years, and the sample runs from
1930 to 1970, with standard errors clustered at the county-category level. Our preferred treatment
measure is the county- and category-level OSRD rate (the fraction of patents filed in a county and
patent category between 1941 and 1948 which were OSRD patents). In our primary specification
we use a continuous measure of the logged OSRD rate, which mechanically restricts the sample
to county-categories with at least one OSRD patent. In robustness checks we also re-examine our
results with a specification with treatment quartiles, similar to that in Section 3, which allows us
to compare segments of the distribution in a flexible way:16

                                    4   1970
             Ln(P atents)ict =                   qt · 1(Treatment quartile q ) · Y eart + ic + t + ict            (3)
                                   q =1 t=1931



An inevitable concern is the endogeneity of the location and subject matter of OSRD research, since
contractors and contracts were not randomly chosen. Indeed, in the aggregate we see that patent
classes with the highest rate of OSRD patenting were growing quickly before the war and continued
16
     Note that although we have experimented with treatment intensity measures derived from OSRD contracts and
     obligations, there is no straightforward way to allocate these to patent classes, especially since many contracts
     yielded either no patents or patents in multiple classes.


                                                            14
growing quickly after the war. However, as we will see below, when the analysis is disaggregated
to the level of county-classes, these pre-trends disappear: much like in Figure 4, it does not appear
that county-classes with high levels of OSRD treatment were on different trends before the war,
relative to those with low OSRD treatment or none at all.


4.1   Baseline effects

Figure 5 plots coefficients from Equation 2, shown with 95% confidence intervals. As the figure
indicates, patenting in the most heavily-treated county-categories: (i) was not growing statistically
differently than the untreated group through 1941, (ii) experienced a relative surge during the war,
(iii) contracted from its mid-war peak when the war ended, and then (iv) took off on a path of
decades of rapid, sustained growth (indeed, the underlying growth pattern is exponential). The
magnitudes indicate that county-categories with double the wartime OSRD rate (e.g., from 50% to
100%) were producing 30% more patents in that technology area by 1970.


                                       [Figure 5 about here]


Appendix C provides several supporting results. Appendix Figure C.1 estimates effects by treat-
ment quartile (similar to Equation 3), where we see similar patterns for the top quartile of treated
county-categories, attenuated effects for the third quartile, and no such effects at lower quartiles.
Appendix Figure C.2 reproduces Figure 5 excluding, in sequence, California, Massachusetts, New
Jersey, and New York ­ states which either had a concentration of OSRD patents in the 1940s or
are now the locations of the largest U.S. technology hubs ­ to demonstrate that our baseline results
are general, and not being driven by any particular region of the country.

These results raise the question of whether the rise in patenting reflects population movements
(agglomeration) or underlying growth in inventive productivity (per capita). To answer this ques-
tion, we collect decadal county population from the U.S. population census, interpolate between
decades, and measure annual per-capita patenting. Appendix Figure C.3 estimates Equation 2 for
county-categories' per-capita patenting. The pattern in Figure 5 persists, though the magnitudes
are attenuated, with a doubling of the OSRD rate being associated with around a 10% increase in
per-capita patenting by 1970. The OSRD shock thus appears to have increased local invention via
a combination of both agglomeration and productivity effects.

We also confirm that these results are similar whether estimated for log patents (as specified),
citation-weighted patents, or inverse hyperbolic sine patents (which can be calculated for county-
categories with zero patents, which then remain in the sample). When estimated for exclusively

                                                 15
non-OSRD patenting, the spike in the mid-1940s is smoothed out (this spike represents the OSRD
patents themselves), but the subsequent take-off in patenting remains.


4.2   Heterogeneity

These patterns show up in numerous other views of the data, including when comparisons are made
within county-years or category-years (versus the baseline comparison, within county-categories
over time). But what these average effects invariably mask is the potential for substantial hetero-
geneity across space, across time, and even across technology areas.

The most striking implication of the results thus far is that World War II was the singular event
setting in motion increasing agglomeration of inventive activity around the country, and ostensibly
the take-off of technology clusters that persist to this day. At first view, this evidence would seem to
contradict historians' continuity hypothesis (Geiger 1993, Owens 1990, Lowen 1991), which posits
continuity between pre-war, wartime, and post-war U.S. science and technology (Section 1). In the
context of the local or regional agglomeration of invention, the question is whether the war was an
equalizing force, or merely deepened existing geographic differences.

To more explore this question, we partition county-categories into the top 5% versus bottom 95%
of 1930s patenting intensity. When Equation 2 is estimated for each group, it becomes apparent
that the effects are entirely driven by clusters which were already among the most inventive before
World War II (Figure 6). Yet even in these clusters, the OSRD treatment does not coincide with
any differential growth leading up to the war: the entirety of the OSRD effect takes place with the
wartime surge in patenting, and the postwar take-off. The evidence thus supports an interpretation
of both continuity and change, like that seen in our Massachusetts example (in Figure 4): pre-war
differences persisted, but the war caused a trend shift. In simpler terms, the OSRD's effect was to
catalyze massive long-run growth in existing geographic centers of invention.

A second question is whether the OSRD effect was general across all technologies whose development
it funded, or stronger for some research fields over others. We evaluate this question by partitioning
the sample by 1-digit NBER categories, which represent six broader technology areas: Chemicals,
Computers & Communications, Drugs & Medical, Electrical & Electronics, Mechanical, and Other.
We re-estimate Equation 2 for each of these subsamples, with results in Figure 7. The OSRD's
prioritization of radar, computing, and electronic controls made Electrical & Electronics one of
the most active areas of OSRD patenting during the war. This was also true of weapons systems,
which fall in the Mechanical category. Perhaps as a result, Figure 7 suggests that the OSRD effect
is driven by precisely these two categories. The fact that the research effort played a large role in

                                                  16
the history of the U.S. electronics industry, and an empirically important role in the take-off of U.S.
electronics invention, motivates our focus on the electronics industry in the next section, when we
study the effects of the OSRD on employment growth and the real economy.

In additional tests, we compare the effects across different categories of assignees, such as patenting
by firms vs. individuals, and for then for patenting by incumbents vs. entrants, which we define
simply as patents whose assignee does versus does not have a prior USPTO filing (back to 1920).
We find large effects for all groups, indicating that the OSRD effect cuts across a wide swath of
filers in the treated clusters. The question, then, is why.


Mechanisms: An ongoing investigation

Despite the fact that World War II was, on its own, an inherently temporary shock to the innovation
system, the evidence thus far indicates that its consequences reverberated for decades. Why did a
temporary shock end up having such long-lived effects? What is it about this funding shock that
led to it transforming the U.S. inventive sector in the latter half of the century? And what does it
teach us about how these effects can be reproduced today?

A complete answer to this question could be a golden ticket to decades of technological progress, and
is beyond the scope of any single paper alone. In ongoing work we are beginning to explore the forces
which may have turned this temporary shock into a long-lived one, especially by understanding how
the wartime research effort shaped, fed, or interacted with other elements of the U.S. innovation
system. The evidence from this effort is more likely to be hypothesis-generating than definitive,
but it can bring into focus some of the postwar developments in U.S. science and technology that
might have cemented the durability of the OSRD's efforts.

Candidate explanations might include direct effects of OSRD-funded research such as follow-on
invention, or less direct ones such as the growth of local innovation ecosystems. We can already
rule out the direct channels: in our ongoing work, we have found no evidence that the long-run
effects were powered by postwar patenting by the inventors or firms involved in OSRD research
(neither OSRD contractors, nor assignees on OSRD patents), or even postwar invention directly
citing OSRD patents. This leads us to a tentative conclusion that the effect of the OSRD was to
cultivate a local ecosystem supporting innovation in treated technology areas. One channel that
may have supported or accelerated this effect was the local university infrastructure, both as a locus
of research activity and as training grounds for scientific talent. Another candidate is rapid growth
in the postwar network of federally-funded R&D centers (FFRDCs), which were borne out of the
major OSRD-supported research labs and often had formal links to local firms and universities;

                                                  17
yet another is defense R&D spending during the Cold War, which engaged contractors around the
country in technology development. The propagation of the OSRD shock may not be attributable
to any single one of these mechanisms ­ it may be the whole system, rather than any one of its
parts, that explains the remarkable persistence of the OSRD effect. In other words, the answer to
"what changed?" might not be any one thing, but rather many things.

Several data sources are available in our effort to understand this persistence. As an initial step, we
plan to expand our efforts to measure intellectual linkages to OSRD-supported research with second
or third generation patent citations, and university spillovers with patent-paper citation linkages,
including in-text citations (Bryan et al. 2020). Typically these types of effects are hard to observe
for policy experiments, but our rich data and long observation window may allow us to do so. We
also collect data on the U.S. university system from a National Academy of Science report (NAS
1963), which provides PhD production by university, year and field. We likewise measure FFRDCs
from the NSF's annual Federal Funds for Research & Development report from 1958 to 1977, which
lists FFRDCs, their funding agency, their administrating organization, and their location, and we
supplement these data with manual research on each lab's primary subject area.

It is also possible that the long-term effects we are observing reflect OSRD building up capacity
(e.g., scientific and technological capabilities, managerial knowledge, grantsmanship) in certain
areas, which in turn helped institutions compete for Cold War grants and contracts, and there are
localized spillovers from the latter ­ in other words, that the OSRD initiated a virtuous cycle of
federal funding in the treated areas. Since most Cold War funding was defense related, we will start
this inquiry by looking at local Department of Defense R&D contracting, which we have collected
back to the 1960s. We also are collating data on total federal support for R&D by institution from
the earliest NSF publications reporting these data (published in the 1960s).

One yet-unaddressed mechanism is migration, especially if certain regions became attractive for
scientists and inventors working in a particular field. The geography of innovation literature (Feld-
man and Kogler 2010) points to cross-fertilization of ideas, thick markets for intermediate inputs,
and the rise of supporting institutions (e.g. venture capital) as potential reasons why scientific and
technical talent may be attracted to a given regions. Although difficult to measure, we may be able
to use the postwar National Roster of Scientific and Technical Personnel (NRSTP), a biennial list
of U.S. scientists, to study migration patterns. An early version of this list was introduced during
World War II, reflecting Kilgorian concerns that not all relevant researchers were being mobilized
through the OSRD model, but the available data span 1954 to 1970. The NRSTP includes sci-
entists' location, field, degrees, and other information which we might be able to use to trace the
mobility of scientists and inventors over the postwar era.

                                                  18
5     Effects on Local Employment in High-Tech Industries

The collective evidence thus far has established that World War II was a sea-change event for
the U.S. inventive economy, and especially for inventive geography, but a remaining question is
whether these effects spilled over into the broader population. What are the real effects of a big-
push investment in science and technology like the one undertaken by the U.S. government in World
War II? What happens to population growth, employment, wages, land prices, and other economic
outcomes? These questions sit at the heart of contemporary debates around place-based policies
to jump-start local innovation and increase both the growth rates and resilience of local economies
(e.g., Gruber and Johnson 2019, Glaeser and Hausman 2020).

To study this question, we need to a data series on local outcomes that is available over a long
horizon and will vary at the level of the OSRD treatment itself, namely counties crossed by subject
areas. For this exercise, we use CBP data from 1959, 1970, and 1980 to measure local employment
in high-tech industries. We relate the OSRD's wartime R&D investments to future employment,
in a test of whether its effects extended beyond R&D and patenting by shaping population centers
and the economic geography of high-tech manufacturing.17

Our focus here is on the postwar U.S. electronics industry. Not only was electronics one of the
technology categories that appears to have embodied the OSRD's effect on inventive agglomeration
(Figure 7), but given (i) the concentration of OSRD research in predecessor fields like microwave
radiation and electrical communication, (ii) our ability to draw relatively clean links between these
industries and related patent classes, and ultimately (iii) the rapid growth of these industries and
their importance to U.S. technological progress and global technological supremacy in the second
half of the 20th century, these industries are most ripe for study.

We focus on SIC 366 and 367, Communications Equipment and Electronic Components and Ac-
cessories manufacturing. Appendix A lists examples of 4-digit industries and products included
in these SICs. We combine these SICs and crosswalk patent classes to them using a USPC-SIC
concordance from the USPTO, which we in turn use to measure (i) total wartime patents and (ii)
OSRD patents for each county and industry ­ in other words, an industry-level measure of the
local OSRD shock. From the CBP data we measure employment in SIC 366-367, as well as total
manufacturing sector employment and total employment.18
17
   Pre-1970 CBP data are unavailable in electronic format and require digitization from Census publications. The
   1959 CBP is the earliest edition available which provides county-level employment at the 3-digit SIC level, which is
   sufficiently disaggregated to serve our purposes, and which we can crosswalk to patent classes using the USPTO's
   USPC-SIC crosswalk. As Section 2 explains, because digitizing the entirety of the 1959 CBP is prohibitively
   expensive, we selected SICs of interest to be digitized for all U.S. counties.
18
   Because a few counties' employment for these industries is suppressed, we have also used county-industry data on


                                                          19
We regress county-level log employment in SIC 366-367 in 1959, 1970, and 1980 on the log number
of technologically-related OSRD patents during the 1941-1948 period. In all specifications, we
control for the log number of total patents (OSRD and non-OSRD) during this period to account
for overall inventive productivity. In successive specifications we also add controls for a county's
log manufacturing employment (across all manufacturing SICs) and log total employment (across
all SICs). Formally, we estimate the following regression:


           Ln(Employment)it =                   t · Ln(OSRD P atents)i · Y eart
                                        t

                                            +        t · Ln(All P atents)i · Y eart + t + Xit  + it              (4)
                                                 t


where i indexes counties and t indexes years, t represent year fixed effects, Xit is a vector of
controls, and standard errors are clustered at the county level. Note that as specified, the regression
sample will be restricted to county-years with nonzero employment in SIC 366-367 and at least one
associated OSRD patent, such that their logged values are defined.

Table 4 presents the results. Column (1) shows our baseline specification without controls, where we
see a qualitative, increasing relationship between local OSRD patenting and SIC 366-367 employ-
ment over time, with effects marginally significant by 1980. Once we control for total manufacturing
employment in Columns (2) and (3), a pattern more clearly emerges: counties with more OSRD
patents in the 1940s in electronics-related classes had higher electronics industry employment in the
postwar period, with the magnitudes suggesting a doubling of OSRD patents being associated with
roughly 60-65% higher employment in 1970 and 1980. In Column (4), we replace the dependent
variable with the fraction of county employment in SIC 366-367, where we see qualitatively similar
effects: a doubling of related OSRD patents in the 1940s is associated with a 0.25 p.p. increase in
local SIC 366-367 employment share by 1970 and 0.4 p.p. by 1980.


                                                 [Table 4 about here]


Given that these effects are largest in columns controlling for total employment, our interpretation
of this evidence is that counties where the wartime research was performed were subsequently more
likely to be loci of electronics and communications manufacturing, and in turn more specialized

 the firm size distribution to impute employment levels, regressing observed employment on the firm size distribution
 for county-industries reporting employment, and using the resulting parameter estimates to generated "predicted"
 employment levels, which we can use in robustness checks to expand the sample. Due to a preference for precise
 measurement and unknown risks of bias in the imputation method, we currently are presenting results using only
 the recorded data, although results based on imputed employment levels are similar.


                                                           20
in these high-tech industries versus others. The upshot, however, is that the seeds planted by the
wartime research effort appears to have also sprouted local industrial activity, spilling over from
the inventive sector to the local economy more broadly.



6       Implications and Conclusion

As the war drew to its close, a flurry of media coverage revealed the scientific research which had
taken place behind the scenes, and the significant role it played in the Allied victory. Yet as the
OSRD's Deputy Director Irvin Stewart wrote in 1948, anticipating its transformative effects, the
"full impact" of this effort may not yet have been realized (Stewart 1948). Despite a large historical
and science policy literature on the long-run effects of OSRD on the institutions of postwar science
policy, we believe this paper to be first quantitative empirical assessment of the long-run effects of
this "unique experiment" on innovation and employment outcomes.

Using a new dataset on all OSRD contracts, we show evidence of the long run effects of this tem-
porary funding shock on the regions and technology areas where OSRD funding was concentrated.
If interpreted as causal, these results support Vannevar Bush's argument that federally-funded re-
search can lead to persistent growth in innovation and economic performance. Here it is important
to recognize that although Bush argued for funding "basic" research in Science: The Endless Fron-
tier, asserting that the wartime effort built on prior advances in fundamental science, the OSRD's
funding was primarily for applied research and development. Our results thus speak most directly
to the effects of large-scale federal investments in applied research.19

The results add to several long-running policy and academic debates. On the concentration of
federal R&D spending, Kilgore was right: much of the OSRD support was directed to researchers
at elite institutions and research labs (Table 2). While it is hard to know whether the elite funding
model of OSRD was the most efficient one for wartime (i.e., were there, literally, any lost Ein-
steins?), it is also hard to argue with the results. Nonetheless, Kilgore's concerns about persistent
concentration of innovative activity and economic power generated by such an approach seems
prescient, given the results of this paper. Gruber and Johnson (2019) have argued that broader
funding, even if it reduces efficiency, could promote not only equity but also geographically-diffuse
public and political buy-in for increasing federal research spending.

In addition to efficiency-equity tradeoffs, another theme in postwar science and technology policy
relates to accountability of federally funded researchers. The Bush Report is often read as a plea for
19
     Similarly, it is interesting that the Bush report emphasized scientific self-governance, but OSRD was decidedly
     driven not by scientific curiosity but instead by battlefield demands.


                                                          21
limited direct accountability of scientists to policymakers, as part of the postwar "social contract"
for science. Calls for greater accountability and performance evaluation, often in times with tight
budgets, ruffle scientists' feathers (Cozzens 1999). Our results suggest the need for long evaluation
time horizons. Were the effects of OSRD research on non-OSRD patenting evaluated in 1950 as
opposed to 1970, we would miss a large part of its economic impact.

Our paper also connects to the literature on the economics of World War II, and on the economic
effects of war in general. There is a debate in the literature about whether war is good or bad
for economic performance, and whether defense R&D generates economic spillovers (e.g., Moretti
et al. 2019). Our results suggest that there is a long-run effect of defense R&D on patenting and
economic performance, even for a research program that was explicitly not focused on creating "dual
use" technologies. It is difficult to perform a rate of return calculation, however, not only because
valuing patent outcomes is difficult, but also because without better understanding of mechanisms
generating the long-run effects (including potential additional funding from other agencies and
actors) it is unclear we are measuring all the relevant inputs.

We previously referenced a large historical literature describing the wartime effort as a sharp break
from the past, and a countervailing school arguing that wartime research was in fact a continuation
of preceding technological developments. Our results lend support to both hypotheses: the main
effects of OSRD funding are seen in county-classes which were already more heavily patenting before
the war ­ but they were not on differential trends. The wartime effort appears to have magnified
these differences, setting in motion persistent agglomeration effects.

Our work is preceded by a large literature in the economics of science which estimates the impact of
marginal changes to research funding on patenting, generally finding positive effects. Much of this
evidence is based on grants for scientific research, such as at the NIH, which ­ reflecting Vannevar
Bush's vision in Science: The Endless Frontier ­ currently comprise the majority of the federal
government's (civilian) extramural research support. Our work complements this body of evidence,
suggesting that the major applied research effort undertaken in World War II had large, long-run
effects on the U.S. national innovation system.




                                                  22
References
Akcigit, Ufuk, John Grigsby, and Tom Nicholas. 2017. The Rise of American Ingenuity: Innovation and
  Inventors of the Golden Age. NBER Working Paper No. 23047.

Andrews, Michael. 2019. Comparing Historical Patent Datasets. Working paper.

Arrow, Kenneth. 1962. "Economic Welfare and the Allocation of Resources for Invention," in The Rate and
  Direction of Inventive Activity: Economic and Social Factors : Princeton University Press, pp. 609­626.

Azoulay, Pierre, Joshua S. Graff Zivin, Danielle Li, and Bhaven N. Sampat. 2019. "Public R&D investments
  and private-sector patenting: Evidence from NIH funding rules," The Review of Economic Studies, Vol.
  86, No. 1, pp. 117­152.

Baten, Joerg, Nicola Bianchi, and Petra Moser. 2017. "Compulsory licensing and innovation: Historical
  evidence from German patents after WWI," Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 126, pp. 231­242.

Berkes, Enrico. 2018. Comprehensive Universe of U.S. Patents (CUSP): Data and Facts. Working paper.

Bryan, Kevin A, Yasin Ozcan, and Bhaven Sampat. 2020. "In-text patent citations: A user's guide," Research
  Policy, Vol. 49, No. 4, p. 103946.

Bud, Robert. 2007. Penicillin: Triumph and tragedy. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Bush, Vannevar. 1945. Science, the Endless Frontier: A report to the President. Washington: Government
  Printing Office.

Cozzens, Susan E. 1999. "Are new accountability rules bad for science?" Issues in Science and Technology,
  Vol. 15, No. 4, pp. 59­66.

Feldman, Maryann P and Dieter F Kogler. 2010. "Stylized facts in the geography of innovation," in Handbook
  of the Economics of Innovation, Vol. 1: Elsevier, pp. 381­410.

Field, Alexander J. 2008. "The impact of the Second World War on US productivity growth," The Economic
  History Review, Vol. 61, No. 3, pp. 672­694.

Geiger, Roger L. 1993. Research and relevant knowledge: American research universities since World War
  II. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Glaeser, Edward L. and Naomi Hausman. 2020. "The spatial mismatch between innovation and joblessness,"
  Innovation Policy and the Economy, Vol. 20, No. 1, pp. 233­299.

Graham, Hugh Davis, Nancy Diamond et al. 1997. The rise of American research universities: Elites and
  challengers in the postwar era.: JHU Press.

Gross, Daniel P. 2019. The consequences of invention secrecy: Evidence from the USPTO Patent Secrecy
  Program in World War II. Working paper.

Gross, Daniel P. and Bhaven N. Sampat. 2020. Mission-oriented research in a National Emergency: Lessons
  from the Committee on Medical Research in World War II. Working paper.

Gruber, John and Simon Johnson. 2019. Jump-starting America: How Breakthrough Science Can Revive
  Economic Growth and the America Dream. New York: PublicAffair Press.

Hart, David M. 1998. Forged consensus: Science, technology, and economic policy in the United States,
  1921­1953. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Hoyt, Kendall. 2006. "Vaccine innovation: Lessons from World War II," Journal of Public Health Policy,
  Vol. 27, No. 1, pp. 38­57.


                                                   23
Iaria, Alessandro, Carlo Schwarz, and Fabian Waldinger. 2018. "Frontier knowledge and scientific production:
   Evidence from the collapse of international science," Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 133, No. 2, pp.
   927­991.

Jacob, Brian A. and Lars Lefgren. 2011. "The impact of research grant funding on scientific productivity,"
  Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 95, No. 9­10, pp. 1168­1177.

Jaffe, Adam B. 2008. "The `Science of Science Policy': Reflections on the important questions and the
  challenges they present," The Journal of Technology Transfer, Vol. 33, No. 2, pp. 131­139.

Jaffe, Adam B., Manuel Trajtenberg, and Rebecca Henderson. 1993. "Geographic localization of knowledge
  spillovers as evidenced by patent citations," Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 108, No. 3, pp. 577­598.

Kevles, Daniel J. 1977. "The National Science Foundation and the debate over postwar research policy,
  1942­1945: A political interpretation of Science­The Endless Frontier," Isis, Vol. 68, No. 1, pp. 5­26.

Kleinman, Daniel Lee. 1995. Politics on the endless frontier: Postwar research policy in the United States.
  Durham: Duke University Press.

Lowen, Rebecca S. 1991. "Transforming the university: Administrators, physicists, and industrial and federal
  patronage at Stanford, 1935­49," History of Education Quarterly, Vol. 31, No. 3, pp. 365­388.

Maddox, Robert Franklin. 1981. The Senatorial Career of Harley Martin Kilgore.: Taylor & Francis.

Moretti, Enrico, Claudia Steinwender, and John Van Reenen. 2019. The Intellectual Spoils of War? Defense
 R&D, Productivity and International Spillovers. NBER Working Paper No. 26483.

Moser, Petra and Alessandra Voena. 2012. "Compulsory licensing: Evidence from the Trading with the
 Enemy Act," American Economic Review, Vol. 102, pp. 396­427.

Mowery, David C. 1997. "The Bush report after 50 years: Blueprint or relic?" in Barfield, Claude E. ed.
 Science for the 21st century: The Bush Report revisited, Washington: American Enterprise Institute.

       . 2010. "Military R&D and innovation," in Handbook of the Economics of Innovation, Vol. 2, pp.
  1219­1256.

NAS. 1963. Doctorate production in United States universities: 1920­1962. National Academy of Sci-
 ences­National Research Council Publication No. 1142.

Nelson, Richard R. 1997. "Why the Bush Report has hindered and effective civilian technology policy," in
  Barfield, Claude E. ed. Science for the 21st century: The Bush Report revisited, Washington: American
  Enterprise Institute.

Owens, Larry. 1990. "MIT and the Federal `Angel': Academic R & D and Federal-private cooperation before
 World War II," Isis, Vol. 81, No. 2, pp. 188­213.

       . 1994. "The counterproductive management of science in the Second World War: Vannevar Bush
  and the Office of Scientific Research and Development," Business History Review, Vol. 68, No. 4, pp.
  515­576.

Petralia, Sergio, Pierre-Alexandre Balland, and David L Rigby. 2016. "Unveiling the geography of historical
  patents in the United States from 1836 to 1975," Scientific data, Vol. 3, No. 1, pp. 1­14.

Pursell, Carroll. 1979. "Science agencies in World War II: The OSRD and its challengers," The Sciences in
  the American Context: New Perspectives, pp. 359­78.

Rasmussen, Nicolas. 2002a. "Of `Small Men', Big Science and Bigger Business: The Second World War and
  biomedical research in the United States," Minerva, Vol. 40, No. 2, pp. 115­146.


                                                     24
        . 2002b. "Steroids in arms: Science, government, industry, and the hormones of the adrenal cortex
  in the United States, 1930­1950," Medical History, Vol. 46, No. 3, pp. 299­324.

Rhodes, Richard. 2012. The making of the atomic bomb. New York: Simon and Schuster.

Roosevelt, Franklin D. 1944. Letter to Vannevar Bush. Dated November 17.

Ruttan, Vernon W. 2006. Is war necessary for economic growth? Military procurement and technology
  development. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Seamans, Robert, Eunhee Sohn, and Daniel Sands. 2018. Technological opportunity and the locus of innova-
  tion: Airmail, aircraft, and local capabilities. Working Paper.

Stewart, Irvin. 1948. Organizing scientific research for war: The administrative history of the Office of
  Scientific Research and Development. Boston: Little, Brown, and Company.

Swann, John Patrick. 1988. Academic scientists and the pharmaceutical industry: Cooperative research in
  twentieth-century America. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.




                                                   25
                                         Figure 1: Number of OSRD Patents, by County




                        Notes: Figure maps counties with OSRD-supported patents. Bubble sizes proportional
                        to each county's total number of OSRD patents.




Figure 2: Patenting at the USPTO versus select foreign patent authorities in each quartile of
           treated patent classes, difference-in-differences, pre-1940 vs. post-1945

      U.S. vs. Great Britain, by treatment quartile                                      U.S. vs. France, by treatment quartile
                                                                                        .8
                   .6


                                                                                        .6
     Ln(Patents)




                                                                          Ln(Patents)




                   .4

                                                                                        .4

                   .2
                                                                                        .2


                   0
                                                                                        0
                         None   0-25th    25-50th 50-75th 75-100th                           None   0-25th   25-50th 50-75th 75-100th



                   Notes: Figure shows difference-in-difference estimates of the effects of the OSRD shock on U.S.
                   versus foreign patenting, in technology classes (2-digit IPCs) at different quartiles of OSRD
                   treatment, as measured by the fraction of U.S. patents in those classes between 1941-1948
                   which were OSRD-supported. Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals, computed from
                   SEs clustered at the country-class level.




                                                                     26
Figure 3: Patenting at the USPTO versus select foreign patent authorities in the top quartile of
       treated patent classes (relative to untreated classes), annual estimates, 1930-1960

                           U.S. vs. Great Britain, top quartile                                        U.S. vs. France, top quartile
                     1                                                                        1



                     .5                                                                       .5
      Ln(Patents)




                                                                               Ln(Patents)
                     0                                                                        0




                    -.5                                                                      -.5

                      1930        1940      1950      1960         1970                        1930          1940          1950          1960   1970



                    Notes: Figure shows annual difference-in-differences estimates of the effects of the OSRD shock
                    on U.S. versus foreign patenting, in technology classes (2-digit IPCs) in the top quartile OSRD
                    treatment, as measured by the fraction of U.S. patents in those classes between 1941-1948
                    which were OSRD-supported, versus those without OSRD treatment. Error bars represent
                    95% confidence intervals, computed from SEs clustered at the country-class level.




                      Figure 4: Annual patenting in top 12 Massachusetts counties, 1935 to 1965
                                    1500



                                                      Middlesex
                                    1000             (Cambridge)




                                     500



                                         0
                                          1935     1940       1945         1950                       1955          1960          1965
                                                     Barnstable                    Berkshire                         Bristol
                                                     Essex                         Franklin                          Hampden
                                                     Hampshire                     Middlesex                         Norfolk
                                                     Plymouth                      Suffolk                           Worcester

                          Notes: Figure shows total annual patents filed in the top 12 Massachusetts counties.
                          The figure illustrates, for Middlesex County (location of Cambridge, home to Harvard
                          and MIT): (i) relatively constant, pre-1940 level differences in patenting; (ii) a mid-
                          1940s spike (doubling) of patenting, driven by war-related research; (iii) a return to
                          approximately pre-war levels; and (iv) a take-off in the early 1950s. The raw data
                          illustrate the general pattern that we find throughout the paper.




                                                                          27
      Figure 5: Effect of the OSRD shock on patenting in county-categories, 1930-1970
                                                .3


                                                .2




                                 Ln(Patents)
                                                .1


                                                0


                                               -.1
                                                  1930          1940           1950                        1960         1970
                                                                               Year
                        Notes: Figure shows annual estimates of the effects of the OSRD shock on
                        county-category patenting. The independent variable measures the log frac-
                        tion of U.S. patents in each county-category between 1941-1948 which were
                        OSRD-supported. Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals, computed
                        from SEs clustered at the county-category level.




Figure 6: Effects of the OSRD shock on local patenting, for county-categories in the
    bottom 95% versus top 5% of 1930s patenting (existing clusters), 1930-1970

                         Bottom 95% of counties                                                                   Top 5% of counties
                                                                                                  .4
               .4
                                                                                                  .3
               .2
Ln(Patents)




                                                                                   Ln(Patents)




                                                                                                  .2

               0
                                                                                                  .1

              -.2                                                                                 0


              -.4                                                                                -.1
                 1930     1940                 1950      1960          1970                         1930      1940       1950    1960   1970
                                               Year                                                                      Year

                Notes: Figure shows annual estimates of the effects of the OSRD shock on county-category
                patenting, for counties in the bottom 95% and top 5% of 1930s patenting (i.e., existing
                technology clusters). Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals, computed from SEs
                clustered at the county-category level.




                                                                              28
                Figure 7: Effects on local patenting by NBER top-level category, 1930-1970

                           NBER Category 1                                                 NBER Category 2
                             Chemicals                                                    Computers & Comms.
               .2                                                                .5


               .1
Ln(Patents)




                                                                  Ln(Patents)
               0
                                                                                 0
              -.1


              -.2


              -.3                                                               -.5
                 1930    1940      1950      1960     1970                         1930   1940      1950     1960    1970
                                   Year                                                             Year

                           NBER Category 3                                                  NBER Category 4
                           Drugs & Medical                                                Electrical & Electronics
               .4
                                                                                 .4

               .2
                                                                                 .3
Ln(Patents)




                                                                  Ln(Patents)
               0
                                                                                 .2

              -.2                                                                .1

              -.4                                                                0

              -.6                                                               -.1
                 1930    1940      1950      1960     1970                         1930   1940      1950     1960    1970
                                   Year                                                             Year

                           NBER Category 5                                                  NBER Category 6
                             Mechanical                                                         Other
               .4                                                                .4


               .3
Ln(Patents)




                                                                  Ln(Patents)




                                                                                 .2
               .2

               .1
                                                                                 0
               0

              -.1
                                                                                -.2
                1930     1940      1950      1960     1970                         1930   1940      1950     1960    1970
                                   Year                                                             Year


                Notes: Figure shows annual estimates of the effects of the OSRD shock on county-category
                patenting, by major technology category. Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals,
                computed from SEs clustered at the county-category level.




                                                             29
                     Table 1: Top 10 OSRD divisions, by contract obligations
         Division   Description                            Contracts    Total oblg. (mil.)    Pct. of oblg.
         14         Radar                                    137             $129.6              28.0%
         03         Rocket Ordnance                           14              $82.9              17.9%
         06         Subsurface Warfare                        50              $47.2              10.2%
         15         Radio Coordination                        46              $27.3               5.9%
         T          Proximity Fuze Program                    63              $25.3               5.5%
         CMR        Committee on Medical Research            572              $21.4               4.6%
         S-1        Atomic Energy Program                    100              $14.4               3.1%
         04         Ordnance Accessories                      43              $13.9               3.0%
         11         Chemical Engineering                     151              $11.7               2.5%
         05         New Missiles                              50              $11.7               2.5%
       Notes: Table lists the top 10 OSRD divisions by total obligations. Percentages measure
       each division's percent of total OSRD research spending.




                     Table 2: Top OSRD contractors, by contract obligations
                     Top 10 Firms                                                Top 10 Universities
Contractor                        Total oblg.   Percent        Contractor                       Total oblg.   Percent
Western Electric Co.              $15.2 mil.     3.3%          Massachusetts Inst. of Tech.     $106.8 mil.    23.1%
General Electric Co.                 $7.6        1.6%          California Inst. of Tech.           $76.6       16.6%
Radio Corp. of America               $6.0        1.3%          Harvard University                  $29.1        6.3%
E. I. Dupont De Nemours & Co.        $5.4        1.2%          Columbia University                 $27.1        5.9%
Monsanto Chemical Co.                $4.5        1.0%          University of California            $14.6        3.2%
Eastman Kodak Co.                    $4.3        0.9%          Johns Hopkins University            $10.8        2.3%
Zenith Radio Corp.                   $4.2        0.9%          George Washington University         $6.9        1.5%
Westinghouse Elect. & Mfg. Co.       $3.9        0.8%          University of Chicago                $5.7        1.2%
Remington Rand, Inc.                 $3.7        0.8%          Princeton University                 $3.6        0.8%
Sylvania Electric Products, Inc.     $3.1        0.7%          University of Pennsylvania           $2.9        0.6%
Total                               $57.81       12.5%         Total                              $284.03      61.5%
Notes: Table lists the top 10 firms and universities with OSRD contracts by total obligations. Per-
centages measure each contractor's percent of total OSRD research spending.




               Table 3: Top 10 2-digit NBER categories by OSRD rate, 1941-1948
                                            # Patents from          Pct. of patents from         Max pct. OSRD
Category   Description                      OSRD contracts        OSRD contracts, 1941-48      in any year, 1941-48
44         Nuclear, X-rays                       194                       12.5%                      24.8%
21         Communications                        671                        6.9%                      16.6%
46         Semiconductor devices                 15                         5.4%                      12.1%
42         Electrical lighting                   241                        4.2%                      10.0%
22         Computer hardware/software            65                         4.1%                       8.5%
23         Computer peripherals                   2                         3.9%                      12.5%
43         Measuring, testing                    187                        3.1%                       6.8%
41         Electrical devices                    308                        2.5%                       6.5%
45         Power systems                         163                        1.7%                       4.2%
31         Drugs                                  27                        1.7%                       6.4%
Notes: Table lists the 10 2-digit NBER categories with the highest fraction of 1941-1948 patents
produced under OSRD contracts, in descending order, as well as the number of patents and the
maximal fraction of patents which were OSRD patents in any single year.




                                                          30
   Table 4: Effects on post-war county employment in high-tech manufacturing industries
                                           Log employment   Log employment   Log employment   Pct. of employment
                                             in 366/367       in 366/367       in 366/367         in 366/367
Ln(OSRD patents, 1941-1948) * Year==1959         0.014         0.428***          0.419**             0.269*
                                               (0.180)          (0.157)          (0.161)            (0.145)
Ln(OSRD patents, 1941-1948) * Year==1970         0.245          0.595**          0.578**            0.238**
                                               (0.227)          (0.234)          (0.235)            (0.099)
Ln(OSRD patents, 1941-1948) * Year==1980        0.353*         0.642***         0.638***            0.392**
                                               (0.196)          (0.184)          (0.186)            (0.161)
Ln(Patents, 1941-1948) * Year==1959           0.800***           -0.006           -0.014              0.059
                                               (0.254)          (0.252)          (0.257)            (0.053)
Ln(Patents, 1941-1948) * Year==1970              0.409           -0.149           -0.141            0.121**
                                               (0.293)          (0.286)          (0.289)            (0.050)
Ln(Patents, 1941-1948) * Year==1980             0.314*           -0.254           -0.270             -0.257
                                               (0.185)          (0.212)          (0.216)            (0.247)
Constant                                      3.447***           -1.883           -2.625              1.101
                                               (1.119)          (1.824)          (2.168)            (0.909)
N                                                 122             122              122                 231
R2                                                0.31            0.42             0.43                0.15
Log mfg. empl.                                                     X                X
Log all empl.                                                                       X
Notes: Table estimates the relationship between counties' post-war manufacturing employment in Communi-
cations Equipment & Electronic Components and Accessories (SIC 366 and 367, including electronic controls
and semiconductors) and wartime OSRD patenting in classes which crosswalk to these industries (according
to the USPTO's USPC-SIC crosswalk). County-level industrial employment measured from the 1959, 1970,
and 1980 editions of the U.S. County Business Patterns (CBP). The outcome in the first three columns is log
employment in SIC 366 and 367; in the fourth column, the fraction of total county employment in these SICs.
All columns control for a given county's total wartime patenting, and successive columns add controls for log
manufacturing employment and log total employment in the given CBP year. Sample restricted to counties
with at least one OSRD patent in the associated classes (by construction). *, **, *** represent significance at
the 0.1, 0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively. SEs clustered by county in parentheses.




                                                      31
Web Appendix
A     Data Appendix

A.1     Data collected from OSRD archival records

A.1.1    OSRD contractors, contracts, and inventions

Data on OSRD contractors and contracts, and OSRD-funded inventions, patents, and publications
were obtained from archival records at the U.S. National Archives and Records Administration
(NARA). Complete records from the OSRD have been preserved at NARA (Record Group 227),
including narrative records (such as correspondence between Vannevar Bush and other OSRD
administrators, contractors, and government agencies) that provide rich background on the OSRD's
day-to-day operation and precedent-setting policy choices throughout the war.

For this paper, we make use of several sets of records from the OSRD collection. The three key data
sources on contracts, contractors, and inventions are (i) a collection of contract index cards, which
identify each contract with the contract ID, contractor, OSRD division managing the contract,
termination date, and obligated value through the end of life; (ii) a directory of contractors, by
contract, with the contractor's principal headquarters location; and (iii) a set of invention disclosure
cards, which document inventions generated in the course of OSRD-supported research, with the
associated contract, applicable patent clause (short form vs. long form), contractor, inventor(s),
invention title, date reported, and if a patent application was filed, the application date and serial
number. Examples of each are provided in Figures A.1 to A.3.

            Figure A.1: Example Contract Index Card for OSRD Contract OEMsr-441




                                                   1
                       Figure A.2: Example Contractor Directory Page for OEMsr-441




                       Figure A.3: Example Invention Disclosure Card for OEMsr-441




In addition to these records, we also collected three supplementary, independent lists of contractors
and contracts which can be used to validate these data and fill in gaps. The first is a list of
contractors, which lists contracts for each contractor provides the total obligations and counts
the number of contracts with the short form vs. long form patent clause. The second is a list
of contracts by contractor, and provides the associated OSRD division and patent clause. The
third is a list of contracts by OSRD division. Using the collective set of records, we compile a
master list of 2,288 OSRD contracts, 573 of which were CMR contracts.1 For comparison, internal
1
    This list of contracts comprises the union of all record sets. Although the vast majority of contracts appear across
    all sources, there are gaps (missing contracts) in each data source: the contract index cards contain 2,275 of the


                                                            2
correspondence from the OSRD's patent division dated October 30, 1945 counts 2,266 research
contracts, with the remaining 22 contracts appearing in our data as administrative contracts for
the purchase/lease of office space, equipment rentals, and publication services. As another point of
comparison, the administrative history of the CMR published in 1948 (Andrus 1948) lists 571 of
the 573 CMR contracts in our data (of the remaining two, one was last contract the OSRD entered
into and likely simply did not make it into this published list).2

Given that for a few contract-level variables we have multiple sources (namely, the OSRD division
and patent clause), we make an additional effort to cross-validate these variables and reconcile
differences as we describe below. We also harmonize contractor names and match them to assignees
in the patent record (see discussion of patent datasets in the next subsection).

    · The OSRD division of each contract indicates the subject matter and can be reported in
      up to four sources: the contract index cards, the contractor directory, and two supplemental
      contract lists. For 2,117 out of 2,288 contracts in the master list, at least one source reports an
      OSRD division and all reporting sources agree. In 152 cases, they disagree, and for these cases
      we take the most commonly-reported division as the true division (in the nine cases where
      there is no single most commonly-reported division, we prioritize the division reported in
      the contract index cards and contractor directory). In the 19 remaining cases, the contract's
      OSRD division is not reported in any of our sources and is unknown.

    · The patent clause of each contract is typically either "short form" or "long form", which
      gives the government or the contractor (respectively) the first rights to patent inventions
      developed under the contract. The short form clause was used predominantly with academic
      contractors, and the long form clause with industrial contractors (as a means to incentivize
      their participation in the war effort). The patent clause of each contract is reported in one
      of the supplemental contract lists as well as on invention disclosure cards ­ but only known
      for 2,020 contracts in the supplemental contract list, and for an additional five contracts via
      the invention disclosures. Determining the applicable patent clause is further complicated
      by the fact that some contracts (i) had their patent clauses changed mid-contract, and/or
      (ii) had custom patent clauses (which were usually variants on the standard short form and
      long form clauses).3 Custom patent clauses and patent clause amendments, as well as the

  2,288 total known contracts; the contractor directory contains 2,259 contracts (the 573 CMR contracts were not
  included in this directory per se, but the contractor information was available in separately-maintained CMR contract
  ledgers); the supplementary contractor list contains 2,192 contracts; and the supplementary contract list contains
  2,112 contracts. These latter two lists were compiled before the end of the war, and most of contracts missing from
  these lists are missing because they post-date the sample. For the 13 contracts missing from the contract index
  cards, the contractor and OSRD division are available from other sources, but the contract value and termination
  date are unknown. For the 29 contracts missing from the contractor directory, we infer contractor locations from
  other contracts with the same contractor where available, and otherwise through manual research.
2
  As a final piece of validation: the OSRD contract IDs were written with three different prefixes (NDCrc, OEMsr,
  OEMcmr) followed by an identification number. The maximum number of each series in the data is NDCrc-208,
  OEMsr-1507, and OEMcmr-573, and these numbers add to a total of 2,288.
3
  For example, all long form atomic energy research contracts (let under the OSRD's S-1 division) were converted to


                                                          3
     date of amendment, are noted in this list and thus measured in our data. In addition,
     several contracts are tagged as having a patent clause of "Purchase Contract" or "Overhead"
     (these are typically administrative contracts, previously described), or even "None". The
     information on patent clauses from this contract list and in the invention disclosure cards
     overwhelmingly agrees, but where it conflicts, we use the information from the contract list,
     which appears to have been created specifically for this purpose.

After dropping administrative and cancelled contracts, there are 2,254 contracts in our data, made
to 461 unique contractors, with a total value of $462 million in 1940-45 dollars (equivalent to
roughly $7.4 billion today). For comparison, in the official administrative history of the OSRD,
Stewart (1948) claims that OSRD contractors had spent "appoximately 457 million dollars through
November 30, 1945" ­ a difference of less than one percent. We observe the contractor and OSRD
division for every contract, the patent clause for 2,006 of the contracts (89%), and the obligated
value and termination date for 2,208 of the contracts (98%).

We also observe the inventions produced under these contracts, which contractors were contractually
required to disclose and the OSRD subsequently catalogued. As mentioned above, these index cards
list the contract that the invention was developed under and also include information on patent
applications, which we use to link OSRD contracts to granted patents ­ these patents are what we
denote in the paper as "OSRD patents". We discuss how we do so below.

Using these index cards alone, we identify 7,879 reported inventions. Each card has an identifying
number in the top left corner, numbering from 1 to 8040 (e.g., see Figure A.3), with some also suf-
fixed with letters. In all, the numbering suggests there may have been as many as 8,056 inventions,
and the 177 (=8056-7879) missing index cards could either be unobserved inventions or numbers
which were skipped or discarded. To fill in these potential gaps, we do a wider search for data
on OSRD-funded inventions across other archival collections at NARA, and find additional lists
of OSRD-supported inventions in the records of the U.S. Army Judge Advocate General's Office
(Record Group 153). Using these records, we recover data for five of the 177 missing index cards,
and identify an additional 26 unnumbered inventions which were reported after the index card file
was no longer maintained. For the inventions on which patent applications were filed, we use the
serial number to link these to granted patents, as we explain in more detail in the next subsec-
tion. In all, we have 7,910 inventions, on which 3,382 patent applications were filed, and 2,659
patents granted (which we identify by linking serials to granted patents). 2,657 of these patents
were granted by 1980, when our sample for this paper ends.

For completeness, we also search for continuations, divisions, and continuations-in-part of OSRD
patent applications. To do so, we parse the first 800 characters of the text of patents filed between
1935 and 1969 (application series 2, 3, and 4) to identify patents which mention an OSRD serial,
and manually check these cases to determine whether they were continued or divided from earlier
short form in 1942, when the research program was spun off into a weapons development program (the Manhattan
Project), to ensure that the government controlled the intellectual property.


                                                    4
OSRD-supported filings. Through this process we find an additional 104 OSRD-supported patents,
bringing our total to 2,763 patents (2,761 granted by 1980).

Our final source of data on OSRD-supported invention is a distinct list of patent applications and
granted patents related to the Manhattan Project, obtained by FOIA (from the U.S. Department
of Energy) by researchers at the Woodrow Wilson Center and available at its digital archives.4 This
document lists over 1,000 U.S. government-supported, nuclear energy-related patent applications
(and >850 grants) from the World War II period, along with the contracts under which they were
produced, including many OSRD contracts. Most of these inventions were placed into secrecy at
the time of filing (see Gross 2019) and were not in the NARA records, likely due to their sensitive
nature, and through this list we identify another 374 OSRD-supported patents (373 granted by
1980), bringing our total to 3,137 patents (3,134 granted by 1980).


A.1.2        Medical research contracts and publications

For the 573 CMR contracts, we collect additional data from other contemporary publications and
archival records. Although the CMR was a division of the OSRD, it itself was organized into six
(sub)divisions, covering some of the following medical subjects:

      1. Division of Medicine. Infectious diseases, venereal diseases, convalescence, psychiatry.

      2. Division of Surgery. Wounds and burns, neurosurgery, other surgical specialties.

      3. Division of Aviation Medicine. Oxygen deprivation, G-force stresses.

      4. Division of Physiology. Blood, blood derivates, blood substitutes, shock, nutrition, acclimiti-
         zation, other miscellaneous physiological studies.

      5. Division of Chemistry. Treatment of gas casualties, and rodent and insect control.

      6. Miscellaneous. Malaria, adrenocortical hormones (steroids), antibiotics.

We obtain the CMR division and medical subject of 571 of our 573 CMR contracts from Andrus
(1948), which also provides one-sentence synopses for each contract. The OSRD archival records
also contain ledgers with more detailed summaries of 567 these contracts: for each contract, the
ledger reports the CMR division, contracting institution, principal investigator(s), project title, per-
formance dates, contract budget, a one-page summary of results, and a list of academic publications
and technical reports which were produced from this research.

In addition to these ledgers, the OSRD archival records include a collective bibliography of CMR
publications, which appears to have been compiled near the end of the war. We construct a dataset
of CMR publications as the union of these two data sources (which only partly intersect), with
4
    See https://digitalarchive.wilsoncenter.org/document/165247.


                                                          5
the associated contracts, and link these publication records to PubMed (PM) and Web of Science
(WOS) identifiers.5 To connect publications to contracts, we use the CMR ledgers where possible
(which explicitly link papers to contracts). For publications which were listed in the bibliography
only (for which we have no direct measure of the associated contract), we take two approaches:
(i) we manually look for other papers by the same author(s) on the same subject (based on paper
titles) for which the contract is known, and assign these cases to that contract; and (ii) if the
publication's contract is still unknown, we manually match authors and paper titles to contract PIs
and project titles/descriptions. Through this procedure we are able to match all papers to CMR
contracts. Between the CMR ledgers and the CMR bibliography, we identify 2,230 publications,
which we matched to 1,715 papers in WOS and 1,146 papers in PM.

In the course of this data work, we noticed that these papers often acknowledge financial support
from "the Committee on Medical Research" of the "Office of Scientific Research and Development"
in a footnote. For completeness ­ especially to pick up papers which resulted from CMR-funded
research but were published after the war (i.e., after our primary data sources were created) ­ we
searched Google Scholar for these terms, and manually examined the results for new hits. Through
this process we find an additional 210 CMR-supported publications, 202 of which we successfully
link to CMR contracts. In total, we therefore have 2,440 CMR publications in our data (with 1,912
matched to Web of Science, and 1,315 matched to PubMed).


A.2     Construction of U.S. patent datasets

A.2.1     Base data

The construction of the patent datasets used in this paper begins with the USPTO historical master
file (Marco et al. 2015), which provides a master list of utility patents with grant dates, patent
class/subclass (USPC), and two-digit NBER category (Hall et al. 2001). In building this paper's
dataset, we restrict the sample to patents granted between January 1, 1920 and December 31, 1979
­ although most of the paper invokes only a subset of these. For all granted patents in this set, we
obtain additional patent characteristics from the following sources:

    · FreePatentsOnline.com (FPO): serial numbers, filing dates, and the network of forward and
      backward citations (front-page citations only)

    · Derwent Innovation database (DI): (mostly) standardized assignee names6

5
  Nearly 1,300 papers were listed in both the CMR ledgers and the CMR bibliography, but sometimes with different
  author sequences, titles, or even just formatting. To make sure we do not double-count publications, we manually
  reviewed all papers to standardize the formatting, and harmonized authors and titles where we were confident that
  two slightly different observations represented the same paper (e.g., where the journal/volume/issue/pages were the
  same but the titles slightly differed). Similarly, in linking these papers to Web of Science and PubMed, we carefully
  review candidate matches and allow for slight deviations in authors and titles.
6
  Note that serial numbers, filing dates, and the network of patent citations were also retrieved from the Derwent
  database for comparison against the FPO data, as a validation exercise. The two data sources overwhelmingly


                                                          6
    · HistPat dataset: lead inventor state and county (U.S. inventors only)7

    · Fleming et al. (2019): indicators for government-owned or -supported patents


A small subset of patents are missing filing dates and assignees. Table A.1 shows the number
patents with missing data, by decade of grant. For the period sampled in this paper (1930-1970),
approximately 2.3% of patents are missing a filing date and 2.3% missing an assignee (note: these
percentages are calculated for patents granted between 1930 and 1970, whereas the paper uses the
sample of patents known to have been filed between 1930 and 1970).


                      Table A.1: Number of patents with missing data, by decade
                                              No filing date      No assignee data
               Decade of grant Patents Number Percent Number Percent
               1920-1929           414901    25738       6.2%      25918       6.2%
               1930-1939           442842    11102       2.5%      11221       2.5%
               1940-1949           307630     5470       1.8%       5546       1.8%
               1950-1959           425985    12461       2.9%      12661       3.0%
               1960-1969           567761    11203       2.0%      11363       2.0%
               1970-1979           689027       2        0.0%        73        0.0%
               Total              2848146    65976       2.3%      66782       2.3%
            Notes: Table shows counts of patents with missing data, and their fraction of all patents, by
            decade (of grant).


Patented, OSRD-funded inventions are identified in the OSRD archival records by the serial number
of the patent application. For the purposes of this paper, it is thus critical to have accurate data
on serial numbers. The application-level data (serials and filing dates) from FPO were therefore
manually reviewed and validated for the period around World War II, by checking patents with
serial numbers or filing dates which are out of sequence. The important feature of the USPTO's ap-
plication numbering system for our purposes here is that applications are organized into application
"series", which span several years, and identified by a serial number within that series, generally
issued in the order in which patent applications arrive at the USPTO, with serial numbers never
exceeding six digits. Application series increment, and serial numbers reset, at the beginning of a
year in which the serial numbers from the previous series are expected to surpass 1,000,000. Series
2 begins January 1, 1935 and ends December, 1947 and is the focus of this data cleaning effort. We
take all patents identified by FPO as belonging to Series 2 and sort these patents by serial. We then
look for patents where the previous and next serial have the same filing date but the given patent
has a different filing date, and then manually validate the serial and filing date for these patents.
Out of over 370,000 patents in Series 2, corrections were made to 279 serials and 188 filing dates.
  agreed, and where they disagreed, spot checks revealed that FPO was consistently the more accurate of the two, and
  when there was an error in the FPO data, it typically reflected the occasional typographical error on the printed
  patent publication itself, such as two flipped digits, or a digit one unit off the correct value. Given their reliability,
  the data for this paper thus use serial numbers, filing dates, and citations from FPO.
7
  See Petralia et al. (2016) for the HistPat data and documentation, as well as Berkes (2018) and Andrews (2019) for
  additional discussion of historical patent geography data.


                                                             7
Although these corrections are valuable for matching patents to secrecy orders, the low error rate
for this sample also indicates that such errors are not widespread in the data.


A.2.2    Harmonizing assignee names

Although the assignee names from DI are largely already standardized, closer examination reveals
that there are still variants on individual assignee names (e.g., BELL TELEPHONE LABOR INC
with > 10, 000 patents, and BELL TELPHONE LAB INC, BELL TEL PHONE LAB INC, and
BELL TEIEPHONE LAB INC with 1 patent each). We undertake several procedures to further
harmonize assignee names. We begin by sorting a unique list of assignees in alphabetical order,
and for each assignee recording other nearby assignees up to 9 positions before and after in the
sorted list. We then calculate the edit distance between the given assignee name and each of these
nearby assignee names. When this edit distance is less than 25% of the length of the longer name
in each pair, We flag that pair as a candidate for manual review. We then review all such matches
for several categories of assignees, and standardize names when a match is found:

   · Assignees with  15 patents between 1930 and 1960

   · Assignees which were OSRD contractors

   · Assignees identified as government agencies (see next section)

   · Assignees identified as universities or hospitals (see next section)

   · Assignees which were synthetic rubber manufacturers

   · Assignees which were spinouts from Standard Oil


This process is repeated (because each round of harmonization may bring new assignees into the
set with  15 patents between 1930 and 1960) until no new matches are found.

This harmonization is neither perfect nor exhaustive, but it is believed to be effective for the
purposes of this paper. It is also worth noting that for the vast majority of assignee names which
were standardized by this procedure, there was clearly a primary spelling for that assignee in the
original DI data, with hundreds or thousands of associated patents in the case of large assignees,
and at worst a handful of secondary spellings with one or two associated patents ­ such that the
actual effects of both (i) performing this harmonization for the priority assignees above, and of (ii)
not performing it for non-priority assignees, are likely minimal.


A.2.3    Determining assignee types

Assignees are then classified into four categories ­ firms, universities and hospitals, government
agencies, and individuals ­ through a combination of rule-based and manual classification. We


                                                  8
begin by classifying assignees as firms when the assignee name includes any of roughly 120 words
which indicate firms (e.g., CO, CORP, INC, LTD, SPA, GMBH, etc., as well as technical words
such as AERO, AUTO, CHEM, ENG, MACHINE, OIL, PROD, TECH, WORKS; full list available
on request). We then manually classify remaining assignees with  15 patents between 1930 and
1960, as well as assignees whose name includes any of the following strings:

      · COLLEGE, INST, UNIV, HOSP, RES FOUND

      · US, CANADA, UK, FRANCE, GERMANY, SWITZERLAND, AUSTRALIA, JAPAN, IS-
        RAEL, and assorted other countries

      · ATOM (to identify international atomic energy commissions)


Assignees with >200 patents in the 1920-1979 period which are thus far unclassified are then
classified as firms. Any remaining unclassified assignees are classified as individuals.

This classification procedure was developed over several years, and although ­ like the name har-
monization ­ it is neither perfect nor exhaustive, random spot checks suggest it is overwhelmingly
effective at categorizing assignees into the right bins. In total, 60.1% of patents with an assignee
in the 1920-1979 sample are assigned to a firm, 0.2% to a university, 0.8% to a government agency,
and 39.1% to an individual (numbers sum to >100% because 5% of patents have multiple assignees,
and 0.2% have assignees in multiple categories).


A.2.4       Patent geography data

Measuring historical patents' inventor locations with completeness and accuracy is critical to our
analysis. For modern, post-1976 patents, the USPTO provides inventor locations as part of the
electronic record, but for pre-1976 patents, locations are only available from the text of the patent
itself, presenting a formidable measurement challenge, especially given the poor quality of patent
text OCR. Over the past few years, several researchers have invested in harvesting inventor and
assignee locations from patent text for the universe of historical U.S. patents (e.g., Akcigit et al.
2017, Berkes 2018, Petralia et al. 2016), which are summarized by Andrews (2019). Of these, the
Petralia et al. (2016) HistPat dataset8 is the only dataset available for public use, and is the source
we use to measure inventor locations for the patents in our sample.

Measuring inventor locations from patent text for the universe of patents is too large a problem
for manual transcription efforts, and researchers who have tried to do so typically rely on a mix of
OCR with rule-based regex string parsing, machine learning, and manual correction. Although the
earliest release of the Petralia et al. (2016) data contained errors which caused the geolocation rate
(the fraction of patents with a location) to drop precipitously in certain grant years, the most recent
data release (v8, January 2019) patches these errors and is the version we use. The Petralia et al.
8
    See https://dataverse.harvard.edu/dataverse/HistPat.


                                                           9
(2016) data provide a state, city, and county for each inventor and assignee on historical patents.
The dataset also includes an accuracy measure, reporting the expected accuracy in discrete bins
("Low" to "High") based on the authors' own validation methods, which varies between 95-99%.
An additional advantage of this dataset is that it provides FIPS codes for each county, with fixed
(modern) county boundaries (i.e., accounting for county boundary changes over time), which we
can use to merge the patent data with other county-level datasets.

Throughout this paper, we use these data as given, identifying the first-listed inventor's location as
the principal place of invention (as is convention). In parallel, we have undertaken a multi-pronged
effort to validate these data ourselves. We begin by comparing counts of granted patents in our
data by state and year to administrative totals from the USPTO's 1977 Technology Assessment &
Forecast report.9 We also collect two hand-entered, patent-level validation samples. For the first
validation sample, we pick 200 random patents from 1930, 1940, 1950, 1960, and 1970, and have
Mechanical Turk workers load the patent document and record inventor and assignee locations.
For a second sample, we randomly select two pages from the USPTO's Index of Patents volumes
for 1930, 1940, and 1950, and have RAs enter inventor and assignee names and locations for every
patent listed on each of the sampled pages.10 As a final check, we compare HistPat to the Berkes
(2018) data, and can release results when the data are public.

Figure A.4 plots the state-year totals in our data against the USPTO administrative totals, by
state, for the 1930 to 1970 period. With the exception of deviations in a handful of state-years
(e.g., NY in the 1930s, RI around 1950, VT in 1940, ID in 1950), and one or two states (e.g., WV),
the totals from the HistPat data closely track those in the USPTO data.




9
    We thank Seamans et al. (2018) for pointing us to this source and sharing their already-transcribed data.
10
    Unfortunately, the 1960 and 1970 volumes to not list locations.


                                                           10
Figure A.4: State-year patent totals, HistPat vs. Administrative data, 1930-1970




                                      11
        Figure A.4: State-year patent totals, HistPat vs. Administrative data, 1930-1970




            Notes: Figure plots counts of granted patents in our data by state and grant year (first
            inventor locations as measured in HistPat) to administrative totals from the USPTO.
            Sample divided into the top third of states by average annual patents over the sampled
            period, middle third, and bottom third for ease of viewing.



That the data so closely matches administrative totals at the state level is confidence-inspiring,
but our analysis is especially dependent on the quality of the more localized city and county
measurement. Using our validation samples as a ground-truth sample, we can evaluate the accuracy
of the HistPat measures. Results from this exercise are forthcoming.


A.2.5    Supplementary data on government-supported patents

We also identify government-owned or -supported patents using the data of Fleming et al. (2019).
We specifically borrow measures of whether a patent is owned by a U.S. government agency, or
whether a patent acknowledges direct financial support from a U.S. government agency. Although
these measures are imperfect ­ particularly the latter, due to changes in reporting requirements
over the historical period we study ­ they can nevertheless be used to separate patents known to
have been directly supported by the U.S. government. Figure A.5 below shows the time series of
the fraction of annual filings that are (i) assigned to U.S. government agencies (left panel), or (ii)
acknowledge U.S. government agencies (right panel).


                                                       12
     Figure A.5: Percent of filed patents assigned to or acknowledging U.S. government, 1930-1970

                       Percent assigned to U.S. gov't                          Percent acknowledging U.S. gov't
            0.03                                                    0.03




            0.02                                                    0.02




            0.01                                                    0.01




            0.00                                                    0.00
                1930      1940      1950       1960     1970            1930        1940      1950       1960   1970
                                 Filing year                                               Filing year


             Notes: Calculated using patent-level data from Fleming et al. (2019).



A.3        Construction of foreign patent dataset

We complement the U.S. patent data with foreign authority patent data. Specifically, we collect
data on all utility patents granted by the U.S., British, and French patent authorities between 1920
and 1979 from the EPO PATSTAT database. Much like the U.S. historical master file, these data
include grant dates and patent class (IPC), which are the main information used in this paper, as
well as filing date, number of inventors and original assignees, the cross-jurisdiction patent family
size, and the patent family's forward citations. In preparing these data, we restrict to patents
from each patent authority (US, GB, FR) of inventions (as opposed to utility models in some
jurisdictions, or design patents), and we restrict the U.S. patents in this dataset to those which are
also in the USPTO dataset which we constructed and described above.


A.4        Other datasets

A.4.1       Historical U.S. County Business Patterns data

In the paper, we use several years of U.S. County Business Patterns (CBP) data to go beyond the
patent record and study the effects of the OSRD on the local development and agglomeration of
high-tech industries. The CBP measures establishments, employment, and wages at the level of
counties and industries, and was published at irregular intervals from 1946 to 1964 and annually
thereafter. PDFs of complete printed volumes are available for most years from HathiTrust, and
electronic CBP data are available from NARA for 1970 onwards.11

11
     More information on the Census' CBP data program is available at https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/
     cbp/technical-documentation/methodology.html. See the NARA online catalog at https://catalog.archives.gov/
     search?q=*:*&f.parentNaId=613576&f.level=fileUnit&sort=naIdSort%20asc for 1970-2007 data files. All of the
     CBP editions used in this paper report mid-March employment and first quarter payroll.


                                                               13
For this paper, we use four editions of the CBP at roughly 10-year intervals: 1947, 1959, 1970,
and 1980. These editions measure industrial activity within counties down to the level of 4-digit
SIC industries, along with 2- and 3-digit level totals (excepting the 1947 edition, which reaches
only the 3-digit level, and only for select industries). Due to resource constraints, we focus our
county-level data collection efforts to 3-digit manufacturing industries associated with technology
areas which were a focus of OSRD research, namely SIC 366 ("Communications Equipment"), SIC
367 ("Electronic Components and Accessories") ­ which are available from the 1959, 1970, and
1980 CBP editions ­ as well as all 4-digit industries within them, manufacturing sector totals, and
all sector totals.12 We also collect totals by state and industry, which were published in standalone
tables and we use to validate the county-level data where possible.

Working with CBP data over long horizons poses three challenges: (i) changes to the SIC classi-
fication over time, (ii) data suppression in small county-industry cells, and (iii) county boundary
changes and the binning of small counties in select states.


      1. Changes to SIC classification. Between 1947 and 1980, the SIC classification underwent mul-
         tiple revisions, adding new industries, combining/dividing/reclassifying existing industries,
         and updating industry definitions to shift some types of businesses across industries. These
         changes primarily occur at the level of 4-digit industries. We use the 1945, 1957, 1967, and
         1972 editions of the SIC Classification Manual (the latest editions preceding each of our sam-
         pling years) to build year-to-year crosswalks between all SIC industries on the 366 and 367
         branches of the classification tree, but at these more aggregated levels, definitions are stable:
         all changes to 4-digit industries occur entirely within these branches. This stability is another
         motivation for performing our analysis at the 3-digit SIC level.

      2. Data suppression. A more challenging problem is data suppression: the CBP historically
         suppressed employment and wages in county-industries with very few establishments, to avoid
         disclosing data on individual establishments ­ and this is particularly the case for later editions
         (the 1947 edition does not appear to have suppressed data). Because data suppression was
         much more common for 4-digit industries than for the 3-digit industries we study, and because
         the industries we study are relatively geographically concentrated, this is less of a problem for
         this paper than it would otherwise be ­ this is yet another reason to study industrial activity
         at these more aggregated levels. However, employment values are nevertheless suppressed for
         our focal industries (366 and 367) in some counties and years.
         In these cases, we impute employment using data on the distribution of establishments across
         size bins, which is provided unsuppressed for all county-industries. In 1980, the data suppres-
         sion flags also indicate not only that the value was suppressed, but also a range it falls in.
12
     In measuring industry-specific local OSRD treatment, we crosswalk patents to industries using a USPTO concor-
     dance between USPCs and (grouped-up) SICs. Given our focus on the electronics industry, we ultimately restrict
     attention to patents which crosswalk to the "366+" SIC group in this concordance, which represents SIC codes 366
     and 367, "Electronic components and accessories and communications equipment".


                                                          14
         Between the two, we have enough information to approximate the suppressed employment
         totals. To have a consistent approach across CBP editions, we focus on imputation from the
         establishment size distribution, using two procedures. We first assign each establishment in
         the size distribution an employment level equal to the midpoint of its bin, and add them
         together.13 For each CBP year, we also regress total employment (where observed) on the
         establishment size distribution, and use the estimated parameters to predict employment for
         all county-industry cells. These two approaches yield distinct, internally-consistent, imputed
         estimates of employment. The correlation of these imputed values with each other and with
         reported values (where observed) is generally >0.8, although this correlation is in part driven
         by the skewed distribution of county size.

      3. County binning and changes. A third potential challenge is the fact that the 1947 and 1959
         CBP report county-level data for most counties, but group up low-density rural counties in
         eight states, typically into groups of 2-3 counties (the encoding limited each state to up to
         only 99 counties and county groups). In Virginia, independent cities were also binned with
         adjoining counties, and in one instance, a newly-created county was binned with its parent
         (Los Alamos and Sandoval, NM). The affected states are as follows:


                                                         Number of counties
                                                     1947                  1959
                         State               Separated Grouped Separated Grouped
                         Georgia                66          93        66         93
                         Illinois               96          6         96         6
                         Kansas                 93         12         93        12
                         Kentucky               84          36        84         36
                         Missouri               85         30         85        30
                         New Mexico                                   30          2
                         North Carolina         98           2        98          2
                         Texas                  39         215        39        215
                         Virginia               98          2         70         62


         Because high-tech industries were concentrated in populated counties with large urban cen-
         ters, the binning up of small rural counties in these states does not create a problem for
         this paper: the only binned county groups with electronics industry employment were a half
         dozen counties and independent cities in Virginia, which (i) are too few in number to affect
         our results, and (ii) we might wish to drop anyway, because of frequent land exchanges and
         ambiguous geographic definitions with Virginia's independent cities.
         An additional challenge is county boundary changes. Although county boundaries in the lower
         48 states are mostly fixed by the 1940s, boundaries do change for a few counties between 1947
13
     These bins are as follows. For 1959 and 1970: 1-3, 4-7, 8-19, 20-49, 50-99, 100-249, 250-499, 500+. For 1980:
     1-4, 5-9, 10-19, 20-49, 50-99, 100-249, 250-499, 500-999, 1000-1499, 1500-2499, 2500-4999, 5000+. For firms in the
     upper, unbounded bins, we assign them an employment level equal to that lower bound.


                                                           15
         and 2000 (the year to which we fix the geographic analysis throughout the paper, to match the
         patent data), due to counties being combined, divided, or simply shifting borders. We use two
         resources for tracking county boundary changes: the Atlas of Historical County Boundaries
         maintained by the Newberry Library, which provides a comprehensive list of county boundary
         changes for every state over the entire history of the U.S.14 Over this period, 22 counties and
         independent cities (Virginia) were created, 9 were abolished, and 1 was both.
         We handle these changes by combining the affected counties and independent cities into single
         units for analysis of CBP outcomes, since we can safely add their values together whereas we
         do not have solid grounds for how to divide counties into smaller pieces. For the counties and
         independent cities which were eliminated between 1947 and 2000, we combine them with the
         absorbing county in the CBP data (bringing the data forward to 2000). For the counties and
         independent cities which were established between 1947 and 2000, we add them back to their
         parent counties in the patent data (bringing these cases back to 1947).
         The Historical Atlas and the Census webpage also discuss other boundary changes, most of
         which are boundary redefinitions or transfers of small areas between counties ­ often between
         counties and independent cities in Virginia, specifically. Because the affected population
         is small, these adjustments would not have a material impact on the data or results, and
         they are omitted. We also run our analysis of the CBP data excluding all of Virginia, and
         find our results unchanged, particularly as many of these cases are already omitted due to
         county-independent city binning in the 1959 data.

Given the focus on SIC 366 and 367, it is also useful to describe some of the industries and
products therein. The table below provides the 4-digit subindustries and examples of products
they manufacture, from the 1972 SIC classification manual. Where products are not listed, it is
because the products approximately match the industry description.

       · 366: Communications Equipment

            ­ 3661: Telephone and Telegraph Apparatus
            ­ 3662: Radio and TV Transmitting, Signaling, and Detection Apparatus
                   Aircraft control systems, Amplifiers, Antennas, Digital encoders, Electronic control systems,
                   Inertial guidance systems, Laser systems, Linear accelerators, Microwave communication
                   equipment, Radar equipment, Sonar equipment, Transponders

       · 367: Electronic Components and Accessories

            ­ 3671: Radio and TV Receiving Type Electron Tubes, except Cathode Ray
            ­ 3672: Cathode Ray TV Picture Tubes

14
     For county boundary changes from the Atlas of Historical County Boundaries, go to https://publications.newberry.
     org/ahcbp/index.html, select a state, and click through to the chronology of state and county boundaries. Also see
     the U.S. Census Bureau's list of substantial changes to county boundaries since 1970, at https://www.census.gov/
     programs-surveys/geography/technical-documentation/county-changes.html.


                                                           16
        ­ 3673: Transmitting, Industrial and Special Purpose Electron Tubes
        ­ 3674: Semiconductors and Related Devices
        ­ 3675: Electronic Capacitors
        ­ 3676: Resistors for Electronic Applications
        ­ 3677: Electronic Coils, Transformers, and Other Inductors
        ­ 3678: Connectors for Electronic Applications
        ­ 3679: Electronic Components (n.e.c.)
              Antennas, Circuit boards, Magnetic recording tape, Oscillators, Relays


A.4.2    Rosters of technical staff at OSRD-funded R&D labs

We also collect data on individuals who were at two major OSRD-funded R&D labs during the
war: the MIT Radiation Laboratory (Rad Lab or RL), which was the epicenter of the Allied radar
research effort during WW2, and the Harvard Radio Research Laboratory (RRL), which worked on
radar countermeasures (i.e., stealth movement and enemy radar jamming). Both labs were large,
employing thousands of scientists and engineers over the course of the war, and the Rad Lab was
considered so successful that it became a model for post-war federally-funded research labs and is
celebrated as an important part of the history of MIT and the broader region.

We use records from the Harvard and MIT university archives to compile rosters of technical staff
from each of these labs. The MIT archive's collection of Rad Lab records contains three documents
useful towards this end: (i) a list of former RL staff members published in June 1946, which lists
the name, field, highest degree, year of degree, and years spent at the RL; (ii) the most reliable
known address of former staff members, as of March 1946; and (iii) the post-war job (or grad
school) placement of former staff members, as of January 1946. We digitize these data sources,
harmonizing name formats in the process so that we can successfully link individuals across them.
Although some individuals appear in only a subset of these records, for most we have complete
records. From the Harvard archive, we observe only RRL staff member addresses, as of March
1946, without the ancillary information on educational background or post-war job placement. We
supplement this information by collecting data on all pre-, mid-, and post-war patents by these
individuals, which we can use to study the effects that these individuals might have had on local
inventive activity after the war in the fields where they were active.


A.4.3    Identities and locations of FFRCs (FFRDCs)

To investigate another channel through which the OSRD shock may have persisted, we collect data
on post-war Federally-funded Research Centers (FFRCs), a category of government-funded research
labs which proliferated in the post-war era and are now referred to as Federally-funded Research
and Development Centers (FFRDCs). Our source is the NSF's annual Federal Funds for Research,


                                                  17
Development, and Other Scientific Activities publication, which includes an appendix listing active
FFRCs in the 1958-1977 editions identifying: (i) the name, (ii) the funding agency (e.g., Department
of Defense, Atomic Energy Commission, NASA), and (iii) the organization administering the lab
(typically a firm or university, although these often had only an arms-length relationship and were
a conduit for staff and/or funding). An example is Lincoln Labs, which was funded by the DoD and
managed by MIT. Having compiled a list of FFRCs by year, we then manually research each FFRC's
(i) type (research lab, study and analysis center, test facility, or systems/technical direction), (ii)
location, and (iii) subject matter. With these data, we can study the role that FFRCs might have
played in the growth of local inventive activity after WW2.


A.4.4    Identities and locations of top PhD-granting institutions

We similar collect data on historical PhD production at U.S. universities, by field and decade. Our
source for these data is the 1963 report Doctorate Production in United States Universities, 1920-
1962, published jointly by the National Academy of Sciences (NAS) and National Research Council
(NRC). This report provides a wide range of information on PhD graduates and the baccalaurate
institutions that feed PhD programs, collected from PhD-granting universities. We use this source
to identify the top 40 institutions of all doctoral production in the 1930s, and analogously the top
40 in the physical sciences, which includes physics, chemistry, and engineering (the other four main
fields reported are biological sciences, social sciences, arts, and education, and are less germane to
invention). Using these data we can test whether the long-run effects of the WW2 research effort
varied across locations with versus without a top university.


A.4.5    Department of Defense R&D contracting data

We also collect data on Department of Defense (DOD) R&D contracting in the late 1960s and early
1970s, which is available in electronic format from NARA and provides contract action level data
for the universe of U.S. defense contracts. These data report all the information that appears on
a DOD procurement action form, including the contractor, the location, the subject matter, the
value, the estimated completion date, information on whether the contractor is a small business or
nonprofit institution, whether the contract was competed, and numerous other fields. We begin by
cleaning the data and building a crosswalk to link DOD county codes to FIPS codes. We then use
the provided Federal Supply Class (FSC) codes to identify R&D contracts, and we collapse the raw
data to measure annual, county-level R&D contracts, unique contractors, and contract value to (i)
all organizations in a given county, (ii) small businesses, and (iii) nonprofit institutions. We also
prepare a version of this dataset disaggregated to the level of county x FSC codes over time, but
with over 1500 military branch FSC codes, they vary between broad and specific in their subject
matter (e.g., "Test and Evaluation" vs. "F-4/F-105 Protective System"), and are more useful for
identifying specific programs of interest than for cross-program comparisons.


                                                  18
B     Supplemental Results: Direction of U.S. Invention

    Figure B.1: Patenting at the USPTO versus select foreign patent authorities by quartile of
        treated patent classes (relative to untreated classes), annual estimates, 1930-1970

                           U.S. vs. Great Britain, top quartile                                   U.S. vs. France, top quartile
                      1                                                                   1



                      .5                                                                  .5
       Ln(Patents)




                                                                           Ln(Patents)
                      0                                                                   0




                     -.5                                                                 -.5

                       1930       1940     1950      1960      1970                        1930      1940     1950     1960       1970


                           U.S. vs. Great Britain, 3rd quartile                                   U.S. vs. France, 3rd quartile
                                                                                          1
                      .6


                      .4                                                                  .5
       Ln(Patents)




                                                                           Ln(Patents)




                      .2
                                                                                          0
                      0

                                                                                         -.5
                     -.2


                     -.4                                                                 -1
                        1930      1940     1950      1960      1970                        1930      1940     1950     1960       1970


                           U.S. vs. Great Britain, 2nd quartile                                   U.S. vs. France, 2nd quartile
                      1                                                                   1




                      .5                                                                  .5
       Ln(Patents)




                                                                           Ln(Patents)




                      0                                                                   0




                     -.5                                                                 -.5
                       1930       1940     1950      1960      1970                        1930      1940     1950     1960       1970



                     Notes: Figure shows annual difference-in-differences estimates of the effects of the OSRD shock
                     on U.S. versus foreign patenting, in technology classes (2-digit IPCs) in the top, 3rd, and 2nd
                     quartiles OSRD treatment, as measured by the fraction of U.S. patents in those classes between
                     1941-1948 which were OSRD-supported, versus those without OSRD treatment. Error bars
                     represent 95% confidence intervals, computed from SEs clustered at the country-class level.




                                                                      19
 Figure B.2: Patenting at the USPTO versus select foreign patent authorities in each quartile of
             treated patent classes, difference-in-differences, pre-1940 vs. post-1945,
      excl. patents in weapons-related classes (firearms/ammunition/ordnance/explosives)

        U.S. vs. Great Britain, by treatment quartile                                                   U.S. vs. France, by treatment quartile
                     .5                                                                             .8


                     .4
                                                                                                    .6
       Ln(Patents)




                                                                                      Ln(Patents)
                     .3
                                                                                                    .4
                     .2


                     .1                                                                             .2


                      0
                                                                                                    0
                           None   0-25th   25-50th 50-75th 75-100th                                        None     0-25th   25-50th 50-75th 75-100th



                     Notes: Figure shows difference-in-difference estimates of the effects of the OSRD shock on U.S.
                     versus foreign patenting, in technology classes (2-digit IPCs) at different quartiles of OSRD
                     treatment, as measured by the fraction of U.S. patents in those classes between 1941-1948
                     which were OSRD-supported. Sample excludes technology classes with primarily military
                     application (e.g., firearms, ammunition, ordnance, explosives). Error bars represent 95%
                     confidence intervals, computed from SEs clustered at the country-class level.




Figure B.3: Patenting at the USPTO versus select foreign patent authorities in the top quartile of
        treated patent classes (relative to untreated classes), annual estimates, 1930-1970,
      excl. patents in weapons-related classes (firearms/ammunition/ordnance/explosives)

                           U.S. vs. Great Britain, top quartile                                             U.S. vs. France, top quartile
                      1
                                                                                                    1



                      .5
       Ln(Patents)




                                                                             Ln(Patents)




                                                                                                .5



                      0                                                                             0




                     -.5                                                                   -.5
                        1930      1940      1950      1960       1970                         1930                1940       1950      1960      1970



                     Notes: Figure shows annual difference-in-differences estimates of the effects of the OSRD
                     shock on U.S. versus foreign patenting, in technology classes (2-digit IPCs) in the top quartile
                     OSRD treatment, as measured by the fraction of U.S. patents in those classes between 1941-
                     1948 which were OSRD-supported, versus those without OSRD treatment. Sample excludes
                     technology classes with primarily military application. Error bars represent 95% confidence
                     intervals, computed from SEs clustered at the country-class level.



                                                                        20
  Figure B.4: Patenting at the USPTO by domestic versus foreign inventors in each quartile of
           treated patent categories, difference-in-differences, pre-1940 vs. post-1945


                                         .6


                                         .4


                          Ln(Patents)    .2


                                         0


                                        -.2
                                              None-25th   25-50th      50-75th   75-100th

         Notes: Figure shows difference-in-difference estimates of the effects of the OSRD shock on
         domestic versus foreign inventor patenting at the USPTO, in technology areas (2-digit NBER
         categories) at different quartiles of OSRD treatment, as measured by the fraction of U.S.
         patents in those classes between 1941-1948 which were OSRD-supported. Error bars represent
         95% confidence intervals, computed from SEs clustered at the country-category level.




 Figure B.5: Patenting at the USPTO by domestic versus foreign inventors in the top quartile of
treated patent categories (relative to bottom quartile and untreated), annual estimates, 1930-1970

                                        1.5


                                          1
                          Ln(Patents)




                                         .5


                                          0


                                        -.5


                                         -1
                                           1930      1940           1950     1960       1970

         Notes: Figure shows annual difference-in-differences estimates of the effects of the OSRD
         shock on domestic versus foreign inventor patenting at the USPTO, in technology areas (2-
         digit NBER categories) in the top quartile of OSRD treatment, as measured by the fraction
         of U.S. patents in those classes between 1941-1948 which were OSRD-supported, versus those
         in the bottom quartile or without OSRD treatment. Error bars represent 95% confidence
         intervals, computed from SEs clustered at the country-category level.




                                                              21
C     Supplemental Results: Geography of U.S. Invention

    Figure C.1: Effect of the OSRD shock on local patenting, by treatment quartile, 1930-1970

                                OSRD rate top quartile                                             OSRD rate 3rd quartile
                      .6
                                                                                         .4

                      .4
                                                                                         .2
       Ln(Patents)




                                                                          Ln(Patents)
                      .2
                                                                                         0

                      0
                                                                                        -.2

                     -.2
                                                                                        -.4
                       1930      1940      1950     1960      1970                         1930     1940    1950     1960     1970
                                          Year                                                              Year

                               OSRD rate 2nd quartile                                             OSRD rate bottom quartile
                      .4
                                                                                         .2

                      .2
                                                                                         0
       Ln(Patents)




                                                                          Ln(Patents)




                      0
                                                                                        -.2


                     -.2                                                                -.4


                     -.4                                                                -.6
                        1930     1940      1950     1960      1970                         1930     1940    1950     1960     1970
                                          Year                                                              Year



                     Notes: Figure shows annual estimates of the effects of the OSRD shock on county-category
                     patenting. The independent variable measures quartiles of the fraction of U.S. patents in each
                     county-category between 1941-1948 which were OSRD-supported, and the figure plots results
                     by treatment quartile. Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals, computed from SEs
                     clustered at the county-category level.




                                                                     22
Figure C.2: Effect of the OSRD shock on local patenting, excluding select states, 1930-1970

                            Log patents (excl. CA)                                            Log patents (excl. MA)
                   .3                                                                .3



                   .2                                                                .2
    Ln(Patents)




                                                                      Ln(Patents)
                   .1                                                                .1


                   0                                                                 0


                  -.1                                                               -.1
                     1930    1940      1950     1960      1970                         1930   1940     1950    1960    1970
                                       Year                                                            Year

                             Log patents (excl. NJ)                                           Log patents (excl. NY)
                   .3                                                                .3


                   .2                                                                .2
    Ln(Patents)




                                                                      Ln(Patents)
                   .1                                                                .1


                   0                                                                 0


                  -.1                                                               -.1
                     1930    1940      1950     1960      1970                         1930   1940     1950    1960    1970
                                       Year                                                            Year



                  Notes: Figure shows annual estimates of the effects of the OSRD shock on county-category
                  patenting, excluding assorted states from the sample. The independent variable measures the
                  log fraction of U.S. patents in each county-category between 1941-1948 which were OSRD-
                  supported. Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals, computed from SEs clustered at
                  the county-category level.




                                                                 23
Figure C.3: Effect of the OSRD shock on per-capita patenting in county-categories, 1930-1970
                                      .2




                 Ln(Patents, p.c.)
                                      .1




                                      0




                                     -.1
                                        1930   1940        1950     1960          1970
                                                       Year
               Notes: Figure shows annual estimates of the effects of the OSRD shock on
               county-category per-capita patenting. The independent variable measures
               the log fraction of U.S. patents in each county-category between 1941-1948
               which were OSRD-supported. Error bars represent 95% confidence inter-
               vals, computed from SEs clustered at the county-category level.




                                                      24
