                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             CHINA'S IMPORT DEMAND FOR AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS:
                THE IMPACT OF THE PHASE ONE TRADE AGREEMENT

                                       Robert C. Feenstra
                                         Chang Hong

                                      Working Paper 27383
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27383


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2020




We thank participants at the NBER conference "Agricultural Markets and Trade Policy," April
30-May 1, 2020, and the 2019 annual meeting of the International Agricultural Trade Research
Consortium (IATRC), December 8-10, 2019, for their comments. This research was supported by
Cooperative Agreement 58-3000-7-0087 between the U.S. Department of Agriculture's
Economic Research Service and the University of California at Davis. The findings and
conclusions in this article are those of the authors and should not be construed to represent any
official USDA or U.S. Government determination or policy, nor do they necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Robert C. Feenstra and Chang Hong. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
China's Import Demand for Agricultural Products: The Impact of the Phase One Trade Agreement
Robert C. Feenstra and Chang Hong
NBER Working Paper No. 27383
June 2020
JEL No. F14,F53,Q17

                                           ABSTRACT

In December 2019, the United States and China reached a Phase One trade agreement, under
which China committed to purchase more imports from the United States: $12.5 billion more
agricultural imports in 2020 and $19.5 billion more in 2021, as compared to 2017. We show that
the most efficient way for China to increase its imports from the United States is to mimic the
effect of an import subsidy. If China's agricultural imports did not otherwise grow from their 2017
values, then the subsidies would need to be 42% and 59% to meet the 2020 and 2021 targets,
respectively. These effective subsidies mean that China would divert agricultural imports away
from other countries. We find that this trade diversion is especially strong for Australia and
Canada, followed by Brazil, Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand, and Vietnam.


Robert C. Feenstra
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
rcfeenstra@ucdavis.edu

Chang Hong
Formerly, U.S. Department of Agriculture
Economic Research Service
Washington, D.C. 20250
bchong2006@gmail.com
                                                     1


1. Introduction

        Since joining the World Trade Organization (WTO) in 2001, China has become a major

agricultural importer. In Figure 1 we report China's agricultural imports from the United States

and from the rest of the world (ROW). 1 These values peaked in about 2014 and remained quite

high in 2017.when China's agricultural imports from the United States totaled $24.1 billion. 2

Since that time, however, U.S. agricultural exports to China fell to $13.2 billion in 2018 and

$16.3 billion in 2019. That reduction in China's imports from the United States was due in part

to the ongoing trade war, with China applying restrictions on agricultural imports and other

goods in response to U.S. tariffs on imports from China (Carter and Steinbach, 2020).

        In December 2019, the United States and China reached a Phase One agreement to end

the trade war. Under this agreement, China committed to purchase more imports from the United

States (Bown, 2020). While the coronavirus pandemic in 2020 may render this agreement moot

or at least delay its implementation, it is still worth asking whether it can ever be achieved. For

agricultural goods, the agreement was that China would purchase $12.5 billion more imports

from the United States in 2020 and $19.5 billion more imports in 2021 than it had in 2017.

Compared with 2017 imports of $24.1 billion, the Phase One agreement creates targets of $36.6

billion in 2020 and $43.6 billion in 2021, as shown in Figure 1. Since these targets exceed the

highest prior values of Chinese agricultural imports from the United States, how can they be

achieved?

        We show in this paper that the most efficient way for China to import more from the



1
  In Figure 1 we report values up to 2017 from China Customs data, as discussed in the Appendix. The
values for 2018 and 2019 for U.S. exports to China are for "agricultural and related products" and were
obtained from U.S. Census Bureau data compiled by the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA).
2
  Chinese customs data indicate imports from the United States of $24.2 billion, while the U.S. data tally
U.S. exports to China are $24 billion, so we use $24.1 billion as the 2017 value.
                                                  2


United States is to mimic the effect of an import subsidy on U.S. imports. That is, state agencies

could instruct the importers of U.S. agricultural policies to act "as if" there was a subsidy on

those goods. For example, if China's agricultural imports grew at the same annual rate from

2017 as during 2007-2017, then we find that the effective subsidies would need to be 12% and

23% to achieve the targets in 2020 and 2021, respectively. But if import growth was only one-

half of that amount, then the subsidies would need to be 18% and 41%; if there was no growth

from 2017, then the subsidies would need to be 42% and 59%. These subsidy rates for U.S.

product are admittedly very high, and it would be challenging to achieve that increase in U.S.

imports through state command.

       To obtain these results, we estimate a non-homothetic demand system for agricultural

imports into China. As described in section 2, Fajgelbaum and Khandelwal (2016) have

developed a framework that combines an almost ideal demand system (AIDS) defined over

products and exporting countries with a gravity equation in trade, so as to identify the demand

from each importer for the products from each exporter. The data used to estimate the AIDS-

gravity equation consist of imports by 30 Chinese provinces for 58 agricultural commodities

from 78 major trading partners, over 1997-2017.

       The results of the estimated AIDS-gravity equation are presented in section 3. We

distinguish the elasticity of demand by commodity and country of origin with respect to price

and income. Based on these key estimated parameters, we are able to forecast China's future

import demand for U.S. agricultural products based on our assumptions about rising spending on

imports. We consider three scenarios in section 4: that total spending on all agricultural imports

grow at the same annual rate from 2017 as during 2007-2017; that total spending on agricultural

imports grows by only one-half that amount; or that there is zero growth in import spending from
                                                   3


2017; and we also allow for various levels of the effective subsidy that China applies on imports

from the United States.

       In section 5, we solve for the effective subsidies needed to achieve the 2020 and 2021

import targets. While the effective subsidy increases China's purchases from the United States, it

diverts its imports away from other countries. That diversion occurs for three reasons: (i) a

conventional substitution effect within products, which depends on the number of competing

countries selling each product in each province; (ii) an income effect that arises due to the

effective subsidy, which can offset the substitution effect in part or in whole; (ii) a further

substitution effect that can occur across products, particularly as some expenditure shares in the

AIDS system reach zero so that there is a renormalization of all other demand shares. Countries

experiencing a fall in their exports to China due to the effective subsidy on the United States

would be justified in raising a complaint to the WTO. We find that this trade diversion is

especially strong for Australia and Canada, followed by Brazil, Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand,

and Vietnam, and then Argentina, France, Germany, Netherlands, and New Zealand. Section 6

concludes, and the data sources and additional results are included in the Appendix.


2. AIDS and the Gravity Equation

       We begin with the almost ideal demand system (AIDS) defined over products n and

countries i importing from countries j:

                        
                           =  +    ln 
                                                           
                                  
                    =                                    +  y ,                                   (1)
                        


              
where         
       =      
                 is the share of aggregate expenditure in country i allocated to product n from


country j, and    = 1 for each importer i. We follow Fajgelbaum and Khandelwal


(2016) in referring to the importers i as countries, but later we specialize them to be China's
                                                 4


provinces. On the right-hand side,                                                    
                                    is a parameter influencing the expenditure share,  are


the prices of all the products n' imported from countries j' , with substitution parameters 
                                                                                             ,

                                                                
while  denotes the "real income" of importer i, with parameters  indicating possibly non-

homotheticity in demand for the product n purchased from country j. As is common in AIDS

estimation, real income can be measured incorporating an income distribution across consumers,

so that it becomes:

                                  
                           =ln   +  ,                                                       (2)
                                     


where ln  =       
               ln  is the homothetic price index in country i,  is the mean of the


income distribution, and  is the Theil index of income inequality.

       To reduce the number of parameters that need to be estimated, Fajgelbaum and

Khandelwal (2016) assume that the substitution parameters 
                                                           are highly symmetric across

                                                                             1
goods n = 1,...,N and source countries, as follows: equation 
                                                              = -(1 - ) for n = n' and

j = j'; 
         =  / for n = n' and j  j'; and 
                                         = 0 for n  n' . These assumptions greatly

simplify the estimation because there will be a single substitution parameter  for each good.

       In order for the expenditures shares in (1) to sum to unity for each importing country i,

we must have that                     
                     =1,    = 0 and    = 0 , where the summations
                           



are taken over all available products n from countries j, selling in each country i. The above

simplifying assumptions on the 
                                parameters satisfy the condition that   
                                                                         = 0,

provided that N denotes the number of source countries selling a product in each importer, that

is,  source countries j. Likewise,      
                                    and  need to be adjusted to sum to unity and zero,


respectively, over the available products in each importing country. These adjustments will
                                                 5


become important in our counterfactual exercises later in the paper, as certain regions no longer

import some goods. Rather than make this adjustment to the      
                                                            and  parameters explicit in


the theory, as a shortcut, we always adjust the shares to sum to unity in our counterfactual

exercises presented later in the paper.

        Under the symmetry assumptions on the 
                                               parameters, demand in effect becomes a

two-tier system with substitution between goods at the upper level, and substitution between

source countries at the lower level, as follows. At the upper level, we can sum equation (1)

across all exporters j to obtain:


                         =   =      
                                 +                                                             (3)

where                 
        =   , and  =   . The prices at this aggregate level of total expenditure on


good n by importer i do not appear because we have assumed that the substitution parameters are

symmetric and 
               = 0 if for n  n': that is, demand has constant shares with respect to prices,

but the shares still depend on real income. This equation shows how the share of spending on

product n in each country i depends on its real income.

        Fajgelbaum and Khandelwal (2016) further aim to eliminate prices at the lower level of

aggregation, when there is substitution across supplying countries, for two reasons. First,

products imported from different source countries vary by quality, and price reflects quality.

Second, trade price data are usually calculated as unit values of trade, which are not actually a

reliable indicator of commodity prices. To eliminate prices, they make an assumption that is

common in the international trade literature: namely, the international prices  reflect domestic

                       
prices in the exporter  adjusted for "iceberg" costs of trade, whereby the amount   1 of
                                                   6


good n must be shipped from country j in order for one unit to arrive in country i. Formally, this

assumption means,

                                      
                                   =   .                                                     (4)

       Making the various substitutions defined above into (1), we are able to solve for country

j's domestic prices using the fact that the income of each exporter in sector n equals the sales to

all countries (including itself) of that product. Using this market clearing condition, we arrive at

the following lower-level AIDS in which there is substitution between exporting countries j

selling to each importer i,

                                      
                              =           
                                   
                                 +  -   +   ,                                                (5)
                                     


where: a) the parameters  capture cross-country differences in tastes across sectors and


exporters are related to  by:
                                                    
                                           
                                  =  -      .
                                         
                                                                                             (6)
                                                       

    
b)  measures the supply capacity of exporter j, which is the share of country j's output of
    


product n to the world's supply of all products  .

c)  stands for trade costs, with,


                                                       
                   = ln  
                          
                           -     ln  
                                     
                                       and   = exp[ ln( ) / ].                               (7)
                                                



d) the term  again reflects real income adjusted for the Theil index, defined by,

                                  
                =  -   =1    
                          
                                  



                                                           
                   =ln    +   -   =1 
                                               
                                                    ln    
                                                               +                             (8)
                                                          
                                                  7


       Equation (5) combines features of an AIDS equation and of a gravity equation in trade.

The gravity interpretation comes because we have trade costs on the right-hand side. Below we

shall assume that trade costs depend on distance. In much the same way as the force of gravity is

inversely related to the distance between objects, it is well-established that the amount of trade

between countries is inversely related to the distance between them. The AIDS interpretation of
                                                     
this equation come from the non-homothetic component   . This component measures the

abilities of destination market i to purchase imports from various sources, depending on the

average real income distribution adjusted by income inequality in the importing country  .

       The term i measures the adjusted real income of importer i relative to the rest of the
                                           
world. For income-elastic or luxury goods ( > 0), higher adjusted real income means that the

country sources a higher share of good n from country j. For income-inelastic goods or
             
necessities ( < 0), higher adjusted real income means that the country sources a lower share

of good n from country j. What is new in this AIDS-gravity equation is that the income

elasticities differ by the selling country. The richer is importer i (higher  ) or the more unequal it

is (higher ), the larger its expenditure share on countries for which it has an income elasticity
                                  
greater than unity for that good ( > 0), and conversely the smaller its expenditure share on

                                                                               
countries for which it has an income elasticity less than unity for that good ( < 0).

       For trade costs, we make the standard assumption in the trade literature that they depend

on distance between the countries:

                       ln           
                           =  ln  +  ,                                                        (9)

      
where   is an error term. Substituting this into (5) and (7) we obtain,

                             
                                       
                                         + 
                
                   =      +  - (   ) +                                                        (10)
                              
                                                   8


where  measures the bilateral trade costs between exporter j and importer i in sector n and is

obtained in the same manner as (7) but replacing  with d. Likewise, the error term  is

              
obtained from   in (9).


        The final step is to indicate how the terms       
                                                      and  in the upper-level and lower-level


AIDS equations (3) and (10) are determined. We assume that the coefficients      
                                                                              =   are


obtained from

                                
                         =  ( +  ),                                                             (11)

where  is an error term. With the assumption that   = 1, we obtain from (3) the upper-

level equation:

                         =   +    +  .                                                          (12)

This upper-level equation slightly simplifies (3), and again, it captures how the share of spending

on product n in each country i depends on its real income.

        Using (11) and (12) combined with (6), we can solve for             
                                                                 =  ( -  -   ).


Substituting this into (10), we obtain our lower-level estimating equation,

                      
                     =  +  ( -  )            
                                              -    ) + 
                  
                                  - (   ) + (           .                                       (13)
                       


Where  is the value of exports from exporter  to importer  in sector ,  is the total income

                
of importer  ,  is total sales of exporter  in sector ,  is world total output of all agricultural


products,  is the share of sector  in the total expenditure of country  , 
                                                                           is the share of

sector  in world expenditures, and  is a measure of the bilateral country distance. 3 Equations



3
  In addition to distance  , Fajgelbaum and Khandelwal (2016) allow for bilateral border and language
barriers between exporter j and importer i in sector n to influence the amount of trade. Using such
indicator variables is quite standard in gravity equation estimation, but we do not include them here
because our focus is on a single importing country, China, comprised of 30 provinces. Within China, all
                                                   9


(12) and (13) represent the final version of the upper-level and lower-level AIDS-gravity

equations that we use for estimation. The first term on the right reflects export supply capacity

and is included in place of exporter fixed effects, while we also included importer (province)

fixed effects in the estimation.


3. Estimation

        While Fajgelbaum and Khandelwal (2016) apply their method to trade between all

countries in all goods, our focus here will be on agricultural products only. We focus on the 30

provinces of China, purchasing agricultural imports from 78 major exporting countries of the

world. So we have i= 30 importers, j=78 countries, and n=58 agricultural goods over 1997-2017,

and "income"  is measured by total spending on all these agricultural imports by province i in

each year. The agricultural commodities that we focus on in the paper consist of the 58 products

as defined by the United States Department of Agriculture's BICO classification scheme, which

divides agricultural products into three groups--bulk, intermediate, consumer oriented, and other

agricultural related goods (hence the acronym BICO) --based on the value or level of

processing. In the Appendix we summarize the sources of our data.

        Table 1 reports estimates of the   coefficient from the upper level of aggregation in

equation (12). At the upper level of aggregation, the income elasticities are,

                          (
                             )             
                                                          
                                                                1
                      =            = 1+          =1+                = 1 +   / ,                 (14)
                                                           


where  is the share of commodity n in the imports of province i from all sources. When

  > (<)0, then the income elasticity for that product is greater (less) than unity. Products with


provinces have the same principal language (Mandarin) and nearly all have the same lack of land borders
with neighboring suppliers. So our focus will be on distance as the measure of trade costs.
                                                  10


an income elasticity greater (less) than unity are traditionally called luxuries (necessities),

indicating that the share of expenditure on these products rises (falls) as income grows.

       The upper-level elasticities in Table 1 are all between +0.03 and -0.03, so provided that

a given product has an import share of at least 3% in a province, then its income elasticity in that

province lies between 2 (for   = 0.03) and zero (for   = -0.03); but if the import share is

greater than 3% in (14), then the upper-level income elasticity is correspondingly closer to unity.

To give just one example, the commodity with the highest value of   = 0.03 in Table 3 is

soybeans, and the share of provincial imports devoted to soybeans in 2017 ranges from a high of

82% in Shaanxi to a low of 1% in Beijing (except for six provinces that do not import soybeans

at all). Based on the upper-level estimates, therefore, the income elasticity of soybeans across

provinces ranges from 1+(0.03/0.82) = 1.037 to 1+(0.03/0.01) = 4.
                                                                               
       Table 2 reports estimates of the lower-level, product-exporter specific  estimates for

the top 19 countries and 14 products from equation (13). The new feature of our non-homothetic

system is that each country exporting to China faces its own income elasticity for each product.

The income elasticity from (13) is,

                          (
                              )
                                           
                                                          
                                                               1         
                                                                          /
                                                           
                      =            =1+           = 1+              = 1 +    .                     (15)
                                                          


                
Therefore, when  > (<)0, then the income elasticity for the products from country j is greater

(less) than unity. We might think of exporting countries with an income elasticity greater (less)

than unity as selling high (low) quality versions of that product, which are therefore treated as

luxuries (necessities) by the purchasing province.

       In Table 2 we list the products by the rank order of their importance in Chinese imports,

with soybeans being the most important import. Surprisingly, we see that the United States has a
                                 
substantial negative estimate of  = -0.047, suggesting that soybeans are a necessity in
                                                  11


demand. Other countries (Argentina, Brazil, Uruguay and Russia) likewise have significant

negative estimates, while some have significant positive estimates. What is the source of these
                                      
conflicting results for the estimated  parameter?

       To understand the source of these estimates, in Figure 2 we show the provincial

expenditure shares on soybean imports from the United States versus the total provincial imports

of all agricultural commodities. The upper-left point in Figure 2 is for Shaanxi, where fully 43%

of its imports in 2017 are devoted to U.S. soybeans. Shaanxi has small overall imports and is a

relatively poor province, so we can expect that its soybean imports are either used for processing

into soybean oil or are used as feed for raising livestock. 4 It is apparent that these soybean

imports are not used for household consumption, but rather, are used for agricultural production.

A similar set of circumstances likely apply to other bulk and intermediate goods listed in Tables

1 and 2: the provincial imports are inputs into production rather than being used for household

consumption.

       One way to deal with this issue would be to use an input-output table to transform the

provincial imports of bulk and intermediate inputs into outputs of final food products into each

province where they are ultimately sold. We do not have an input-output table at this very fine

level of aggregation, however. A much simpler solution to this issue is to use the upper-level

elasticities shown in Table 1 for all bulk and intermediate goods, while we use the lower-level

elasticities shown in Table 2 for all consumer and other goods. We will take this approach as we

forecast Chinese demand for agriculture goods, in the next section.


4
 Nearly all the soybeans imported by China are used to produce either high-protein meals consumed by
Chinese livestock or edible oil consumed by the Chinese people. According to the China Ministry of
Agriculture and Rural Affairs (2018), soybean processing capacity expanded from 20 to 160 million
metric tons over 2001-2016. Shaanxi grows soybeans and processes them for edible oil, and likely added
capacity during this period. China's domestically produced soybeans are used mainly to produce foods
such as tofu, soy milk, soy sauce, and nutritional supplements (Gale, Valdes, and Ash, 2019).
                                                12


4. Forecasting Chinese Import Demand for Agricultural Products

       Using the estimated AIDS-gravity system, we now forecast Chinese import demand for

agricultural products. To achieve that goal, we go back to equation (1) of our system. We hold

prices fixed so that our forecast purely reflects Chinese import demand. We consider three

different scenarios for projecting Chinese import demand for agricultural products over one year.

In the first scenario, we will assume that the growth in spending on all agricultural imports and

the change in income inequality by province are the same as the annual average of their change

over 2007­2017. That is, we just calculate the change in nominal and real spending over each

future year as the annual average real change over the decade before:

                          =  = (2017 - 2007 )/10.                                           (16)

This growth in real income ­ adjusted for the past average changes in income inequality ­ is
                                              
multiplied by the non-homothetic coefficients  in (10) to obtain the change in the share of

import purchases coming from each source country. The second and third scenarios are that

import growth in China from 2017 is only one-half of the annual average during 2007-2017, or

that imports do not grow at all from 2017.

Targets for Chinese Imports from the United States

       In addition to the differing scenarios concerning growth of import demand, we also allow

suppose that China faces a target on the minimum imports of agricultural goods that it purchases

from the United States, which we denote by country 1. This constraint is written as:


                                n=1  i
                                  N
                                            1qi1  Y1.
                                          pin n
                                                                                            (17)

We will assume that China desires to achieve this constraint at a minimum loss of utility. That is,

we will assume that China adopts the policy to maximize the utility of an aggregate consumer

who faces the constraint in (17) along with a budget constraint over all agricultural goods,
                                                       13



              n=1  j  i
               N
written as                  n n
                           pij qij  Y , where Y is China's total import purchases of agricultural

goods which is held fixed.

       We denote the quantity of agricultural good n that country j sends to province i in China

    n
by qij , and the vector of all purchases of good n across provinces and supplying countries by qn .

Then the Lagrangian to maximize utility subject to the constraints is,

      (q1 , ...,q N ) +  (Y -  n                                 i
                                        N                        N
  =L U=                                     1=
                                             j i
                                                  n n
                                                 pij qij ) + µ ( n 1       1qi1 - Y1 ).
                                                                         pin n
                                                                                             (18)

The marginal utility of income is  > 0. In addition, the Lagrange multiplier  can be interpreted

as L / Y1 =- µ < 0, where this sign is established provided that Y1 exceeds the amount of

imports from the United States that China would normally choose to purchase, so that any

increase in that target lowers welfare. It follows that µ > 0, and we further assume that µ < .

       The first-order conditions for problem (18) are:

                        U
                             =  pij
                                 n
                                    ,                for j  1                                (19)
                       qij
                        n


                        U
                       qin
                         1
                             ( µ ) pin
                             =-      1= 1- µ
                                                 (          )
                                               1   pi1 , for j = 1
                                             pin    n
                                                                                             (20)


where   [1 - ( µ /  )] < 1. It follows that the optimal policy for China to achieve the import

target is to act "as if" there is an ad valorem subsidy on U.S. prices, lowering them by  < 1.

Importantly, this "effective" subsidy is the same across all agricultural imports.

Substitution and Income Effects

       In order to calculate the impact of this effective subsidy on China's imports from various

countries, we use the AIDS demand equations in (1). Changing our notation from (14), we now

let  denote the change in the share of China's imports from each country that it purchases
                                                   14


due to the effective subsidy. Noting that the log of U.S. effective prices falls by  from (21),

then from (1) we obtain:
                                1
                               
                       =     +   for j  1,
                          
                                                                                           (22)

                                       1
                                       
                      1 = -(1 -  )   + 1  for j = 1.
                                  
                                                                                           (23)

                                                                                   1
where we have made use of the normalizations just below (2) that 
                                                                  = -(1 - ) for n =

n' and j = j'; 
                =  / for n = n' and j  j'; and 
                                                = 0 for n  n' .

       The first terms appearing in (22) and (23) are a conventional substitution effect, which

always increases China's imports from the United States and decreases China's imports from

other countries. We note that the magnitude of the substitution effect depends on the number of

countries competing with the United States. We have referred to that number as N in the above

equations, but as noted in section 2, it actually measures the numbers of source countries for each

product and province and should therefore be properly written as  . The larger is  , then the

                                           1
greater is the substitution effect - 1 -      > 0 towards U.S. exports, but the smaller (in
                                           


                                               1
absolute magnitude) is the substitution effect     < 0 away from other countries.
                                               


       The second terms appearing in (22) and (23) are the income effects associated with an

effective subsidy on imports from the United States. To solve for the change in real income, we

use the log of the homothetic price index ln  =       
                                                   ln  appearing in (2) to obtain:


                         = - ln  = -1   .                                                  (24)

With ln  < 0, the effective subsidy on U.S. goods acts like a rise in real income. Substituting

this into (22), we obtain the change in the provincial share of good n imported from countries

other than the United States,
                                                  15


                                 
                                
                        = (  - 1  ) ln  for j  1.                                             (25)
                                  


For imported products from country j that have income elasticities less than or equal to unity, so
     
that  < 0, the effective subsidy on U.S. product combined with the effective rise in real income

will lead to a reduced share of purchases from that country. On the other hand, if purchases from
                                     
country j are sufficiently luxuries ( > 0) so that        
                                                   1  >  / , then there would be an
                                                        


increased import share because purchases from country j are complementary with those from the

United States. We will find that this complementary relationship holds for some countries

exporting soybeans to China, for example.

       We can also substitute (24) into (23), to obtain:

                                          1
                                       
                        = - 1 -     + 1 1  ln  for j = 1.
                                   
                                                                                              (26)
                                           


                                                            1
Recalling again that ln  < 0, then with   
                                        1  > - 1 -    
                                                      
                                                       there will be an increased share
                                                            


of purchases from the United States. This condition rules out a backward-bending demand curve
                                                           
and is always satisfied in our data. Having a luxury good (1 > 0) means that the positive

income effect adds to the substitution effect in raising imports from the United States.

       The effective subsidies therefore create both substitution effects ­ which occur within

the same products that the United States is exporting to China ­ and income effects, which can

possibly create complementarity between U.S. exports and those of other countries. There is a

final effect which we must consider, and that is the substitution effect across products. That was

ruled out in the initial estimation of our parameters because we assumed that 
                                                                               = 0 for n  n'.

But cross-product substitution can still enter into our results, for a subtle reason we mentioned in

section 2. Specifically, as the effective subsidy increases on U.S. products, it is entirely possible

that the drop in the share of China's purchases from other countries ­  in (25) ­ exceeds the
                                                    16


initial purchases from that country, so that the share should be zero. That involves an adjustment

to all the parameters of the AIDS equation (1), as discussed just below that equation, so that the

sum of shares over all products and source countries for each province continues to be unity. We

have implemented that adjustment by first replacing the (hypothetical) negative share with zero,

in which case the sum of shares exceeds unity. Then we subtract the same, small amount needed

from all the (positive) shares in that province so that the sum of shares is again unity. This

procedure, which can be justified theoretically, 5 leads to a slight reduction in import shares of all

products and source countries in a province, even for products that the United States does not

export. In other words, there is a cross-product substitution created by the effective subsidies.

        To summarize, equations (25) and (26) will be used to mimic the effect of an import

subsidy on U.S. product, where we will change the size of the effective subsidy in order to meet

the Phase One targets for 2020 and 2021. We have held fixed China's total import purchases of

agricultural imports, denoted by Y. It follows that the increase in China's agricultural imports

from the United States will equal the reduction in total imports from other countries. If our

estimation of the AIDS-gravity equation had included additional goods beyond agricultural

imports (such as home-produced or nonagricultural goods), then total agricultural imports Y

could have changed endogenously in response to the effective subsidy, thereby allowing imports

from other countries to fall by more or less than the rise in imports from the United States. But

results of that type are beyond the scope of this paper.

Calibration

        As explained in the previous section, for bulk and intermediate goods, we replace the



5
  Feenstra (2010) shows how the parameters of an AIDS expenditure function must be adjusted when
there are new or disappearing goods, and this implies an adjustment to the shares so that they sum to
unity. An empirical application to a translog expenditure functions is in Feenstra and Weinstein (2017).
                                                17


lower-level parameters 
                        with their upper-level values   for each product. The other two

parameters appearing in (25) and (26) are 1 and  . For the former, we use the share of
                                                



imports from the United States, 1 , in each province and product in 2017. The parameter  was
                                                                                        


not well-estimated from the coefficient of the distance term in the AIDS-gravity equation (13).

The reason for this is that the distance term  measures the bilateral trade costs between

exporter j and importer i in sector n and is obtained in the same manner as (7) but replacing 

with d. As can be seen from (7), the distance term actually measures the cross-provincial

differences in the distance to trading partners. While we attempted to capture such cross-

provincial differences by using their distances to the nearest Chinese ports, this method was not

successful in obtaining reliable estimates of  .

       Accordingly, we calibrate this parameter using estimates from Fajgelbaum and

Khandelwal (2016). They report an estimate on distance in their AIDS-gravity equation--

estimated over agricultural products--of 0.0011 and varying between 0.0013 and 0.0009. We

shall use an average value of 0.0010 to calibrate that distance parameter, which equals the

combined parameters    in (13). Following Fajgelbaum and Khandelwal again, we use a

calibrated value of  = 0.177, so that we obtain  = 0.0010/0.177 = 0.00565. This value

for  is used in all our calculations.


5. Forecast Results

       In Table 3 we report China's demand for agricultural imports from the United States

under our three growth scenarios: when the annual change in real spending on all agricultural

imports from 2017 is equal to its average annual growth over 2007-2017, or one-half that

amount, or zero growth from 2017. In the first case, China's import demand increases by roughly
                                                     18


10% per year. Still, we see from Table 3 that China's imports from the United States fall short of

the Phase One targets in both 2020 and 2021: import demand from the United States is $33.6

billion in 2020 as compared with the target of $36.6 billion, and import demand is $37.5 billion

in 2021 as compared with the target of $43.6 billion. Reaching both of these targets would

require an effective subsidy from China of 12% in 2020 and 23% in 2021. These subsidies would

lead to increases in U.S. imports of $2.9 and $6.3 billion in 2020 and 2021, respectively, or

percentage increases of 8.6% and 16.9%.

          In the remaining rows of Table 3, we summarize the results for a growth rate of one-half

of that which occurred during 2007-2017 and for zero import growth from 2017. In the former

case, the needed effective subsidies on U.S. imports to reach the Phase One targets in 2020 and

2021 are 18% and 41%, respectively, and in the latter case with zero-growth, the needed

subsidies are 42% and 59%, respectively. These subsidy rates on the United States are high and

show that it would be challenging to achieve the increase in imports needed to achieve the Phase

One targets through state command.

          In Table 4, we report the increase in imports from the United States that would occur in

specific agricultural products, focusing on those products with U.S. exports to China in 2017

greater than $500 million. 6 The top selling U.S. export is soybeans, followed by forest products,

cotton, coarse grains, hides & skins, fish products, pork, and dairy products. We show the impact

of the effective subsidies on the United States needed to reach the Phase One targets in 2020 and

2021. For brevity, in each of those years, we report only the relevant subsidy that reaches the

Phase One target under the zero-growth scenario, where China's import demand for each

agricultural product is the same as in 2017. With the effective subsidy of 42% in 2020, forest



6
    The change in U.S. exports to China for the complete list of products is in Appendix Table A9.
                                                   19


products have the greatest increase in exports to China ($359 million, or 17.3%), while soybean

exports grow by $289 million (only 2.1%, from a very high base of $13.9 billion). The effective

subsidy of 59% in 2021 leads to even higher exports of $559 million (26.9%) for forest products

and $530 million (3.8%) for soybeans. 7

Results for Other Countries

        By assumption in our framework, China's imports from other countries would fall by the

same amount in total as the increase in imports from the United States. However, we are

especially interested in how that diversion of imports is spread across other countries. In Table 5,

we report the decrease in imports from the rest of the world (ROW) in 2020 and 2021, and for

individual supplying countries 8 Once again, we report only the impact of the subsidies under the

zero-growth scenario. For example, in the first row of Table 5, we report that the ROW would

sell $12.5 billion less to China under a 42% subsidy in 2020 and $19.5 billion less to China

under a 59% subsidy in 2021. These dollar amounts equal the dollar increase in China's imports

from the United States under zero growth, but the percentage decrease for the ROW is smaller

because China's agricultural imports from the United States are only about one-quarter as large

as for the ROW. The percentage reduction in China's imports from the ROW to achieve the

Phase One targets are 11.8% and 18.4% (Table 5, first row).

        For individual supplying countries, the percentage reduction in China's purchase of their

imports can be higher or lower than that for the ROW, while the average over all non-U.S.

supplying countries will equal the percentage reduction for ROW in total. In Table 5, we rank the



7
  Forest products such as hardwood lumber are not considered to be agricultural goods in the Phase One
targets for the United States but rather manufactured goods. Because we have not analyzed the Phase One
manufacturing targets in this study, we have included forest products within agriculture.
8
  The change in exports to China for the top exporters besides the United States and the complete list of
products are in Appendix Tables A10-A16.
                                                   20


individual countries by their exports to China in 2017. The top supplier after the United States is

Brazil. It suffers a loss in exports to China of 2.5% and 4.0% in 2020 and 2021, respectively,

which is much less that for the ROW overall (which is a decline of 11.8% and 18.4%). The

modest impact on Brazil occurs because it is a principal supplier of soybeans to China, and in

that commodity, there is weaker substitution (and sometimes a complementary relationship)

between imports from the United States and those from some other countries, as we will explain

below.

         The next largest exporter to China is Australia, and it suffers the largest dollar drop in

exports to China of all countries, with a percentage drop nearly equal to the ROW overall.

Canada is the only country among the top-five exporters to China that has a percentage drop in

exports that exceeds the ROW overall. These two countries ­ Australia and Canada ­ experience

trade diversion of close to $1 billion in 2020 and exceeding $1 billion in 2021. Following those

two countries, the next largest drop in exports to China occurs for Brazil, Malaysia, Indonesia,

Thailand, and Vietnam, with trade diversion of close to $0.5 billion in 2020, and between $0.75

and $1.0 billion in 2021. Next, a group of countries--including Argentina, France, Germany, the

Netherlands, and New Zealand --experience trade diversion of between $0.33 and $0.5 billion in

2021 and $0.5 to $0.75 in 2021. Spain and South Korea have declines in exports that are close to

those lower amounts, followed by Chile and Japan. It is evident that the ranking of countries by

their exports to China (Brazil is at the top after the United States) and by their loss in exports

(Australia and Canada are highest) are not the same, and we can turn to individual products to

understand this difference.

Results for Specific Products

         To understand in more detail the sources of these export declines by country, we report
                                                   21


results for specific agricultural products. We begin with the largest agricultural export from

Australia to China: coarse grains (except corn). In Table 6, we report the change in China's

imports from the United States, the ROW in total, and each country individually, provided that it

has sales to China over $100 million.9 We report only the impact of the subsidies under the zero-

growth scenario. China's imports from the United States grow by about $120 million in 2020 and

$230 million in 2021 under the effective subsidies of 42% and 59% needed to achieve the Phase

One targets. The reductions in imports from the ROW are much larger: $170 million in 2020 and

$240 billion in 2021. So, we see that for this commodity, the import reductions from the ROW

exceed the U.S. gain. This difference between the U.S. export gain and ROW export loss occurs

because of the income effects, which are the second terms included in (25) and (26). 10

        Coarse grains are included as "bulk" in the BICO classification, so we have used the

upper-level parameter value   = -0.009 in Table 1, so coarse grains are a necessity overall,

with income elasticity less than unity. Such necessities have a negative income effect in (26), in

which case both the substitution and income effects lead to reduced imports from countries other

than the United States, which explains why China's imports from the ROW fall by more than the

rise in imports from the United States. As a result, China's total imports for this product fall.

        Different results are found for soybeans, which is a major export from both the United

States and Brazil. 11 Since this product is also listed as "bulk" under the BICO classification, we

have again used the upper-level parameter value   = 0.030 from Table 1, so that soybeans are


9
   The complete list of countries exporting more than $50,000 worth of coarse grains to China in 2017 is
reported in Appendix Table A5. There are 15 of these countries besides the United States.
10
    It is readily shown from (25) and (26) that the substitution effects (the first terms included in each
equation), when summed over the  - 1 countries other than the United States in (25) and added to the
U.S. effect in (26), equal zero on a crop-by-crop basis.
11
   The United States and Brazil together supply over 80% of global soybean exports, with Argentina being
the third largest exporter. China was the destination for 61% of U.S. soybean exports and 77% of Brazil's
soybean exports in 2017.
                                                   22


a luxury good with income elasticity greater than unity. In Table 7, the effective subsidy on the

United States of 42% in 2020 and 59% in 2021 increases U.S. soybean exports to China in those

years by roughly $300 million and $500 million, respectively. One the other hand, declines of

nearly $100 million in each year are experienced by Brazil and Argentina, with a very slight

decline by Uruguay. The remaining countries shown in Table 7 ­ including Canada, Russia,

Ukraine and small suppliers ­ all have increases in their exports to China. Indeed, the total

reductions in China's ROW imports are modest, at about $150 million in 2020 and only $37

million in 2021, much less than the rise in imports from the United States. So, for soybeans,

China's total imports rise with the effective subsidy.

        Soybeans illustrate the potential for a complementary relationship between China's

imports from the United States, which occur because we are treating soybeans as a luxury good

and the expenditure share on the United States is high in many provinces. That combination of

parameters creates a strong positive income effect,    
                                                    1  , as appears in (25) and (26), which is

multiplied by -ln  > 0 to create an especially strong income effect in 2021. Soybeans is the

only product for which we find a complementary relationship between China's imports from the

United States and from other countries. The fact that China's soybean imports from the United

States and from the ROW are rising means that imports of other products must be falling,

because we have held its total imports fixed at Y in our theoretical model and at their 2017 level

in our zero-growth scenario. We have already seen that China reduces its imports of coarse

grains from the ROW by more than the increase in its imports from the United States due to the

negative income effect, and the same pattern will arise for other necessities. 12 But it is worth



12
  In Appendix Tables A6-A8, we report the change in China's imports for cotton, which is a necessity
from Table 1, and pork and beef, which are necessities in their exports from some countries and luxuries
from others. The fall China's ROW imports for each of these products exceed the rise in U.S. imports.
                                                     23


considering if other features are at work in our AIDS model that can contribute to reduced ROW

imports.

          To answer this question, let us consider China's imports from Canada. As was noted in

Table 5, Canada has the greatest percentage loss among the top-five countries exporting to

China. Canada's loss in exports of coarse grains is about half as large as for Australia (Table 6),

and as we have just seen (Table 7), Canada's soybean exports to China actually increase. So

where does the large loss in Canada's exports occur? Canada's top agricultural export to China is

rapeseed, and that is also the product where Canada experiences the greatest drop in exports. 13

We report China's imports of rapeseed in Table 8. China buys rapeseed from only four countries,

but nearly all of these imports come from Canada. In 2017, Canada's rapeseed exports to China

totaled $2 billion. Those imports fall by about $250 million in 2020 and $340 million in 2021

due to the effective subsidy on U.S. products.

          This result is not surprising since rapeseed and soybeans are substitutes, and the cross-

product substitution that we referred to in the previous section is helping to drive the decline in

China's rapeseed imports from Canada. Specifically, each province importing rapeseed will

experience a decline in the price of other imports from the United States with the effective

subsidy. Due to substitution (and negative income effects if they occur), the province's imports

of those products from the ROW will fall. But in many cases, the expenditure share  on


imports from a given country j can fall to zero, and as the subsidy on U.S. product is raised, it

cannot fall further. The import share on the United States, 1 , continues to rise with the subsidy,

but if the share of competing countries cannot fall past zero, then all shares in each province

must be adjusted so that their sum in each province still equals unity. That adjustment is done by


13
     See Appendix Table A13 for the change in Canada's exports of specific products to China.
                                                  24


subtracting the same, small value from all (positive) shares in a province so that they sum to

unity.

         This procedure creates a cross-product substitution in our analysis, as illustrated by the

reduction in Canada's rapeseed exports to China. To express this substitution pattern in less

technical language, we can think of the subsidy on soybeans ­ used, for example, to create

soybean oil for consumers ­ as implemented by command or by fiscal incentives to processing

factories in China. Increased soybean imports from the United States would lower the price of

soybean oil for consumers, leading to increased demand. That consumer decision would

incorporate a positive income effect on soybean purchases. In addition, there can be cross-

product substitution away from other products--in particular, away from canola oil that is

processed from rapeseed. In this way, the effective subsidy on U.S. soybean imports provided to

processing plants in China can result in less rapeseed imports from Canada, as we have found.


6. Conclusions
         The administration of President Trump has engaged in numerous trade policy actions

with China. In December 2019, the United States and China reached a Phase One agreement,

under which China committed to purchase more imports from the United States in 2020 and

2021. While this agreement may be modified because of the coronavirus pandemic in 2020, it is

still worth asking how China would be able to achieve the targets, particularly for agricultural

imports.

         We have shown that the most efficient way for China to import more from the United

States is to mimic the effect of an import subsidy on U.S. product. The magnitude of these

"effective" subsidies on the United States depend on the assumptions of how much China's

imports would have grown since 2017, and we have considered three scenarios. In the first, if
                                                 25


China's agricultural imports grew at the same annual rate from 2017 as during 2007-2017, then

we find that the effective subsidies would need to be 12% and 23% to achieve the targets in 2020

and 2021, respectively. But if import growth was only one-half of that amount, then the subsidies

would need to be 18% and 41%; while if there was zero growth from 2017, then the subsidies

would need to be 42% and 59%. In fact, China's agricultural imports from the United States fell

from 2017 to 2019, so we focus on the zero-growth scenario in most of our calculations.

       These subsidy rates on imports from the United States are admittedly very high. We are

agnostic on whether such an import subsidy will actually be put into place, or whether it would

be achieved via state command. In either case, it can be expected that the increased imports from

the United States would result in trade diversion away from the ROW. In our analysis, we have

assumed that the increased imports from the United States and decreased imports from the ROW

are equal when calculated over all agricultural imports. But that does not mean that they are

equal on product-by-product basis. On the contrary, we have shown that both substitution and

income effects influence importing decisions in China under the effective subsidies on U.S.

product. The income effects depend on whether goods are inferior or luxuries: that is, whether

China's income elasticities for imports from particular source countries are less than or greater

than unity.

       In our results, we find some products where the increase in China's imports from the

United States is less than the decrease in imports from the ROW, such that total imports fall.

That case occurs for necessity goods, in particular (with income elasticities less than unity for

some countries). We have also found products where the decrease in imports from the ROW is

less than the increase in China's imports from the United States, such that total imports rise. That

case occurs for soybean imports, which are a luxury good, and in this case the income effect is so
                                                 26


strong that China's imports from some countries are complementary with those from the United

States, and therefore rise rather than fall with the Phase One targets. Finally, we have also found

products ­ rapeseed, in particular ­ where China's imports from ROW countries (principally

Canada) fall despite the fact that the United States does not export this product to China, so there

is no effective subsidy on U.S. product. This case illustrates the potential for cross-product

substitution in our AIDS-gravity equation. These results for rapeseed and all other products show

a rich pattern of trade diversion across source countries due to the Phase One targets.
                                                27


References

Bown, Chad, 2020. "Unappreciated Hazards of the Phase One Deal," Trade and Investment
       Policy Watch, Peterson Institute for International Economics, January 21. Available at:
       https://www.piie.com/blogs/trade-and-investment-policy-watch/unappreciated-hazards-us-
       china-phase-one-deal .


Carter, Colin A. and Sandro Steinbach, 2020. "The Impact of Retaliatory Tariffs on Agricultural
       and Food Trade," University of California, Davis and University of Connecticut.


China Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs. 2018. China Agricultural Outlook (2018­
       2027). Beijing: China Agricultural Science and Technology Press.


Fajgelbaum, Pablo D. and Amit K. Khandelwal, 2016. "Measuring the Unequal Gains from
       Trade," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131 (3): 1113-1180.


Feenstra, Robert C., 2010. "New Products with a Symmetric AIDS Expenditure Function,"
       Economic Letters, February, 2, 108-111


Feenstra, Robert C. and David Weinstein, 2017. "Globalization, Markups, and U.S. Welfare,"
       Journal of Political Economy, 125(4), August, 1041-1074.


Gale, Fred, Constanza Valdes, and Mark Ash, 2019. "Interdependence of China, United States,
       and Brazil in Soybean Trade," Oil Crops Outlook No. (OCS-19F-01), U.S. Department of
       Agriculture, Economic Research Service, June.


Tian, Weimin, 2012. "Provincial Level GINI Indexes and Their Changing Pattern", Economic
       Science, 2, 48-59.
                                               28


        Figure 1: China Agricultural Imports ($ bill) from USA and ROW, 1997-2019

  140


  120


  100


   80


   60


   40


   20


    0



             China Import USA       China Import ROW         2020 Target        2021 Target



        Figure 2: China's Import Share of Soybeans from the USA, 2017 by Province

 0.50

 0.45

 0.40

 0.35

 0.30

 0.25

 0.20

 0.15

 0.10

 0.05

 0.00
        0         5,000         10,000        15,000         20,000        25,000        30,000
                      Provincial total agricultural imports ($ million, 2017)

Sources: China Customs Trade Data, and USDA for 2018 and 2019.
                                           29




                 Table 1: Estimates of   Coefficient from Equation (12)

BICO Category     Agricultural Products                      Estimate     Std. Error
Bulk              Wheat                                   -0.011**        (0.004)
Bulk              Corn                                    0.001           (0.005)
Bulk              Coarse Grains (except corn)             -0.009*         (0.004)
Bulk              Rice                                    -0.003          (0.004)
Bulk              Soybeans                                0.030**         (0.004)
Bulk              Rapeseed                                -0.012*         (0.005)
Bulk              Oilseeds NESOI                          0.003           (0.003)
Bulk              Cotton                                  -0.012**        (0.003)
Bulk              Peanuts                                 0.001           (0.006)
Bulk              Pulses                                  0.005           (0.004)
Bulk              Coffee, Unroasted                       0.001           (0.005)
Bulk              Cocoa Beans                             -0.001          (0.008)
Bulk              Tobacco                                 0.003           (0.004)
Bulk              Rubber & Allied Gums                    -0.025**        (0.003)
Bulk              Other Bulk Commodities                  -0.005+         (0.003)
Intermediate      Soybean meal                            -0.041**        (0.004)
Intermediate      Oilseed Meal/Cake (except soybean)      0.002           (0.004)
Intermediate      Soybean Oil                             -0.014**        (0.004)
Intermediate      Palm Oil                                -0.021**        (0.003)
Intermediate      Vegetable Oils NESOI                    -0.006*         (0.003)
Intermediate      Distillers Grains                       0.003           (0.006)
Intermediate      Hay                                     0.003           (0.006)
Intermediate      Feeds & Fodders NESOI                   0.000           (0.003)
Intermediate      Live Animals                            0.011**         (0.003)
Intermediate      Hides & Skins                           -0.007*         (0.003)
Intermediate      Animal Fats                             -0.000          (0.004)
Intermediate      Essential Oils                          0.002           (0.003)
Intermediate      Planting Seeds                          0.003           (0.003)
Intermediate      Sugars & Sweeteners                     0.002           (0.003)
Intermediate      Other Intermediate Products             -0.015**        (0.003)
Consumer-ready    Beef & Beef Products                    0.005           (0.004)
Consumer-ready    Pork & Pork Products                    0.009*          (0.004)
Consumer-ready    Poultry Meat & Prods. (except eggs)     0.003           (0.004)
Consumer-ready    Meat Products NESOI                     0.002           (0.003)
Consumer-ready    Eggs & Products                         0.002           (0.004)
Consumer-ready    Dairy Products                          0.009**         (0.003)
                                              30


 Consumer-ready     Fresh Fruit                                0.003      (0.004)
 Consumer-ready     Processed Fruit                            0.003      (0.003)
 Consumer-ready     Fresh Vegetables                           0.003      (0.004)
 Consumer-ready     Processed Vegetables                       0.000      (0.003)
 Consumer-ready     Fruit & Vegetable Juices                   0.001      (0.003)
 Consumer-ready     Tree Nuts                                  0.002      (0.004)
 Consumer-ready     Chocolate & Cocoa Products                 0.002      (0.003)
 Consumer-ready     Snack Foods NESOI                          0.003      (0.003)
 Consumer-ready     Condiments & Sauces                        -0.000     (0.003)
 Consumer-ready     Prepared Foods                             0.014**    (0.003)
 Consumer-ready     Spices                                     0.002      (0.003)
 Consumer-ready     Tea                                        0.001      (0.004)
 Consumer-ready     Coffee, Roasted and Extracts               0.001      (0.004)
                    Non-Alcoholic Bev. (except juices,
 Consumer-ready     coffee, tea)                               0.000      (0.004)
 Consumer-ready     Wine & Beer                                0.005      (0.003)
 Consumer-ready     Dog & Cat Food                             0.001      (0.006)
 Consumer-ready     Nursery Prod. & Cut Flowers                0.003      (0.003)
 Other              Distilled Spirits                          0.003      (0.004)
 Other              Ethanol                                    0.003      (0.004)
 Other              Biodiesel & Blends > B30                   0.008**    (0.003)
 Other              Forest Products                            -0.009**   (0.003)
 Other              Fish Products                              0.001      (0.003)
 Observations       23,812
 R-squared          0.386

Note: Standard errors in parentheses; ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.10
                                                                                      31


                                                Table 2: Product-Exporter Specific  Estimates from Equation (13)
                                                                          Coarse                                      Biodiesel
                                                                          Grains                             Pork &   &
                         Forest                     Hides &    Distillers (except     Fish                   Pork     Blends > Dairy                       Prepared
Country         Soybeans Products Cotton            Skins      Grains     corn)       Products Corn          Products B30       Products Wheat             Foods    Hay
USA             -0.047**     0.013**    -0.006**    0.005**    0.005       -0.009**   -0.005*    -0.022**    -0.003     0.007**     0.000     -0.012**     0.005**    -0.006*
Brazil          -0.067**     -0.009**   0.012**     0.017**    0.001       0.001      0.035**    -0.021      0.009      -0.008*     -0.007    na           -0.001     na
Australia       0.051**      -0.002     -0.008**    -0.027**   -0.029      -0.028**   -0.001     0.001       0.002      0.001       0.004*    -0.006   +
                                                                                                                                                           -0.001     0.005
Thailand        0.136**      0.014**    -0.007      0.006      -0.001      -0.001     -0.002     0.008       0.001      0.001       -0.004    0.174        0.001      na
Canada          0.005        0.009**    0.004       0.003      0.001       -0.002     0.000      0.003       0.002      -0.004+     0.000     -0.040**     0.001      0.001
Malaysia        0.023+       0.016**    0.012**     0.018**    na          -0.016     0.006*     0.001       0.001      -0.001      0.002     0.01         0.003      0.005
Indonesia       0.010        0.019**    0.002       0.007      na          0.005      0.002      -0.011      -0.004     -0.004      0.003     na           0.000      0.002
New Zealand     0.121        0.007**    0.011       0.005+     na          -0.015     0.006+     na          0.002      -0.001      0.003     na           0.001      0.001
Argentina       -0.011**     -0.009**   0.003       0.014**    na          0.007      0.009+     0.000       0.001      -0.005      -0.002    -0.053       -0.001     0.001
Russia          -0.046**     -0.097**   0.080**     0.047**    na          -0.011     0.014**    -0.005      -0.027*    -0.036**    -0.007+   0.004        -0.011**   -0.001
Vietnam         na           -0.039**   0.008       0.008*     0.001       0.027      -0.001     0.000       0.001      0.001       -0.002    na           -0.002     0.001
France          0.025        0.001      0.004       0.000      0.000       -0.018**   0.003      0.012       0.001      -0.001      0.002     -0.007       0.001      -0.001
India           0.008        0.001      -0.001      0.004      na          0.004      0.004      -0.001      -0.001     0.000       -0.002    0.001        0.000      0.001
Netherlands     -0.008       0.000      -0.001      0.000      -0.001      -0.001     0.004      -0.024      0.002      0.001       -0.002    na           0.001      0.000
Germany         0.004        0.008**    0.000       -0.001     0.000       0.000      0.001      -0.001      0.004      0.004**     0.001     -0.003       0.001      0.000
Uruguay         -0.010*      0.000      0.001       0.003      na          0.001      0.004      na          -0.001     0.002       0.000     na           0.000      na
South Korea     -0.001       0.006**    0.001       0.001      0.001       -0.001     0.000      -0.003      0.005      -0.001      0.001     0.017        0.002      -0.001
Chile           0.018        -0.001     -0.002      0.003      na          0.043**    0.002      0.001       0.002      -0.017**    0.000     na           0.000      na
Japan           0.004        0.001      0.000       0.001      0.000       0.005      -0.002     0.002       0.001      0.015**     0.000     0.005        0.002      0.000


            Note: ** Significant at the 1% level; * significant at the 5% level; + significant at the 10% level. Na = not applicable.
                                                     32


                 Table 3: Forecast China's Import Demand from the United States

                                                          2020       2021      Impact on U.S. imports
                                                            billion US$       Year bill US$ Percent
    Phase One Target                                      36.6       43.6

    Average 2007-17 growth from 2017                      33.62     37.52
    Average 2007-17 growth, subsidy = 12%                 36.50     40.15     2020      +2.88      8.6%
    Average 2007-17 growth, subsidy = 23%                 39.96     43.63     2021      +6.33      16.9%

    0.5*Ave 2007-17 growth from 2017                      28.41     30.07
    0.5*Ave 2007-17 growth, subsidy = 18%                 36.63     38.28     2020     +8.22       28.9%
    0.5*Ave 2007-17 growth, subsidy = 41%                 41.67     43.42     2021     +13.35      44.4%

    Zero growth from 2017                                  24.1      24.1
    Zero growth from 2017, subsidy = 42%                  36.62     36.62     2020     +12.52      51.9%
    Zero growth from 2017, subsidy = 59%                  43.56     43.56     2021     +19.46      80.7%




                           Table 4: Impact on Major U.S. Agricultural Exports,
                                    Assuming Zero Growth from 2017


                                  No Subsidy             Subsidy=42%                    Subsidy=59%
                                  2020 & 2021        Difference from 2020           Difference from 2021
          Product                 Million US$      Million US$     Percent        Million US$     Percent
Soybeans                           13,858.8           289.2            2.1%          529.7          3.8%
Forest Products                     2,080.7           359.0           17.3%          558.7          26.9%
Cotton                               975.3            278.3           28.5%          429.3          44.0%
Coarse Grains (ex. corn)             918.2            117.7           12.8%          228.0          24.8%
Hides & Skins                        898.7            309.6           34.5%          478.7          53.3%
Fish Products                        607.3            305.7           50.3%          473.8          78.0%
Pork & Pork Products                 535.5            308.6           57.6%          476.7          89.0%
Dairy Products                       529.9            322.4           60.8%          499.1          94.2%
   Note: Only products with 2017 export sales to China exceeding $500 million are shown. Results for the
   complete list of products that the United States exported to China in 2017 is in Appendix Table A9.
                                                  33


  Table 5: China's Import Demand from the Rest of the World, Zero Growth from 2017
                                 No Subsidy      Subsidy=42%              Subsidy=59%
                                 2020 & 2021     Difference from 2020     Difference from 2021
          Country                Billion US$     Billion US$ Percent      Billion US$    Percent
          ROW                       105.86          -12.52      -11.8%        -19.46      -18.4%
     1    Brazil                     24.08           -0.59       -2.5%         -0.96       -4.0%
     2    Australia                   9.18           -0.99      -10.8%         -1.67      -18.1%
     3    Thailand                    7.65           -0.51       -6.6%         -0.90      -11.8%
     4    Canada                      6.38           -0.87      -13.6%         -1.34      -20.9%
     5    Indonesia                   5.81           -0.49       -8.5%         -0.82      -14.1%
     6    New Zealand                 5.34           -0.43       -8.1%         -0.75      -14.0%
     7    Malaysia                    4.34           -0.48      -11.2%         -0.79      -18.3%
     8    Vietnam                     3.73           -0.57      -15.2%         -0.92      -24.5%
     9    Argentina                   3.55           -0.31       -8.6%         -0.41      -11.5%
     10   France                      2.99           -0.42      -14.0%         -0.69      -23.1%
     11   Netherlands                 2.93           -0.44      -14.9%         -0.65      -22.3%
     12   Chile                       2.12           -0.26      -12.3%         -0.45      -21.1%
     13   Germany                     1.97           -0.35      -18.0%         -0.59      -29.9%
     14   Uruguay                     1.86           -0.20      -11.0%         -0.24      -13.0%
     15   Russia                      1.77           -0.15       -8.3%         -0.21      -12.0%
     16   Spain                       1.46           -0.32      -22.0%         -0.53      -36.5%
     17   Denmark                     1.44           -0.22      -15.2%         -0.36      -24.7%
     18   Ukraine                     1.13           -0.28      -25.1%         -0.43      -38.5%
     19   India                       1.09           -0.30      -27.5%         -0.46      -42.4%
     20   South Africa                0.97           -0.18      -18.4%         -0.27      -27.7%
     21   South Korea                 0.96           -0.32      -33.6%         -0.48      -50.1%
     22   Belgium                     0.88           -0.28      -32.1%         -0.43      -49.0%
     23   Ireland                     0.86           -0.14      -16.3%         -0.20      -23.5%
     24   Philippines                 0.78           -0.18      -23.1%         -0.26      -33.5%
     25   Taiwan                      0.68           -0.21      -31.3%         -0.30      -44.2%
     26   United Kingdom              0.62           -0.22      -35.4%         -0.31      -50.7%
     27   Japan                       0.62           -0.28      -46.0%         -0.40      -63.9%
     28   Singapore                   0.61           -0.19      -31.0%         -0.27      -44.3%
     29   Papua New Guinea            0.59           -0.03       -5.2%         -0.06       -9.9%
     30   Italy                       0.57           -0.25      -43.4%         -0.34      -60.3%

Note: Only countries with 2017 export sales to China exceeding $500 million are shown. The complete
list of products in including in Appendix Table A2, with other growth scenarios shown in Table A3-A4.
                                                   34


       Table 6: Forecast of China's Import Demand for Coarse Grains (except corn),
                                  Zero growth from 2017


                             No Subsidy           Subsidy=42%                   Subsidy=59%
                             2020 & 21        Difference from 2020         Difference from 2021
          Country            Million US$      Million US$   Percent       Million US$    Percent
    United States                918.2            117.7         12.8%         228.0           24.8%
    ROW                         2,814.3          -172.8         -6.1%        -242.0           -8.6%
    Australia                   1391.0           -143.6        -10.3%        -228.8          -16.4%
    Canada                       324.6            -71.8        -22.1%        -121.2          -37.3%
    Ukraine                      129.1            -39.4        -30.5%         -71.1          -55.1%
    France                       47.3             -31.7        -67.0%         -44.8          -94.7%
    Denmark                       1.5              -1.5       -100.0%          -1.5         -100.0%
Note: Only countries with 2017 export sales to China exceeding $1 million are shown, though the ROW
total is computed over all countries besides the United States. The complete list of countries exporting
forest products to China in 2017, with sales over $50,000, is reported in Appendix Table A5.




      Table 7: Forecast China's Import Demand for Soybeans, Zero growth from 2017
                          No Subsidy           Subsidy=42%                   Subsidy=59%
                             2020          Difference from 2020          Difference from 2021
     Country              Million US$      Million US$    Percent       Million US$     Percent
     United States          13,858.8           289.2         2.1%           529.7          3.8%
     ROW                    25,569.5          -151.5        -0.6%           -37.0         -0.1%
     Brazil                 20,873.2           -99.4        -0.5%          -104.4         -0.5%
     Argentina               2,644.0           -110         -4.2%          -121.5         -4.6%
     Uruguay                  990.7            -47.6        -4.8%            -1.5         -0.2%
     Canada                   886.3              2.7         0.3%            46.1          5.2%
     Russia                   158.4             20.6        13.0%            30.7         19.4%
     Ukraine                   9.2               8.2        88.4%             6.5         70.5%
     Ethiopia                  4.5              44.7        >100%            63.6         >100%
     Kazakhstan                2.8               0.4        13.0%             0.6         21.2%
     Germany                   0.2               8.4        >100%            12.1         >100%
     Mozambique                0.1               8.4        >100%            12.1         >100%
Note: Only countries with 2017 export sales to China exceeding $50,000 are shown.
                                                   35




    Table 8: Forecast of China's Import Demand for Rapeseed, Zero growth from 2017
                           No Subsidy            Subsidy=42%               Subsidy=59%
                              2020           Difference from 2020      Difference from 2021
         Country           Million US$       Million US$ Percent       Million US$ Percent
         ROW                  2,100.2           -246.6       -11.7%          -336.9   -16.0%
         Canada               2,035.1           -239.6      -11.8%           -320.1   -15.7%
         Mongolia              26.7              -0.2        -0.6%            -0.4     -1.4%
         Australia             25.8              -6.6       -25.7%             -16    -62.2%
         Russia                12.6              -0.2        -1.5%            -0.4     -3.2%
Note: All countries with 2017 export sales of rapeseed to China are shown.
                                                36


Data Appendix

       The Chinese import statistics used in this paper, by the Harmonized System (HS)

classification and by source country and destination province over 1997-2017, were acquired by

UC Davis from the Customs General Administration of the People's Republic of China. These

data were purchased from Mr. George Chen, China Customs Statistics Information Center,

Economic Information Agency, Hong Kong; EIAET@PACIFIC.NET.HK . These statistics treat

Hong Kong as a separate customs region. The Hong Kong trade statistics for imports, exports,

and re-exports over 1997-2015, by HS classification and by source and destination countries,

Census and Statistical Department, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, were also

purchased. We merged these datasets to attribute the products re-exported to China from Hong

Kong back to the source country originally exporting to Hong Kong. In this way, we create

Chinese imports (including those coming from Hong Kong attributed to the original source

country) of agricultural products by destination province, for 1997-2017. Nominal "income" in

the AIDS system, denoted by  , is actually measured by total spending on all these agricultural

imports from all source counties by province i in each year

       We further convert the HS classification to the BICO agricultural product classification

developed by the U.S. Department of Agriculture. Based on value or level of processing,

agricultural goods are broken into distinct categories: bulk, intermediate, consumer-ready, and

other products. Bulk goods--such as grains, soybean, cotton, and oilseeds--are relatively

standardized products used as raw materials and inputs. They are sold in large quantities at

relatively low unit costs. Comparatively, consumer-ready products are high value products that
                                                 37


are usually ready for immediate use by consumers. They are typically higher value goods, mostly

finished products, such as meat, dairy, eggs, fruits and vegetables, processed goods, chocolates,

and wines. Compared with bulk commodities, consumer-oriented products are less substitutable,

because they are easy to be differentiated by brand, quality, sanitary standards, and source

countries. Other products are agricultural related products such as fish products, forest products,

ethanol, and biodiesel.

       Provincial level GDP, population, retail price indexes, and income data are obtained from

China Statistical Yearbooks 1997-2017. Provincial level income inequality GINI indexes are

from Tian (2012) and then extrapolated to 2017. Distance between Chinese provinces and each

of its trading partners is measured as the sum of internal and external distance, which takes into

account the fact that the interior provinces first transport the goods to the economic center or

harbors by railway, and then send the goods from the economic center or harbors to the rest of

the world. The internal distance is the train hours between the interior province and the economic

center (Beijing) or harbor cities (Tianjin, Shanghai, and Guangdong), which is obtained from the

Chinese Railroad Timetable. The external distance is the shipping distance from the harbor to the

capital of other countries. The shipping distance is obtained from a World Map, which is

designed for sketching the maritime transportation.
                                                38


                  Table A1: China's Top Imported Products from ROW and USA, 2017
                                               Rank in      Share in     Rank in         Share in
Category                 BICO product          US Exports   US Exports   World Exports   World Exports
                                               To China     To China     To China        To China
B          Soybeans                                   1       57.4%            1            29.9%
O          Forest Products                            2        8.6%            2            8.9%
B          Cotton                                     3        4.0%           16            1.7%
B          Coarse Grains (ex. corn)                   4        4.0%           14            2.2%
I          Hides & Skins                              5        3.7%           15            2.2%
O          Fish Products                              6        2.5%            5            4.1%
C          Pork & Pork Products                       7        2.2%           10            2.8%
C          Dairy Products                             8        2.2%            6            4.0%
C          Prepared Foods                             9        1.8%            3            4.5%
C          Fresh Fruit                               10        1.7%            7            3.8%
I          Hay                                       11        1.6%           33            0.4%
B          Wheat                                     12        1.6%           25            0.8%
I          Other Intermediate Products               13        1.5%            4            4.5%
B          Tobacco                                   14        0.7%           21            0.9%
B          Corn                                      15        0.7%           31            0.5%
C          Processed Fruit                           16        0.6%           27            0.7%
C          Tree Nuts                                 17        0.6%           28            0.6%
I          Planting Seeds                            18        0.6%           39            0.3%
C          Processed Vegetables                      19        0.5%           19            1.3%
I          Essential Oils                            20        0.5%           36            0.3%
I          Feeds & Fodders NESOI                     21        0.5%           37            0.3%
C          Wine & Beer                               22        0.3%           12            2.3%
I          Soybean Oil                               23        0.3%           32            0.4%
C          Meat Products NESOI                       24        0.3%           20            1.1%
I          Distillers Grains                         25        0.3%           50            0.1%
B          Peanuts                                   26        0.2%           44            0.1%
I          Vegetable Oils NESOI                      27        0.2%           13            2.3%
C          Chocolate & Cocoa Products                28        0.1%           34            0.4%
C          Beef & Beef Products                      29        0.1%           11            2.4%
B          Pulses                                    30        0.1%           35            0.4%
C          Coffee, Roasted and Extracts              31        0.1%           43            0.2%
I          Live Animals                              32        0.1%           40            0.2%
C          Condiments & Sauces                       33        0.1%           46            0.1%
C          Snack Foods NESOI                         34        0.1%           30            0.5%
B          Oilseeds NESOI                            35        0.1%           23            0.8%
C          Fruit & Vegetable Juices                  36       < 0.1%          42            0.2%
C          Distilled Spirits                         37       < 0.1%          26            0.7%
                                                          39


I          Sugars & Sweeteners                               38        < 0.1%       22          0.9%
C          Dog & Cat Food                                    39        < 0.1%       53          0.0%
C          Nursery Prod. & Cut Flowers                       40        < 0.1%       41          0.2%
C          Non-Alcoholic Bev. (ex. juices, coffee, tea)      41        < 0.1%       49          0.1%
I          Animal Fats                                       42        < 0.1%       48          0.1%
B          Coffee, Unroasted                                 43        < 0.1%       47          0.1%
B          Rubber & Allied Gums                              44        < 0.1%        8          3.7%
C          Tea                                               45        < 0.1%       45          0.1%
B          Other Bulk Commodities                            46        < 0.1%       29          0.6%
C          Fresh Vegetables                                  47        < 0.1%       56          0.0%
C          Spices                                            48        < 0.1%       52          0.0%
C          Eggs & Products                                   49        < 0.1%       58          0.0%
O          Ethanol                                           50        < 0.1%       55          0.0%
I          Soybean meal                                      51        < 0.1%       54          0.0%
O          Biodiesel & Blends > B30                          52        < 0.1%       57          0.0%
C          Poultry Meat & Prods. (ex. eggs)                  53        < 0.1%       24          0.8%
B          Rice                                              54        < 0.1%       18          1.4%
I          Oilseed Meal/Cake                                 55        < 0.1%       38          0.3%
B          Cocoa Beans                                       56        < 0.1%       51          0.0%
I          Palm Oil                                          57        < 0.1%        9          3.3%
B          Rapeseed                                          58          nil        17          1.6%
 2017 Total Ag Import Value (billion US$)                 USA: 24.21            World 132.41

       Note: authors' calculation using trade data from China and Hong Kong's customs office.
                                        40


         Table A2: Forecasted Chinese Imports from Partner Countries,
           with Zero growth from 2017, Complete list of the countries

                        No Subsidy         Subsidy=42%             Subsidy=59%
                        2020 & 2021    Difference from 2020    Difference from 2021
     Country            Billion US$   billion US$    Percent    billion      Percent
     ROW                   105.86        -12.52      -11.8%          $
                                                                -19.46       -18.4%
 1   Brazil                 24.08         -0.59       -2.5%      -0.96        -4.0%
 2   Australia               9.18         -0.99      -10.8%      -1.67       -18.1%
 3   Thailand                7.65         -0.51       -6.6%      -0.90       -11.8%
 4   Canada                  6.38         -0.87      -13.6%      -1.34       -20.9%
 5   Indonesia               5.81         -0.49       -8.5%      -0.82       -14.1%
 6   New Zealand             5.34         -0.43       -8.1%      -0.75       -14.0%
 7   Malaysia                4.34         -0.48      -11.2%      -0.79       -18.3%
 8   Vietnam                 3.73         -0.57      -15.2%      -0.92       -24.5%
 9   Argentina               3.55         -0.31       -8.6%      -0.41       -11.5%
10   France                  2.99         -0.42      -14.0%      -0.69       -23.1%
11   Netherlands             2.93         -0.44      -14.9%      -0.65       -22.3%
12   Chile                   2.12         -0.26      -12.3%      -0.45       -21.1%
13   Germany                 1.97         -0.35      -18.0%      -0.59       -29.9%
14   Uruguay                 1.86         -0.20      -11.0%      -0.24       -13.0%
15   Russia                  1.77         -0.15       -8.3%      -0.21       -12.0%
16   Spain                   1.46         -0.32      -22.0%      -0.53       -36.5%
17   Denmark                 1.44         -0.22      -15.2%      -0.36       -24.7%
18   Ukraine                 1.13         -0.28      -25.1%      -0.43       -38.5%
19   India                   1.09         -0.30      -27.5%      -0.46       -42.4%
20   South Africa            0.97         -0.18      -18.4%      -0.27       -27.7%
21   South Korea             0.96         -0.32      -33.6%      -0.48       -50.1%
22   Belgium                 0.88         -0.28      -32.1%      -0.43       -49.0%
23   Ireland                 0.86         -0.14      -16.3%      -0.20       -23.5%
24   Philippines             0.78         -0.18      -23.1%      -0.26       -33.5%
25   Taiwan                  0.68         -0.21      -31.3%      -0.30       -44.2%
26   United Kingdom          0.62         -0.22      -35.4%      -0.31       -50.7%
27   Japan                   0.62         -0.28      -46.0%      -0.40       -63.9%
28   Singapore               0.61         -0.19      -31.0%      -0.27       -44.3%
29   Papua New Guinea        0.59         -0.03       -5.2%      -0.06        -9.9%
30   Italy                   0.57         -0.25      -43.4%      -0.34       -60.3%
31   Solomon Is              0.48         -0.02       -3.6%      -0.03        -6.2%
32   Nigeria                 0.45         -0.06      -13.3%      -0.09       -19.2%
33   Myanmar                 0.42         -0.08      -17.7%      -0.09       -20.3%
34   Peru                    0.39         -0.08      -20.0%      -0.12       -30.1%
35   Laos,PDR                0.39         -0.02       -4.5%      -0.03        -8.6%
36   Mozambique              0.36         -0.06      -17.4%      -0.11       -31.5%
37   Norway                  0.32         -0.03       -9.7%      -0.06       -17.8%
                           41


38   Cameroon       0.30   -0.03   -10.5%   -0.06   -19.3%
39   Mongolia       0.30   -0.01    -4.9%   -0.02    -7.6%
40   Sudan          0.29   -0.06   -21.9%   -0.11   -37.4%
41   Eq. Guinea     0.27   -0.01    -3.7%   -0.02    -8.3%
42   Ecuador        0.27   -0.08   -29.4%   -0.12   -45.3%
43   Finland        0.26   -0.05   -20.3%   -0.08   -29.5%
44   Zimbabwe       0.25   -0.04   -17.6%   -0.06   -25.8%
45   Cuba           0.24   -0.04   -14.6%   -0.07   -30.5%
46   Ethiopia       0.24    0.01     2.5%    0.00     0.9%
47   Gabon          0.23   -0.05   -20.9%   -0.07   -30.8%
48   Congo          0.22   -0.02    -8.6%   -0.03   -15.9%
49   Pakistan       0.21   -0.07   -32.4%   -0.09   -43.8%
50   Turkey         0.20   -0.12   -59.4%   -0.14   -68.3%
51   Mexico         0.20   -0.09   -46.7%   -0.11   -57.3%
52   Romania        0.19   -0.06   -31.3%   -0.09   -47.6%
53   Kazakhstan     0.19   -0.01    -7.0%   -0.02   -10.0%
54   Iran           0.18   -0.05   -30.5%   -0.10   -53.7%
55   Korea,DPR      0.16   -0.02   -12.4%   -0.03   -17.5%
56   Switzerland    0.16   -0.05   -34.0%   -0.07   -47.9%
57   Poland         0.15   -0.08   -52.7%   -0.10   -68.6%
58   Tanzania       0.15   -0.06   -41.7%   -0.10   -69.0%
59   Democratic     0.15   -0.04   -26.0%   -0.06   -41.2%
60   Senegal        0.13   -0.05   -41.0%   -0.08   -65.8%
61   Ghana          0.12   -0.04   -36.0%   -0.06   -53.0%
62   Slovenia       0.11   -0.06   -54.0%   -0.09   -77.7%
63   Egypt          0.11   -0.04   -37.9%   -0.06   -53.1%
64   Uzbekistan     0.09   -0.01   -11.3%   -0.01   -12.9%
65   Benin          0.09   -0.04   -43.1%   -0.08   -83.2%
66   Israel         0.08   -0.04   -53.0%   -0.06   -71.5%
67   ROW            0.08   -0.02   -27.9%   -0.04   -48.1%
68   Sri Lanka      0.08   -0.05   -65.9%   -0.06   -74.2%
69   Cote d'lvoir   0.07   -0.04   -64.1%   -0.06   -86.8%
70   Togo           0.06   -0.04   -62.9%   -0.06   -86.2%
71   Sweden         0.06   -0.05   -76.0%   -0.05   -84.1%
72   United Arab    0.05   -0.04   -72.1%   -0.05   -90.5%
73   Greece         0.04   -0.04   -99.8%   -0.04   -99.5%
74   Bangladesh     0.03   -0.02   -57.2%   -0.02   -70.7%
75   Mali           0.03   -0.02   -70.9%   -0.02   -76.8%
76   Latvia         0.02   -0.02   -88.3%   -0.02   -96.7%
77   Guatemala      0.02   -0.01   -82.3%   -0.02   -98.4%
                                              42


               Table A3: Forecasted China Imports from Partner Countries,
                      with Half of Average 10 year growth, 2007-2017

                              No Subsidy            Subsidy=28%              Subsidy=41%
                             2020     2021      Difference from 2020     Difference from 2021
     Country                  Billion US$      Billion US$     Percent   Billion US$ Percent
     ROW                    124.70   131.68        -8.22       -6.6%       -13.35     -10.1%
 1   Brazil                 29.37     31.50        -0.16       -0.6%        -0.29      -0.9%
 2   Australia              10.23     10.57        -0.64       -6.2%        -1.09     -10.3%
 3   Thailand                8.74      9.13        -0.38       -4.4%        -0.69      -7.6%
 4   Canada                  7.20      7.59        -0.32       -4.4%        -0.53      -7.0%
 5   New Zealand             6.45      6.81        -0.31       -4.8%        -0.54      -8.0%
 6   Indonesia               5.92      5.97        -0.30       -5.1%        -0.50      -8.3%
 7   Malaysia                4.64      4.84        -0.36       -7.7%        -0.62     -12.9%
 8   Argentina               4.64      5.18        -0.05       -1.0%        -0.09      -1.7%
 9   France                  3.71      3.94        -0.29       -7.9%        -0.51     -12.9%
10   Netherlands             3.41      3.58        -0.30       -8.7%        -0.46     -12.8%
11   Vietnam                 3.07      2.94        -0.22       -7.2%        -0.32     -10.9%
12   Germany                 2.66      2.86        -0.31      -11.7%        -0.51     -17.9%
13   Chile                   2.62      2.77        -0.18       -7.0%        -0.34     -12.4%
14   Uruguay                 2.54      2.90         0.00       -0.1%        -0.04      -1.3%
15   Russia                  2.23      2.47        -0.06       -2.8%        -0.12      -5.0%
16   Spain                   1.77      1.86        -0.24      -13.3%        -0.36     -19.2%
17   Denmark                 1.65      1.71        -0.15       -8.9%        -0.26     -15.3%
18   Ukraine                 1.37      1.48        -0.16      -11.5%        -0.27     -18.4%
19   South Korea             1.25      1.31        -0.25      -19.6%        -0.40     -30.7%
20   South Africa            1.22      1.26        -0.17      -14.2%        -0.26     -20.9%
21   Taiwan                  1.08      1.16        -0.27      -25.2%        -0.40     -34.0%
22   Singapore               1.05      1.21        -0.17      -16.1%        -0.29     -23.8%
23   Ireland                 1.02      1.05        -0.09       -9.0%        -0.14     -13.0%
24   Belgium                 1.01      1.03        -0.19      -18.8%        -0.31     -29.5%
25   India                   0.97      0.93        -0.20      -20.6%        -0.28     -30.2%
26   Japan                   0.92      0.99        -0.25      -26.8%        -0.38     -38.3%
27   United Kingdom          0.84      0.90        -0.19      -22.2%        -0.30     -33.1%
28   Italy                   0.78      0.77        -0.27      -34.5%        -0.37     -48.1%
29   Papua New Guinea        0.73      0.78        -0.02       -2.4%        -0.04      -5.1%
30   Ethiopia                0.69      0.86        -0.01       -2.1%        -0.04      -4.9%
31   Philippines             0.67      0.64        -0.09      -13.8%        -0.13     -20.9%
32   Solomon Is              0.60      0.64        -0.01       -2.3%        -0.02      -3.6%
33   Nigeria                 0.57      0.61        -0.06      -10.4%        -0.11     -18.1%
34   Myanmar                 0.52      0.58        -0.05       -8.8%        -0.08     -14.7%
35   Peru                    0.46      0.47        -0.05      -10.6%        -0.08     -16.5%
36   Laos,PDR                0.46      0.50        -0.01       -1.9%        -0.01      -2.1%
37   Zimbabwe                0.41      0.47        -0.05      -11.7%        -0.09     -20.0%
                                          43


38   Cameroon               0.39   0.41        -0.03    -6.6%   -0.04   -10.7%
39   Norway                 0.39   0.41        -0.03    -7.3%   -0.05   -11.4%
40   Mozambique             0.34   0.39        -0.04   -12.7%   -0.09   -21.9%
41   Cuba                   0.33   0.35        -0.03    -8.4%   -0.06   -17.3%
42   Sudan                  0.33   0.34        -0.04   -13.0%   -0.07   -20.5%
43   Mongolia               0.31   0.32        -0.01    -1.6%   -0.01    -2.1%
44   Congo                  0.30   0.33        -0.02    -5.2%   -0.04   -11.4%
45   Eq. Guinea             0.30   0.31         0.00    -1.4%   -0.01    -3.5%
46   Pakistan               0.28   0.30        -0.06   -20.7%   -0.12   -39.0%
47   Finland                0.28   0.28        -0.05   -17.7%   -0.06   -20.9%
48   Poland                 0.26   0.27        -0.08   -32.0%   -0.11   -40.7%
49   Ecuador                0.25   0.26        -0.03   -13.2%   -0.07   -27.1%
50   Mexico                 0.24   0.23        -0.08   -32.3%   -0.09   -37.1%
51   Kazakhstan             0.22   0.23        -0.01    -4.7%   -0.02    -7.8%
52   Switzerland            0.21   0.21        -0.04   -19.9%   -0.07   -31.5%
53   Tanzania               0.20   0.21        -0.05   -23.7%   -0.09   -41.1%
54   Senegal                0.20   0.21        -0.06   -31.9%   -0.09   -45.4%
55   Iran                   0.17   0.17        -0.04   -25.1%   -0.06   -36.4%
56   Korea,DPR              0.16   0.16        -0.01    -6.4%   -0.02   -11.6%
57   Israel                 0.15   0.16        -0.06   -41.1%   -0.09   -56.0%
58   Slovenia               0.15   0.16        -0.05   -35.0%   -0.07   -44.1%
59   Ghana                  0.14   0.14        -0.04   -28.4%   -0.05   -36.4%
60   Turkey                 0.14   0.13        -0.05   -37.6%   -0.06   -47.2%
61   Democratic Kampuchea   0.13   0.12        -0.03   -25.3%   -0.05   -42.3%
62   Mali                   0.13   0.16        -0.04   -28.1%   -0.07   -46.1%
63   Romania                0.12   0.11        -0.03   -26.5%   -0.03   -31.4%
64   United Arab Emirates   0.12   0.12        -0.06   -51.1%   -0.07   -60.5%
65   Sri Lanka              0.11   0.11        -0.02   -13.9%   -0.03   -28.8%
66   ROW                    0.11   0.10        -0.05   -45.1%   -0.06   -55.4%
67   Uzbekistan             0.10   0.10        -0.05   -49.1%   -0.06   -57.8%
68   Sweden                 0.10   0.11         0.00    -4.8%   -0.01    -5.9%
69   Egypt                  0.10   0.09        -0.02   -20.5%   -0.02   -27.3%
70   Gabon                  0.08   0.05        -0.01   -11.4%   -0.01   -23.4%
71   Greece                 0.08   0.08        -0.05   -62.6%   -0.05   -65.7%
72   Togo                   0.07   0.08        -0.03   -37.1%   -0.05   -59.2%
73   Bangladesh             0.07   0.08        -0.03   -45.0%   -0.05   -67.1%
74   Benin                  0.06   0.06        -0.02   -26.6%   -0.03   -45.7%
75   Guatemala              0.04   0.03        -0.03   -68.7%   -0.03   -89.7%
76   Cote d'lvoire          0.02   0.01        -0.01   -81.4%   -0.01   -76.5%
77   Latvia                 0.01   0.01        -0.01   -74.0%   -0.01   -87.9%
                                              44


               Table A4: Forecasted China Imports from Partner Countries,
                         with Average 10 year growth, 2007-2017

                              No Subsidy            Subsidy=12%            Subsidy=23%
                             2020      2021    Difference from 2020    Difference from 2021
     Country                  Billion US$      billion US$ Percent    billion US$    Percent
     ROW                    147.08   164.56        -2.88     -2.0%       -6.11       -3.7%
 1   Brazil                 36.25     41.69        -0.05     -0.1%       -0.15       -0.4%
 2   Australia              11.32     12.19        -0.24     -2.1%       -0.55       -4.5%
 3   Thailand               10.03     11.12        -0.14     -1.4%       -0.35       -3.1%
 4   Canada                  8.60      9.76        -0.11     -1.3%       -0.22       -2.2%
 5   New Zealand             7.65      8.56        -0.11     -1.4%       -0.28       -3.3%
 6   Argentina               6.40      7.81        -0.01     -0.1%       -0.04       -0.5%
 7   Indonesia               6.11      6.40        -0.10     -1.7%       -0.20       -3.1%
 8   Malaysia                5.17      5.44        -0.14     -2.7%       -0.32       -5.8%
 9   France                  4.38      4.82        -0.11     -2.5%       -0.25       -5.3%
10   Netherlands             3.95      4.36        -0.10     -2.6%       -0.23       -5.2%
11   Uruguay                 3.70      4.62         0.00      0.1%       -0.01       -0.3%
12   Germany                 3.26      3.65        -0.12     -3.7%       -0.24       -6.7%
13   Chile                   3.03      3.27        -0.07     -2.4%       -0.18       -5.5%
14   Russia                  2.99      3.59        -0.02     -0.8%       -0.07       -1.8%
15   Vietnam                 2.83      2.87        -0.06     -2.2%       -0.09       -3.2%
16   Spain                   2.07      2.31        -0.08     -4.0%       -0.17       -7.2%
17   Denmark                 1.81      1.91        -0.06     -3.2%       -0.12       -6.3%
18   Ukraine                 1.74      2.04        -0.07     -3.8%       -0.15       -7.2%
19   Singapore               1.52      1.87        -0.06     -3.9%       -0.14       -7.6%
20   South Korea             1.39      1.43        -0.09     -6.2%       -0.18      -12.9%
21   South Africa            1.36      1.53        -0.06     -4.2%       -0.11       -7.3%
22   Taiwan                  1.29      1.42        -0.10     -7.5%       -0.16      -11.5%
23   Ethiopia                1.22      1.63         0.00     -0.3%       -0.02       -1.1%
24   Japan                   1.12      1.25        -0.09     -7.8%       -0.15      -12.2%
25   Ireland                 1.11      1.17        -0.03     -2.4%       -0.05       -3.9%
26   Belgium                 1.06      1.08        -0.06     -6.0%       -0.13      -11.6%
27   United Kingdom          1.02      1.13        -0.06     -6.3%       -0.15      -13.4%
28   India                   0.88      0.94        -0.05     -6.2%       -0.11      -11.7%
29   Papua New Guinea        0.87      0.97        -0.01     -0.8%       -0.02       -1.8%
30   Italy                   0.73      0.67        -0.09    -12.5%       -0.14      -20.1%
31   Solomon Is              0.73      0.82         0.00     -0.5%       -0.01       -1.4%
32   Myanmar                 0.69      0.80        -0.02     -2.9%       -0.05       -6.3%
33   Nigeria                 0.64      0.65        -0.03     -4.0%       -0.05       -7.3%
34   Philippines             0.60      0.57        -0.03     -4.3%       -0.05       -8.6%
35   Zimbabwe                0.59      0.72        -0.02     -3.8%       -0.06       -8.2%
36   Laos,PDR                0.58      0.68         0.00     -0.4%       -0.01       -0.8%
37   Peru                    0.50      0.52        -0.02     -3.2%       -0.03       -5.9%
                                              45


38   Mozambique              0.49     0.59         -0.02     -4.0%   -0.05      -7.7%
39   Cameroon                0.45     0.48         -0.01     -2.4%   -0.02      -4.4%
40   Norway                  0.44     0.48         -0.01     -1.9%   -0.02      -3.5%
41   Cuba                    0.39     0.42         -0.01     -3.0%   -0.04      -8.4%
42   Congo                   0.38     0.42         -0.02     -4.1%   -0.04      -9.5%
43   Sudan                   0.38     0.42         -0.01     -1.9%   -0.02      -5.7%
44   Mongolia                0.34     0.36          0.00     -0.5%    0.00      -1.1%
45   Eq. Guinea              0.32     0.38         -0.02     -7.7%   -0.05     -12.0%
46   Poland                  0.32     0.32          0.00     -0.7%   -0.01      -2.5%
47   Pakistan                0.31     0.30         -0.02     -7.3%   -0.06     -19.4%
48   Finland                 0.28     0.28         -0.02     -6.3%   -0.02      -6.6%
49   Ecuador                 0.26     0.25         -0.01     -5.2%   -0.04     -15.5%
50   Kazakhstan              0.25     0.28          0.00     -1.4%   -0.01      -3.0%
51   Mexico                  0.23     0.25         -0.02     -9.2%   -0.03     -11.5%
52   Senegal                 0.23     0.23         -0.02     -7.7%   -0.05     -20.3%
53   Switzerland             0.21     0.27         -0.02     -7.2%   -0.04     -14.6%
54   Mali                    0.21     0.22         -0.01     -6.3%   -0.02      -8.9%
55   Tanzania                0.20     0.17         -0.03    -13.1%   -0.04     -21.7%
56   Iran                    0.19     0.20         -0.01     -6.5%   -0.03     -15.6%
57   Israel                  0.19     0.22         -0.02     -9.3%   -0.03     -11.4%
58   Korea,DPR               0.17     0.16          0.00     -2.4%   -0.01      -4.8%
59   Slovenia                0.16     0.17         -0.02    -12.9%   -0.05     -28.8%
60   Romania                 0.13     0.14         -0.01     -5.8%   -0.02     -13.0%
61   Ghana                   0.12     0.13         -0.01    -12.0%   -0.02     -18.1%
62   United Arab Emirates    0.12     0.13         -0.01    -11.8%   -0.02     -13.7%
63   Turkey                  0.12     0.11         -0.01     -5.2%   -0.02     -16.5%
64   ROW                     0.12     0.10         -0.01     -9.8%   -0.01     -10.6%
65   Uzbekistan              0.11     0.12          0.00     -1.4%    0.00      -0.4%
66   Sweden                  0.10     0.11         -0.01    -12.7%   -0.02     -15.9%
67   Democratic Kampuchea    0.10     0.06         -0.01    -13.1%   -0.02     -41.7%
68   Sri Lanka               0.10     0.09         -0.01    -14.9%   -0.01     -13.3%
69   Greece                  0.09     0.10         -0.01    -15.7%   -0.03     -25.3%
70   Togo                    0.08     0.07         -0.01    -15.5%   -0.02     -27.2%
71   Bangladesh              0.08     0.06          0.00     -5.3%   -0.01      -8.9%
72   Egypt                   0.08     0.06         -0.01    -14.4%   -0.02     -26.3%
73   Gabon                   0.07     0.10          0.00     -2.9%   -0.01      -6.4%
74   Benin                   0.05     0.04         -0.01    -11.8%   -0.01     -18.6%
75   Guatemala               0.02     0.02         -0.01    -27.4%   -0.01     -48.3%
76   Cote d'lvoire           0.01     0.01         < 0.01   -35.4%   < 0.01     -4.9%
77   Latvia                 < 0.01   < 0.01        < 0.01   -37.0%   < 0.01   -100.7%
                                              46



      Table A5: Forecast of China's Import Demand for Coarse Grains (except corn),
                                 Zero growth from 2017

                          No Subsidy         Subsidy=42%                 Subsidy=59%
                          2020 & 21      Difference from 2020       Difference from 2021
         Country          Million US$    Million US$   Percent     Million US$    Percent
    United States            918.2           117.7        12.8%        228.0           24.8%
    ROW                     2,814.3         -172.8        -6.1%       -242.0           -8.6%
    Australia               1,391.0         -143.6       -10.3%       -228.8          -16.4%
    Canada                   324.6           -71.8       -22.1%       -121.2          -37.3%
    Ukraine                  129.1           -39.4       -30.5%        -71.1          -55.1%
    France                   47.3            -31.7       -67.0%        -44.8          -94.7%
    Denmark                   1.5             -1.5      -100.0%         -1.5         -100.0%
    Peru                      0.7             -0.7      -100.0%         -0.7         -100.0%
    Myanmar                   0.5             -0.4       -76.1%         -0.5         -100.0%
    Germany                   0.3             -0.3      -100.0%         -0.3         -100.0%
    Spain                     0.2             -0.2      -100.0%         -0.2         -100.0%
    United Kingdom            0.2             -0.2      -100.0%         -0.2         -100.0%
    Korea Rep                 0.2             -0.2      -100.0%         -0.2         -100.0%
    Malaysia                  0.2             -0.2      -100.0%         -0.2         -100.0%
    Japan                     0.2             -0.2      -100.0%         -0.2         -100.0%
    Chile                     0.1             -0.1      -100.0%         -0.1         -100.0%
    New Zealand               0.1             -0.1      -100.0%         -0.1         -100.0%

Note: Only countries with 2017 exports to China greater than $50,000 are reported.
                                              47


    Table A6: Forecast of China's Import Demand for Cotton, Zero Growth from 2017
                         No Subsidy             Subsidy=42%                 Subsidy=59%
                         2020 & 2021        Difference from 2020        Difference from 2021
 Country                 Million US$    Million US$       Percent      Million US$ Percent
 United States              975.3          278.3           28.5%          429.3        44.0%
 ROW                       1,234.6        -357.8          -29.0%         -536.6       -43.5%
 Australia                   480           -63.4           -13.2%         -103.9      -21.6%
 India                      216.3          -43.7           -20.2%           -79       -36.5%
 Brazil                      124            -42            -33.9%          -68.4      -55.2%
 Iran                       103.6          -28.5           -27.6%          -53.2      -51.4%
 Uzbekistan                  68.7           -8.1           -11.8%           -9.6      -14.1%
 Benin                       61.9          -27.2           -43.9%          -49.6      -80.1%
 Sudan                       23.8           -14            -58.8%          -23.8     -100.0%
 Togo                        23.1          -14.5           -62.9%          -22.9      -99.0%
 Cote d'lvoire               17.8          -15.7           -88.3%          -17.5      -98.7%
 Greece                      17.4          -17.4          -100.0%          -17.4     -100.0%
 Mexico                      17.3          -12.9           -74.8%          -17.3     -100.0%
 Turkey                      16.7          -15.9           -95.3%          -16.7     -100.0%
 Israel                      12.1          -11.4           -94.6%          -11.7      -97.3%
 Cameroon                    10.5           -8.8           -83.9%           -8.9      -84.3%
 Egypt                        7.9           -7.8           -99.3%           -7.9     -100.0%
 Kazakhstan                   5.6           -1.3           -23.7%           -1.5      -26.4%
 South Africa                 5.4           -3.2           -59.8%           -4.7      -85.6%
 Malaysia                     4.8           -4.8          -100.0%           -4.8     -100.0%
 United Arab Emirates         3.9           -3.9          -100.0%           -3.9     -100.0%
 Italy                        1.5           -0.8           -53.6%           -1.5     -100.0%
 Canada                       1.4           -1.4          -100.0%           -1.4     -100.0%
 Zimbabwe                     1.4           -1.4          -100.0%           -1.4     -100.0%
 Russia                       1.2           -1.2          -100.0%           -1.2     -100.0%
 Pakistan                     1.2           -1.2          -100.0%           -1.2     -100.0%
 Spain                         1             -1           -100.0%            -1      -100.0%
 Korea Rep                    0.9           -0.9          -100.0%           -0.9     -100.0%
 Senegal                      0.9           -0.9          -100.0%           -0.9     -100.0%
 Vietnam                      0.8           -0.8          -100.0%           -0.8     -100.0%
 Singapore                    0.8           -0.8          -100.0%           -0.8     -100.0%
 Tanzania                     0.7           -0.7          -100.0%           -0.7     -100.0%
 Nigeria                      0.6           -0.6          -100.0%           -0.6     -100.0%
 Argentina                    0.5           -0.5          -100.0%           -0.5     -100.0%
 Taiwan                       0.5           -0.5          -100.0%           -0.5     -100.0%
 Mozambique                   0.5           -0.5          -100.0%           -0.5     -100.0%
 Belgium                      0.2           -0.2          -100.0%           -0.2     -100.0%
Note: Only countries with 2017 exports to China greater than $50,000 are reported.
                                              48


     Table A7: Forecast of China's Import Demand for Pork, Zero Growth from 2017


                          No Subsidy             Subsidy=42%                Subsidy=59%
                          2020 & 2021        Difference from 2020      Difference from 2021
Country                   Million US$       Million US$ Percent       Million US$    Percent
United States                535.5             308.6         57.6%       476.7         89.0%
ROW                         3,155.3           -510.9        -16.2%      -875.9        -27.8%
Spain                        645.6             -55.2         -8.6%      -113.9        -17.6%
Germany                      607.3             -51.8         -8.5%      -101.3        -16.7%
Canada                       456.9             -57.7        -12.6%      -113.6        -24.9%
Denmark                      400.1              -49         -12.2%       -81.3        -20.3%
Netherlands                  311.5             -53.2        -17.1%       -87.2        -28.0%
France                       228.3             -53.6        -23.5%       -86.2        -37.8%
Brazil                       112.5             -42.5        -37.8%        -65         -57.8%
Chile                        100.5              -31         -30.9%       -51.9        -51.7%
Ireland                       98.1             -37.9        -38.6%       -55.7        -56.7%
United Kingdom                96.1             -33.4        -34.8%       -54.4        -56.6%
Belgium                       38.9             -20.2        -51.8%       -24.3        -62.6%
Slovenia                      37.3             -13.7        -36.9%       -28.2        -75.7%
Romania                        14               -3.4        -24.6%        -4.7        -33.8%
Mexico                         3.2              -3.1        -97.6%        -3.1        -97.6%
Italy                          2.8              -2.8       -100.0%        -2.8       -100.0%
Finland                        2.0              -2.0       -100.0%        -2.0       -100.0%
Korea Rep                      0.1              -0.1       -100.0%        -0.1       -100.0%
Cote d'lvoire                  0.1              -0.1       -100.0%        -0.1       -100.0%
Note: Only countries with 2017 exports to China greater than $50,000 are reported.
                                           49


Table A8: Forecast of China's Import Demand for Beef, Zero Growth from 2017
                 No Subsidy        Subsidy=42%                 Subsidy=59%
                 2020 & 2021   Difference from 2020        Difference from 2021
 Country         Million US$   Million US$ Percent        Million US$     Percent
 United States       25.1          240.4         956.4%       370        1,472.4%
 ROW               3,091.7        -349.9         -11.3%     -626.5        -20.3%
 Brazil             870.4           -70           -8.0%     -140.9        -16.2%
 Uruguay            683.9          -62.5          -9.1%     -103.5        -15.1%
 Australia          672.7          -69.4         -10.3%     -138.6        -20.6%
 New Zealand        396.2          -59.7         -15.1%     -109.7        -27.7%
 Argentina          369.9          -45.8         -12.4%      -60.6        -16.4%
 Canada              79.3          -30.2         -38.1%      -54.2        -68.4%
 Chile               14.6           -8.3         -56.8%      -14.2        -97.1%
 South Africa         4.3           -3.5         -80.3%       -4.3       -100.0%
 Mexico               0.2           -0.2        -100.0%       -0.2       -100.0%
 Korea Rep            0.1           -0.1        -100.0%       -0.1       -100.0%
 Ukraine              0.1           -0.1        -100.0%       -0.1       -100.0%
 Note: Only countries with 2017 exports to China greater than $50,000 are reported.
                                               50


                    Table A9: Impact on United States, Zero Growth from 2017,
                                   Complete list of Products

                                No Subsidy          Subsidy=42%               Subsidy=59%
                                2020 & 21       Difference from 2020      Difference from 2021
      Agricultural Product      Million US$   Million US$     Percent   Million US$     Percent
Soybeans                         13858.8         289.2           2.1%      529.7         3.8%
Forest Products                   2080.7          359           17.3%      558.7         26.9%
Cotton                             975.3         278.3          28.5%      429.3         44.0%
Coarse Grains (ex. corn)           918.2         117.7          12.8%       228          24.8%
Hides & Skins                      898.7         309.6          34.5%      478.7         53.3%
Fish Products                      607.3         305.7          50.3%      473.8         78.0%
Pork & Pork Products               535.5         308.6          57.6%      476.7         89.0%
Dairy Products                     529.9         322.4          60.8%      499.1         94.2%
Prepared Foods                      426          333.7          78.3%      517.4        121.4%
Fresh Fruit                        400.9         299.1          74.6%      463.2        115.5%
Wheat                              390.4         210.6          53.9%      316.4         81.0%
Hay                                387.3         241.8          62.4%      367.8         95.0%
Other Intermediate Products         366          336.1          91.8%      521.1        142.4%
Tobacco                            166.7         139.5          83.7%      212.9        127.7%
Processed Fruit                    155.5         329.4         211.8%      510.4        328.3%
Corn                               147.5         127.6          86.5%      186.2        126.2%
Tree Nuts                          144.8          305          210.6%      470.8        325.1%
Planting Seeds                     140.7         220.2         156.5%      341.5        242.7%
Processed Vegetables                126           313          248.5%      484.2        384.4%
Essential Oils                      123          314.7         255.8%      486.5        395.4%
Feeds & Fodders NESOI              120.8         304.7         252.3%      471.3        390.3%
Wine & Beer                         80.7         331.1         410.5%      513.5        636.6%
Soybean Oil                         70.4         229.5         326.2%      351.1        499.0%
Meat Products NESOI                 69.8         269.6         386.3%      416.7        597.1%
Distillers Grains                   65.2          62.1          95.1%       85.2        130.6%
Peanuts                             59.4          65.2         109.7%       99.1        166.8%
Vegetable Oils NESOI                42.7         323.5         756.8%      501.1        >1,000%
Chocolate & Cocoa Products          25.5         299.4        >1,000%      463.5        >1,000%
Beef & Beef Products                25.1         240.4         956.4%       370         >1,000%
Pulses                              24.7         228.7         924.7%      351.5        >1,000%
Coffee, Roasted and Extracts         20          235.1        >1,000%      364.4        >1,000%
Live Animals                        18.9         271.3        >1,000%      418.6        >1,000%
Condiments & Sauces                 13.8         305.8        >1,000%      473.2        >1,000%
Snack Foods NESOI                   13.6         310.1        >1,000%      480.3        >1,000%
                                                  51


Oilseeds NESOI                       12.7          170.7        >1,000%          267         >1,000%
Fruit & Vegetable Juices             10.9          287.8        >1,000%         445.2        >1,000%
Distilled Spirits                     9.7          226.6        >1,000%         352.6        >1,000%
Sugars & Sweeteners                   7.4          303.2        >1,000%         469.6        >1,000%
Dog & Cat Food                        4.4          159.9        >1,000%         247.2        >1,000%
Nursery Products & Cut Flowers        4.1           296         >1,000%         456.3        >1,000%
Non-Alcoholic Bev.                     3           223.3        >1,000%         346.7        >1,000%
Animal Fats                           2.4          172.6        >1,000%         267.4        >1,000%
Coffee, Unroasted                      1           209.6        >1,000%         324.6        >1,000%
Rubber & Allied Gums                  0.8          157.5        >1,000%         244.3        >1,000%
Tea                                   0.7          198.3        >1,000%         307.9        >1,000%
Other Bulk Commodities                0.6          212.7        >1,000%         330.2        >1,000%
Fresh Vegetables                      0.5          148.7        >1,000%         229.9        >1,000%
Spices                                0.4          229.2        >1,000%         352.9        >1,000%
Ethanol                               0.3          125.3        >1,000%         190.5        >1,000%
Eggs & Products                       0.3          112.4        >1,000%         176.4        >1,000%
Soybean meal                          0.2           93.8        >1,000%         146.5        >1,000%
Biodiesel & Blends > B30              0.1           43.9        >1,000%          65.6        >1,000%
Poultry Meat & Prods. (ex. eggs)      0.1           44.5        >1,000%          69.2        >1,000%
Rice                                  0.1          112.8        >1,000%         176.1        >1,000%
Oilseed Meal/Cake (ex. soybean)      < 0.1          13.9        >1,000%          21.1        >1,000%
Cocoa Beans                          < 0.1          11.0        >1,000%          16.3        >1,000%
Palm Oil                             < 0.1          34.7        >1,000%          54.8        >1,000%

   Note: All products that were exported to China in 2017 are reported, with < 0.1 indicating that
   export sales or the drop in exports was less than $50,000.
                                             52


                   Table A10: Impact on Brazil, Zero Growth from 2017

                               No Subsidy         Subsidy=42%              Subsidy=59%
                               2020 & 21      Difference from 2020     Difference from 2021
     Agricultural Product      Million US$   Million US$    Percent   Million US$ Percent
Soybeans                        20873.2         -99.4         -0.5%     -104.4         -0.5%
Poultry Meat & Prods.              873          -38.1         -4.4%      -82.9         -9.5%
Beef & Beef Products              870.4          -70          -8.0%     -140.9        -16.2%
Sugars & Sweeteners               347.9         -37.3        -10.7%      -78.3        -22.5%
Soybean Oil                       267.9         -73.1        -27.3%     -136.1        -50.8%
Tobacco                           263.8         -44.6        -16.9%      -74.8        -28.4%
Cotton                             124           -42         -33.9%      -68.4        -55.2%
Forest Products                   114.2         -31.7        -27.7%      -50.3        -44.1%
Pork & Pork Products              112.5         -42.5        -37.8%       -65         -57.8%
Fruit & Vegetable Juices           74.6         -24.3        -32.6%      -35.9        -48.2%
Vegetable Oils NESOI               38.1         -19.5        -51.3%      -36.1        -94.8%
Processed Fruit                    26.2          -7.2        -27.4%      -12.6        -48.2%
Other Intermediate Products        22.1           -7         -31.9%      -11.7        -52.8%
Feeds & Fodders NESOI              14.7          -9.4        -63.6%      -12.7        -86.3%
Essential Oils                     11.7          -9.5        -81.2%      -11.7       -100.0%
Coffee, Unroasted                  10.9          -8.8        -80.6%      -10.4        -95.9%
Prepared Foods                     10.7          -8.7        -81.4%      -10.7       -100.0%
Other Bulk Commodities             10.5         -10.5       -100.0%      -10.5       -100.0%
Fish Products                       7.9          -1.8        -22.6%       -1.3        -16.7%
Meat Products NESOI                 2.5          -2.5       -100.0%       -2.5       -100.0%
Coffee, Roasted and Extracts        1.4          -1.4       -100.0%       -1.4       -100.0%
Spices                              1.4          -1.4       -100.0%       -1.4       -100.0%
Wine & Beer                         0.8          -0.8       -100.0%       -0.8       -100.0%
Chocolate & Cocoa Products          0.3          -0.3       -100.0%       -0.3       -100.0%
Tree Nuts                           0.2          -0.2       -100.0%       -0.2       -100.0%
Snack Foods NESOI                   0.2          -0.2       -100.0%       -0.2       -100.0%
Nursery Products & Cut
                                   0.2            -0.2     -100.0%       -0.2       -100.0%
Flowers
Hides & Skins                      0.1            -0.1     -100.0%       -0.1       -100.0%
Non-Alcoholic Bev.                 0.1            -0.1     -100.0%       -0.1       -100.0%
Distilled Spirits                  0.1            -0.1     -100.0%       -0.1       -100.0%
Dog & Cat Food                     0.1            -0.1     -100.0%       -0.1       -100.0%
Dairy Products                    < 0.1           < 0.1    -100.0%       < 0.1      -100.0%
Fresh Fruit                       < 0.1           < 0.1    -100.0%       < 0.1      -100.0%
Processed Vegetables              < 0.1           < 0.1    -100.0%       < 0.1      -100.0%
                                               53


 Planting Seeds                     < 0.1           < 0.1     -100.0%        < 0.1      -100.0%
 Rubber & Allied Gums               < 0.1           < 0.1     -100.0%        < 0.1      -100.0%
 Tea                                < 0.1           < 0.1     -100.0%        < 0.1      -100.0%
 Eggs & Products                    < 0.1           < 0.1     -100.0%        < 0.1      -100.0%
 Soybean meal                       < 0.1           < 0.1     -100.0%        < 0.1      -100.0%

Note: All products that were exported from this country to China in 2017 are reported, with the
value "< 0.1" indicating that exports or the drop in exports was less than $50,000. When the
percentage drop in export sales is -100.0%, then country exports became zero under the effective
subsidy to the U.S.
                                             54


                 Table A11: Impact on Australia, Zero Growth from 2017

                               No Subsidy         Subsidy=42%              Subsidy=59%
                               2020 & 2021    Difference from 2020     Difference from 2021
     Agricultural Product      Million US$   Million US$    Percent   Million US$    Percent
Other Intermediate Products      2,062.2        -46.2         -2.2%      -93.4        -4.5%
Coarse Grains (ex. corn)         1,391.0       -143.6        -10.3%     -228.8       -16.4%
Forest Products                   749.9          -37          -4.9%      -82.9       -11.1%
Beef & Beef Products              672.7         -69.4        -10.3%     -138.6       -20.6%
Prepared Foods                    661.1          -42          -6.4%      -71.7       -10.8%
Wine & Beer                       577.4         -49.6         -8.6%      -95.7       -16.6%
Hides & Skins                     491.2         -50.2        -10.2%      -94.5       -19.2%
Cotton                            480.0         -63.4        -13.2%     -103.9       -21.6%
Wheat                             420.6        -124.5        -29.6%     -206.4       -49.1%
Dairy Products                    357.5         -43.4        -12.1%      -80.4       -22.5%
Meat Products NESOI               351.8         -39.2        -11.1%      -59.2       -16.8%
Fresh Fruit                       229.4         -13.6         -5.9%      -28.7       -12.5%
Fish Products                     127.3         -20.4        -16.0%      -36.3       -28.5%
Live Animals                      122.4         -32.8        -26.8%       -44        -35.9%
Oilseeds NESOI                     85.1         -21.7        -25.5%       -42        -49.4%
Hay                                83.6          -52         -62.1%      -64.9       -77.7%
Sugars & Sweeteners                71.3          -18         -25.3%      -21.5       -30.2%
Tree Nuts                          57.7         -15.1        -26.2%      -30.6       -53.0%
Vegetable Oils NESOI               51.2         -25.2        -49.2%      -36.4       -71.2%
Animal Fats                        45.3         -20.7        -45.8%      -32.1       -70.9%
Rapeseed                           25.8          -6.6        -25.7%       -16        -62.2%
Pulses                             16.5         -12.2        -73.9%      -16.3       -99.0%
Snack Foods NESOI                  10.3          -5.3        -52.0%       -7.8       -75.6%
Oilseed Meal/Cake (ex.
                                   6              -5.8      -96.8%        -6        -100.0%
soybean)
Chocolate & Cocoa Products         5.3            -3.5      -66.2%       -4.5        -85.8%
Processed Fruit                    5.1            -5.1     -100.0%       -5.1       -100.0%
Feeds & Fodders NESOI              4.3            -4.3     -100.0%       -4.3       -100.0%
Fruit & Vegetable Juices           4.3            -4.2      -97.9%       -4.3        -99.1%
Essential Oils                     3.8            -3.8     -100.0%       -3.8       -100.0%
Planting Seeds                     2.8            -1.1      -40.6%       -2.1        -74.3%
Coffee, Roasted and Extracts       1.9            -1.9     -100.0%       -1.9       -100.0%
Condiments & Sauces                1.9            -1.9     -100.0%       -1.9       -100.0%
Dog & Cat Food                     1.6            -1.6     -100.0%       -1.6       -100.0%
                                           55


 Non-Alcoholic Bev. (ex. juices,
                                   1.4          -1.4    -100.0%   -1.4    -100.0%
 coffee, tea)
 Distilled Spirits                 1.2          -1.2    -100.0%   -1.2    -100.0%
 Nursery Products & Cut
                                   1.2          -1.2    -100.0%   -1.2    -100.0%
 Flowers
 Spices                             0.6         -0.6    -100.0%   -0.6    -100.0%
 Processed Vegetables               0.3         -0.3    -100.0%   -0.3    -100.0%
 Tea                                0.3         -0.3    -100.0%   -0.3    -100.0%
 Eggs & Products                    0.1         -0.1    -100.0%   -0.1    -100.0%
 Coffee, Unroasted                  0.1         -0.1    -100.0%   -0.1    -100.0%
 Rice                               0.1         -0.1    -100.0%   -0.1    -100.0%
 Pork & Pork Products              < 0.1        < 0.1   -100.0%   < 0.1   -100.0%
 Ethanol                           < 0.1        < 0.1   -100.0%   < 0.1   -100.0%
 Other Bulk Commodities            < 0.1        < 0.1   -100.0%   < 0.1   -100.0%
 Fresh Vegetables                  < 0.1        < 0.1   -100.0%   < 0.1   -100.0%

See notes to Table A10.
                                                 56


                    Table A12: Impact on Thailand, Zero Growth from 2017

                                   No Subsidy        Subsidy=42%              Subsidy=59%
                                   2020 & 2021   Difference from 2020     Difference from 2021
      Agricultural Product         Million US$   Million US$ Percent     Million US$    Percent
Rubber & Allied Gums                  1881.5        -45.2        -2.4%     -102.3         -5.4%
Forest Products                       1385.5        -22.7        -1.6%      -61.5         -4.4%
Processed Vegetables                  1174.2        -38.5        -3.3%      -76.7         -6.5%
Fresh Fruit                           1004.7         -24         -2.4%      -44.1         -4.4%
Other Intermediate Products            687.1        -48.8        -7.1%     -108.1        -15.7%
Rice                                   547.3        -34.6        -6.3%      -70.4        -12.9%
Processed Fruit                        237.7        -28.8       -12.1%      -50.4        -21.2%
Prepared Foods                         174.5        -28.9       -16.6%      -53.4        -30.6%
Sugars & Sweeteners                    140.7         -40        -28.4%      -73.2        -52.0%
Fish Products                          131.7        -24.4       -18.6%      -47.3        -35.9%
Tree Nuts                               63          -23.7       -37.7%      -40.4        -64.1%
Non-Alcoholic Bev.                     30.4         -14.4       -47.3%      -25.4        -83.7%
Dog & Cat Food                         27.7         -20.6       -74.6%      -21.5        -77.6%
Snack Foods NESOI                      24.8         -15.8       -63.6%       -21         -84.9%
Planting Seeds                         20.3         -12.5       -61.5%      -20.2        -99.7%
Condiments & Sauces                    17.4         -11.7       -67.3%      -15.5        -89.5%
Nursery Products & Cut Flowers         17.1          -3.5       -20.4%       -3.9        -22.8%
Feeds & Fodders NESOI                  16.1         -16.1      -100.0%      -16.1       -100.0%
Other Bulk Commodities                 15.6         -13.8       -88.5%      -14.2        -91.2%
Coffee, Roasted and Extracts           14.7          -5.3       -36.4%       -9.6        -65.4%
Vegetable Oils NESOI                    7.8          -7.8      -100.0%       -7.8       -100.0%
Fruit & Vegetable Juices                7.8          -7.8       -99.9%       -7.8        -99.9%
Pulses                                   6           -5.8       -96.9%        -6        -100.0%
Palm Oil                                4.8          -3.8       -79.8%       -4.1        -86.5%
Dairy Products                          3.1           -3        -97.1%       -3.1       -100.0%
Chocolate & Cocoa Products              1.2          -1.2      -100.0%       -1.2       -100.0%
Essential Oils                           1            -1       -100.0%        -1        -100.0%
Wine & Beer                             0.7          -0.7      -100.0%       -0.7       -100.0%
Meat Products NESOI                     0.5          -0.5      -100.0%       -0.5       -100.0%
Tea                                     0.5          -0.5      -100.0%       -0.5       -100.0%
Spices                                  0.5          -0.5      -100.0%       -0.5       -100.0%
Distillers Grains                      < 0.1        < 0.1      -100.0%      < 0.1       -100.0%
Pork & Pork Products                   < 0.1        < 0.1      -100.0%      < 0.1       -100.0%
Poultry Meat & Prods. (ex. eggs)       < 0.1        < 0.1      -100.0%      < 0.1       -100.0%
Live Animals                           < 0.1        < 0.1      -100.0%      < 0.1       -100.0%
                                  57


Oilseeds NESOI            < 0.1        < 0.1   -100.0%   < 0.1   -100.0%
Distilled Spirits         < 0.1        < 0.1   -100.0%   < 0.1   -100.0%
Beef & Beef Products      < 0.1        < 0.1   -100.0%   < 0.1   -100.0%
Animal Fats               < 0.1        < 0.1   -100.0%   < 0.1   -100.0%
Eggs & Products           < 0.1        < 0.1   -100.0%   < 0.1   -100.0%
Coffee, Unroasted         < 0.1        < 0.1   -100.0%   < 0.1   -100.0%
Soybean meal              < 0.1        < 0.1   -100.0%   < 0.1   -100.0%
Fresh Vegetables          < 0.1        < 0.1   -100.0%   < 0.1   -100.0%

See notes to Table A10.
                                                58


                   Table A13: Impact on Canada, Zero Growth from 2017
                                  No Subsidy         Subsidy=42%              Subsidy=59%
                                  2020 & 2021    Difference from 2020     Difference from 2021
      Agricultural Product        Million US$   Million US$ Percent      Million US$    Percent
Rapeseed                            2,035.10      -239.6        -11.8%     -320.1        -15.7%
Soybeans                              886.3          2.7          0.3%       46.1          5.2%
Vegetable Oils NESOI                  551.9        -28.8         -5.2%      -52.4         -9.5%
Pork & Pork Products                  456.9        -57.7        -12.6%     -113.6        -24.9%
Fish Products                         446.5        -32.9         -7.4%      -69.8        -15.6%
Pulses                                372.5         -56         -15.0%      -98.1        -26.3%
Coarse Grains (ex. corn)              324.6        -71.8        -22.1%     -121.2        -37.3%
Oilseed Meal/Cake (ex. soybean)       289.1        -21.6         -7.5%      -49.3        -17.1%
Hides & Skins                         222.9        -53.2        -23.9%     -106.9        -48.0%
Forest Products                       167.3        -23.2        -13.9%       -56         -33.4%
Wheat                                 157.7        -74.5        -47.2%     -103.1        -65.4%
Oilseeds NESOI                        122.5         -9.3         -7.6%      -16.5        -13.5%
Beef & Beef Products                   79.3        -30.2        -38.1%      -54.2        -68.4%
Other Intermediate Products            38.9        -24.8        -63.9%      -33.4        -85.9%
Prepared Foods                          32         -15.9        -49.7%      -30.4        -94.9%
Fresh Fruit                             27         -13.4        -49.4%       -25         -92.5%
Tobacco                                22.3         -1.6         -7.0%        -3         -13.4%
Meat Products NESOI                    20.7        -18.1        -87.5%      -20.7       -100.0%
Planting Seeds                         19.8         -6.8        -34.7%       -8.9        -45.2%
Dairy Products                         19.5        -17.5        -89.5%      -19.3        -98.9%
Processed Fruit                         18         -14.2        -78.8%      -17.8        -98.6%
Hay                                    16.6        -16.6       -100.0%      -16.6       -100.0%
Wine & Beer                            15.4        -13.1        -85.3%      -15.4       -100.0%
Feeds & Fodders NESOI                  8.3          -8.2        -98.3%       -8.3       -100.0%
Animal Fats                            6.8          -6.3        -93.8%       -6.6        -98.0%
Dog & Cat Food                         5.7          -1.9        -33.2%       -4.3        -76.1%
Live Animals                           3.6          -3.6       -100.0%       -3.6       -100.0%
Processed Vegetables                   2.7          -1.1        -42.1%       -1.4        -52.2%
Sugars & Sweeteners                    2.3          -2.3       -100.0%       -2.3       -100.0%
Snack Foods NESOI                        2           -2        -100.0%        -2        -100.0%
Cotton                                 1.4          -1.4       -100.0%       -1.4       -100.0%
Distillers Grains                      1.2          -1.2       -100.0%       -1.2       -100.0%
Essential Oils                           1           -1        -100.0%        -1        -100.0%
Fruit & Vegetable Juices                 1           -1        -100.0%        -1        -100.0%
Distilled Spirits                      0.9          -0.9       -100.0%       -0.9       -100.0%
                                          59


Other Bulk Commodities            0.7          -0.7    -100.0%   -0.7    -100.0%
Chocolate & Cocoa Products        0.6          -0.6    -100.0%   -0.6    -100.0%
Corn                              0.5          -0.4     -80.5%   -0.5    -100.0%
Condiments & Sauces               0.5          -0.5    -100.0%   -0.5    -100.0%
Non-Alcoholic Bev. (ex. juices,
                                  0.1          -0.1    -100.0%   -0.1    -100.0%
coffee, tea)
Coffee, Roasted and Extracts       0.1         -0.1    -100.0%   -0.1    -100.0%
Nursery Products & Cut Flowers     0.1         -0.1    -100.0%   -0.1    -100.0%
Tree Nuts                         < 0.1        < 0.1   -100.0%   < 0.1   -100.0%
Rubber & Allied Gums              < 0.1        < 0.1   -100.0%   < 0.1   -100.0%
Tea                               < 0.1        < 0.1   -100.0%   < 0.1   -100.0%
Eggs & Products                   < 0.1        < 0.1   -100.0%   < 0.1   -100.0%
Coffee, Unroasted                 < 0.1        < 0.1   -100.0%   < 0.1   -100.0%
Rice                              < 0.1        < 0.1   -100.0%   < 0.1   -100.0%
Spices                            < 0.1        < 0.1   -100.0%   < 0.1   -100.0%
Soybean meal                      < 0.1        < 0.1   -100.0%   < 0.1   -100.0%
Fresh Vegetables                  < 0.1        < 0.1   -100.0%   < 0.1   -100.0%

See notes to Table A10.
                                                   60


                        Table A14: Impact on Malaysia, Zero Growth from 2017

                                     No Subsidy          Subsidy=42%             Subsidy=59%
                                     2020 & 21      Difference from 2020     Difference from 2021
         Agricultural Product        Million US$    Million US$ Percent     Million US$ Percent
Rubber & Allied Gums                  1,483.7          -45.9        -3.1%     -103.9        -7.0%
Palm Oil                               1450.0          -74.5        -5.1%     -126.2        -8.7%
Forest Products                         521.9          -20.6        -3.9%       -56        -10.7%
Vegetable Oils NESOI                    154.7          -43.3       -28.0%      -71.2       -46.0%
Prepared Foods                          122.6          -20.9       -17.1%      -41.8       -34.1%
Other Intermediate Products             113.7           -37        -32.6%      -71.6       -63.0%
Chocolate & Cocoa Products               93.0           -28        -30.1%      -44.2       -47.5%
Coffee, Roasted and Extracts             84.7           -25        -29.5%       -37        -43.7%
Snack Foods NESOI                        65.6          -14.9       -22.8%      -30.9       -47.0%
Other Bulk Commodities                   47.6          -24.9       -52.4%      -31.3       -65.8%
Meat Products NESOI                      41.9          -29.5       -70.3%      -34.7       -82.9%
Processed Fruit                          23.8          -14.8       -62.3%       -21        -88.4%
Fish Products                            20.6          -17.5       -84.7%       -20        -97.1%
Non-Alcoholic Bev. (ex. juices,
                                        18.2            -11.2     -61.4%       -18.2      -99.9%
coffee, tea)
Oilseed Meal/Cake (ex. soybean)         17.8            -15.4     -86.7%       -17.8     -100.0%
Spices                                  13.8             -5.2     -37.5%       -10.1      -73.4%
Feeds & Fodders NESOI                   12.3            -10.1     -81.9%       -12.3     -100.0%
Condiments & Sauces                     8.8              -6.9     -78.0%        -8.8     -100.0%
Sugars & Sweeteners                     5.9              -5.9    -100.0%        -5.9     -100.0%
Cotton                                  4.8              -4.8    -100.0%        -4.8     -100.0%
Tree Nuts                               4.6              -4.6    -100.0%        -4.6     -100.0%
Wine & Beer                             4.3              -4.3    -100.0%        -4.3     -100.0%
Fruit & Vegetable Juices                3.7              -1.5     -41.9%        -2.6      -70.2%
Biodiesel & Blends > B30                3.3              -3.3    -100.0%        -3.3     -100.0%
Processed Vegetables                    3.3              -3.3    -100.0%        -3.3     -100.0%
Tea                                     2.6              -2.6    -100.0%        -2.6     -100.0%
Dairy Products                          2.1              -2.1    -100.0%        -2.1     -100.0%
Cocoa Beans                             1.8              -1.8    -100.0%        -1.8     -100.0%
Essential Oils                          1.7              -1.7    -100.0%        -1.7     -100.0%
Fresh Fruit                             1.1              -1.1    -100.0%        -1.1     -100.0%
Live Animals                             1               -0.7     -65.1%         -1      -100.0%
Coarse Grains (ex. corn)                0.2              -0.2    -100.0%        -0.2     -100.0%
Distilled Spirits                       0.2              -0.2    -100.0%        -0.2     -100.0%
Nursery Products & Cut Flowers          0.2              -0.2    -100.0%        -0.2     -100.0%
Soybean Oil                             0.1              -0.1    -100.0%        -0.1     -100.0%
                                       61


Hides & Skins                  < 0.1        < 0.1   -100.0%   < 0.1   -100.0%
Pork & Pork Products           < 0.1        < 0.1   -100.0%   < 0.1   -100.0%
Planting Seeds                 < 0.1        < 0.1   -100.0%   < 0.1   -100.0%
Oilseeds NESOI                 < 0.1        < 0.1   -100.0%   < 0.1   -100.0%
Pulses                         < 0.1        < 0.1   -100.0%   < 0.1   -100.0%
Beef & Beef Products           < 0.1        < 0.1   -100.0%   < 0.1   -100.0%
Eggs & Products                < 0.1        < 0.1   -100.0%   < 0.1   -100.0%
Dog & Cat Food                 < 0.1        < 0.1   -100.0%   < 0.1   -100.0%
Coffee, Unroasted              < 0.1        < 0.1   -100.0%   < 0.1   -100.0%
Rice                           < 0.1        < 0.1   -100.0%   < 0.1   -100.0%
Soybean meal                   < 0.1        < 0.1   -100.0%   < 0.1   -100.0%

     See notes to Table A10.
                                             62


                 Table A15: Impact on Argentina, Zero Growth from 2017
                              No Subsidy         Subsidy=42%              Subsidy=59%
                              2020 & 2021    Difference from 2020     Difference from 2021
    Agricultural Product      Million US$   Million US$    Percent   Million US$    Percent
Soybeans                         2644           -110         -4.2%     -121.5         -4.6%
Beef & Beef Products             369.9         -45.8        -12.4%      -60.6        -16.4%
Fish Products                    150.7         -29.3        -19.5%      -52.1        -34.6%
Poultry Meat & Prods.            113.1         -13.6        -12.0%      -23.1        -20.4%
Tobacco                            77           -4.8         -6.3%       -8.7        -11.3%
Other Intermediate Products       60.4         -21.5        -35.6%      -37.5        -62.1%
Vegetable Oils NESOI              56.9         -19.2        -33.8%      -34.6        -60.8%
Dairy Products                    30.5         -19.6        -64.3%      -25.8        -84.7%
Wine & Beer                       12.1         -11.1        -91.9%      -12.1       -100.0%
Feeds & Fodders NESOI             10.9           -10        -91.8%      -10.9       -100.0%
Planting Seeds                     4.9          -2.2        -44.2%       -3.1        -63.3%
Hides & Skins                      4.3          -4.1        -95.4%       -4.3       -100.0%
Fresh Fruit                        3.2          -3.2       -100.0%       -3.2       -100.0%
Peanuts                             3             -3       -100.0%        -3        -100.0%
Fruit & Vegetable Juices           2.7          -2.7       -100.0%       -2.7       -100.0%
Live Animals                       2.1          -1.8        -87.5%        -2         -98.4%
Forest Products                    1.9          -1.9       -100.0%       -1.9       -100.0%
Prepared Foods                     0.6          -0.3        -55.7%       -0.6       -100.0%
Cotton                             0.5          -0.5       -100.0%       -0.5       -100.0%
Essential Oils                     0.5          -0.5       -100.0%       -0.5       -100.0%
Tea                                0.4          -0.4       -100.0%       -0.4       -100.0%
Snack Foods NESOI                  0.2          -0.2       -100.0%       -0.2       -100.0%
Sugars & Sweeteners                0.2          -0.2       -100.0%       -0.2       -100.0%
Nursery Products                   0.2          -0.2       -100.0%       -0.2       -100.0%
Hay                                0.1          -0.1       -100.0%       -0.1       -100.0%
Processed Fruit                    0.1          -0.1       -100.0%       -0.1       -100.0%
Coarse Grains (ex. corn)         < 0.1         < 0.1          0.0%      < 0.1          0.0%
Pork & Pork Products             < 0.1         < 0.1       -100.0%      < 0.1       -100.0%
Processed Vegetables             < 0.1         < 0.1       -100.0%      < 0.1       -100.0%
Tree Nuts                        < 0.1         < 0.1       -100.0%      < 0.1       -100.0%
Meat Products NESOI              < 0.1         < 0.1       -100.0%      < 0.1       -100.0%
Chocolate & Cocoa Products       < 0.1         < 0.1       -100.0%      < 0.1       -100.0%
Oilseeds NESOI                   < 0.1         < 0.1       -100.0%      < 0.1       -100.0%
Distilled Spirits                < 0.1         < 0.1       -100.0%      < 0.1       -100.0%
Animal Fats                      < 0.1         < 0.1       -100.0%      < 0.1       -100.0%
Other Bulk Commodities           < 0.1         < 0.1       -100.0%      < 0.1       -100.0%

See notes to Table A10.
                                                  63


                        Table A16: Impact on Japan, Zero Growth from 2017
                               No Subsidy           Subsidy=42%              Subsidy=59%
                               2020 & 2021     Difference from 2020     Difference from 2021
    Agricultural Product       Million US$   Million US$     Percent   Million US$     Percent
Fish Products                     107.5          -29         -27.0%       -58.4         -54.3%
Prepared Foods                    103.2         -29.1        -28.2%       -38.2         -37.0%
Other Intermediate Products        62.8         -30.9        -49.2%       -41.7         -66.5%
Planting Seeds                      54          -34.9        -64.6%       -48.1         -89.1%
Nursery Products & Cut
                                  52.4          -15.9        -30.3%       -22.4        -42.7%
Flowers
Snack Foods NESOI                 47.6           -17         -35.6%       -34.4         -72.2%
Essential Oils                    33.4          -20.5        -61.5%       -27.4         -82.1%
Forest Products                   21.4           -10         -46.6%       -15.9         -74.1%
Wine & Beer                       21.3          -11.2        -52.7%       -16.3         -76.8%
Condiments & Sauces               16.6          -14.7        -88.3%       -16.4         -98.3%
Coffee, Roasted and Extracts      14.9          -12.8        -85.8%       -14.9        -100.0%
Vegetable Oils NESOI              14.5           -9.7        -66.9%       -14.2         -98.1%
Distilled Spirits                 11.7           -7.9        -67.9%       -11.7        -100.0%
Non-Alcoholic Bev. (ex.
                                   8.8          -8.6         -97.5%       -8.6         -97.9%
juices, coffee, tea)
Chocolate & Cocoa Products         7.2          -6.4         -88.2%       -7.2         -100.0%
Feeds & Fodders NESOI              5.4          -5.4        -100.0%       -5.4         -100.0%
Tree Nuts                          5.1          -3.4         -66.6%       -3.8          -73.3%
Dairy Products                     4.6          -3.8         -83.2%       -4.6         -100.0%
Processed Fruit                    3.2          -3.2        -100.0%       -3.2         -100.0%
Fruit & Vegetable Juices            3            -3         -100.0%        -3          -100.0%
Fresh Fruit                        2.7          -2.7        -100.0%       -2.7         -100.0%
Sugars & Sweeteners                2.5          -2.4         -95.7%       -2.4          -97.8%
Rubber & Allied Gums               2.3          -2.3        -100.0%       -2.3         -100.0%
Live Animals                       2.2          -2.2        -100.0%       -2.2         -100.0%
Processed Vegetables               1.8          -1.8         -98.6%       -1.8          -98.6%
Tea                                1.8          -1.8        -100.0%       -1.8         -100.0%
Hides & Skins                      1.4          -1.4        -100.0%       -1.4         -100.0%
Rice                               1.3          -1.2         -95.1%       -1.3         -100.0%
Oilseeds NESOI                     1.1          -1.1        -100.0%       -1.1         -100.0%
Poultry Meat & Prods.              0.6          -0.6        -100.0%       -0.6         -100.0%
Spices                             0.5          -0.4         -92.6%       -0.5         -100.0%
Ethanol                            0.3          -0.3        -100.0%       -0.3         -100.0%
Dog & Cat Food                     0.3          -0.3        -100.0%       -0.3         -100.0%
Coarse Grains (ex. corn)           0.2          -0.2        -100.0%       -0.2         -100.0%
                                      64


Meat Products NESOI          0.2    -0.2    -100.0%   -0.2    -100.0%
Coffee, Unroasted            0.2    -0.2    -100.0%   -0.2    -100.0%
Biodiesel & Blends > B30     0.1    -0.1    -100.0%   -0.1    -100.0%
Animal Fats                  0.1    -0.1    -100.0%   -0.1    -100.0%
Eggs & Products              0.1    -0.1    -100.0%   -0.1    -100.0%
Other Bulk Commodities       0.1    -0.1    -100.0%   -0.1    -100.0%
Soybeans                    < 0.1   12.3     >100%    18.8     >100%
Cotton                      < 0.1   < 0.1   -100.0%   < 0.1   -100.0%
Pork & Pork Products        < 0.1   < 0.1   -100.0%   < 0.1   -100.0%
Hay                         < 0.1   < 0.1   -100.0%   < 0.1   -100.0%
Tobacco                     < 0.1   < 0.1   -100.0%   < 0.1   -100.0%
Soybean Oil                 < 0.1   < 0.1   -100.0%   < 0.1   -100.0%
Peanuts                     < 0.1   < 0.1   -100.0%   < 0.1   -100.0%
Pulses                      < 0.1   < 0.1    -12.2%   < 0.1    -16.2%
Beef & Beef Products        < 0.1   < 0.1   -100.0%   < 0.1   -100.0%
Oilseed Meal/Cake (ex.
                            < 0.1   < 0.1   -100.0%   < 0.1   -100.0%
soybean)
Soybean meal                < 0.1   < 0.1   -100.0%   < 0.1   -100.0%
Palm Oil                    < 0.1   < 0.1   -100.0%   < 0.1   -100.0%

  See notes to Table A10.
