                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     DEFAULT OPTIONS AND INSURANCE DEMAND

                                      Peter John Robinson
                                      W.J. Wouter Botzen
                                      Howard Kunreuther
                                      Shereen J. Chaudhry

                                      Working Paper 27381
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27381


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2020




This study received financial support from the Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research
(NWO) VIDI Grant No. 452.14.005 and Alfred P. Sloan Foundation Grant No. G-2018-11100.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Peter John Robinson, W.J. Wouter Botzen, Howard Kunreuther, and Shereen J.
Chaudhry. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
Default Options and Insurance Demand
Peter John Robinson, W.J. Wouter Botzen, Howard Kunreuther, and Shereen J. Chaudhry
NBER Working Paper No. 27381
June 2020
JEL No. D1

                                         ABSTRACT

Default options may provide a low-cost way of influencing behaviour without modifying
incentives and constraining choices between alternatives. We study whether defaults can be used
to increase insurance coverage against low-probability/high-impact risks, like floods, and whether
past flood insurance purchases and flooding experience moderate the effect of defaults. Our study
uses a naturally occurring difference in experience, comparing the surveyed flood insurance
choices of 1,187 homeowners, half of whom are in the Netherlands, where flood insurance
penetration rates are low and recent flooding caused minor losses, and the other half of whom are
in the United Kingdom (UK), where the opposite is true. We find defaults are effective among
homeowners with little to no flood-related experience: in the Netherlands defaults increase the
likelihood of insuring by between 17 and 18 percentage points. Although there is no overall effect
of defaults in the UK, defaults increase flood insurance coverage for risk averse individuals, and
those who have no reported previous flood experience and have not purchased flood insurance.
Anticipated regret about not having insurance coverage in the event of a flood, and perceptions
about the insurance cost explain between 34 and 37 percent of the relationship between the
default and flood insurance demand. We discuss policy implications of our findings.

Peter John Robinson                             Howard Kunreuther
VU University Amsterdam                         Wharton Risk Management
Department of Environmental Economics            and Decision Processes Center
De Boelelaan 1087                               The Wharton School
1081 HV Amsterdam                               University of Pennsylvania
Amsterdam                                       3819 Chestnut Street, Suite 330
The Netherlands                                 Philadelphia, PA 19104-6366
peter.robinson@vu.nl                            and NBER
                                                kunreuth@wharton.upenn.edu
W.J. Wouter Botzen
VU University                                   Shereen J. Chaudhry
wouter.botzen@vu.nl                             Booth School of Business
                                                5807 S Woodlawn Ave
                                                Chicago, IL 60637
                                                USA
                                                shereen.chaudhry@chicagobooth.edu
    1. INTRODUCTION

Whereas rational economic approaches assume individuals are fully informed and maximize their expected
utility, behavioural economics recognizes individuals' cognitive limitations that may lead them to fail to
act in their own self-interest (Bhargava and Loewenstein, 2015). Individuals are more likely to act in
accordance with rational economic theory if they have experience related to the decision, because there are
opportunities for learning (List, 2003). Within behavioural economics, choice architecture uses subtle
changes in decision framing to promote socially and individually beneficial decisions (Johnson and
Goldstein, 2003; Cohen et al., 2015; Ungemach et al., 2017). However, it has been noted that choice
architecture may work better when individuals are less knowledgable decision makers (Löfgren et al.,
2012), because they have not had an opportunity to learn from previous decisions.

Defaults are a type of choice architecture which has received limited attention with respect to insurance
against low-probability/high-impact (LPHI) risk, like floods, which is the focus of this study (Kunreuther,
2015; Kunreuther and Pauly, 2018). 1 Floods are the most frequent and costly natural hazards worldwide
and homeowners often underinvest in measures that mitigate these risks (Kunreuther and Pauly, 2004;
Browne et al., 2015; Wallemacq, 2018; Kousky, 2018), so there is a rationale for using defaults to encourage
individuals to protect themselves against future losses by purchasing insurance. Meyer and Kunreuther
(2017) suggest developing strategies for improving preparedness for disasters by recognizing decision
biases that lead to underinvestment in protective behaviours.

It has been shown that individuals find it difficult to comprehend LPHI risks (Kunreuther et al., 2001). This
may increase the tendency of individuals to follow heuristics and their proneness to behavioural biases
which can influence default effects (Thaler and Sunstein, 2008). Therefore, there may be different decision
processes that operate when defaults are applied within the LPHI risk context, compared to non-catastrophic
risks which have been the focus of multiple studies on default effects (e.g., Johnson et al., 1993; Johnson
et al., 2013; Coe et al., 2016; Krieger and Felder, 2013). This also highlights the innovation of a dedicated
study of defaults under LPHI risk.

We conducted a survey to assess how defaults influenced the way 1,187 homeowners made their flood
insurance choices. We study homeowners because they are more likely to make flood insurance decisions
and be responsible for structural damage to their home if a flood occurs, compared to other subgroups like
renters. In one condition, flood insurance coverage was included in an insurance policy and individuals had


1
 Other types of choice architecture has been proposed to increase flood insurance demand, by stretching the time
horizon with respect to the likelihood of a future flood occurring (Chaudhry et al., 2018) and by providing information
on the severity of flood risk (Bradt, 2019).

                                                          2
to opt-out to cancel their coverage. This was compared to an opt-in condition where individuals had to pay
additional insurance premiums to include flood coverage in their insurance policy.

Given the limited attention defaults have received for insurance against LPHI risk, it is also an open question
of whether variables related to learning like experience moderate the default effect in this domain. To assess
the potential influence of experience on the effectiveness of defaults, we collected data on the impact of
opt-in and opt-out policies from two populations that differ in experience: the Netherlands and the United
Kingdom (UK). Private flood insurance is purchased by a small fraction of the population in the Netherlands
and recent flooding has caused only minor losses, while in the UK flood insurance penetration rates are
currently very high and the country has recently experienced a number of damaging flood events. We argue
that these types of experience are distinct from experiential factors examined by previous studies, which
are related to high levels of individual expertise, e.g., frequent buying and selling experience as well as
expert individual knowledge within a specific domain of decision making (List, 2003; Löfgren et al., 2012).
Learning effects may differ for LPHI risks since there is little feedback in terms of loss experiences. That
is, it is uncertain to what extent individuals learn from the more infrequent experiences of purchasing flood
insurance and flooding which may moderate the effectiveness of insurance defaults. These are novel
insights provided in the current study.

We control for and test the impact of several features which may influence individuals' response to defaults
that serve as a reference point (Dinner et al., 2011). The status quo often serves as a reference point, and
losses are weighted more heavily than gains from the reference point due to loss aversion (Samuelson and
Zeckhauser, 1988). Reference-dependent subjective expected utility proposed by Sugden (2003)
conjectures that if one deviates from the status quo and learns that a better result would have been achieved
by maintaining the status quo, she/he will experience regret for not having chosen the ex-post optimal
alternative. If an individual anticipates this regret and is regret-averse then he/she will prefer to stay with
the status quo ex-ante (Keller et al., 2011; Zhang and Fishbach, 2005; Sautua, 2017).

In keeping with the loss aversion argument of default effects, the perceived cost of opting out of the default
may be influential (Sunstein, 2013). In our setting, individuals may examine the certain cost of purchasing
flood insurance relative to the uncertain benefits in terms of reduced flood damages resulting from an
unlikely future flood event. If the cost of flood insurance is perceived as high, individuals may decide to
stick with the status quo of no flood insurance coverage. Risk preferences (which are influenced by loss
aversion) may also impact behaviour with respect to defaults. For example, if the default option is having
insurance and individuals are risk seeking, they might want to opt-out of this coverage, while more risk
averse types may want to maintain this coverage.



                                                      3
Based on the data we collected, we show that subjects demand more flood insurance in the Netherlands if
they are assigned to an opt-out rather than an opt-in condition, but we find no overall impact of defaults in
the UK. Indeed, the contrasting influence of default assignment on flood insurance demand in the
Netherlands and the UK is explained by past experience with flooding and previous purchasing of flood
insurance. We do find that in the UK there are subgroups for which defaults are effective, i.e., highly risk
averse individuals, and those with no reported previous flood experience who have never purchased flood
insurance.

The default effect we find in the Netherlands is partially mediated by regret about not purchasing flood
insurance coverage in the event of a flood and perceptions about the flood insurance cost. That is, subjects
in the opt-out condition are more likely to focus on flood damages and regret associated with not insuring,
and less likely to focus on the cost of insurance than those assigned to the opt-in condition. This in turn
influences whether subjects purchase flood insurance. The mediators of regret and perceived insurance cost
may be an indicator of loss aversion in relation to their reference point, which is determined by the default.

The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: Section 2 provides an overview of the flood insurance
markets in the Netherlands and the UK. Section 3 describes hypotheses to be tested with motivation from
the literature. Section 4 presents the survey design and descriptive statistics. Section 5 details the method
used to test the hypotheses and results related to the impact of default options on flood insurance demand.
Section 6 discusses these results and provides directions for future research. Section 7 concludes by
highlighting the policy implications of the analysis.

    2. INSTITUTIONAL DESIGN AND COMPARISON

This section provides an overview of institutional differences between the Netherlands and the UK
regarding their flood insurance markets. The two countries have been described as being at opposite ends
of the spectrum of flood insurance penetration (Surminski et al., 2015), i.e., penetration rates are currently
low in the Netherlands and high in the UK.

Floods very rarely occur in the Netherlands with the last large-scale flood occurring in 1953 when total
damage amounted to around 5 percent of Dutch national income (Bos and Zwaneveld, 2017). The most
recent flood in the country occurred in 2003 when a dike breach in the village of Wilnis caused 16 million
damage to residential property (Aerts and Botzen, 2011). In contrast, the UK has recently experienced a
number of highly publicized flood events, such as those during the winter storms of 2013/2014, which
resulted in around £290 million flood damages (Penning-Rowsell, 2014; Muchan et al., 2015) and
2015/2016, when insured flood damages amounted to approximately £1.3 billion (McCarthy et al., 2016).



                                                        4
Flood insurance is not included in homeowners policies in the Netherlands but this coverage has been
offered by a private insurer, Neerlandse, since 2016 on a voluntary basis by more than 1,500 insurance
agents. 2 Premium costs are determined on the basis of objective flood risk information provided by Dutch
governmental institutions. Today only a very small percentage of homeowners have purchased a flood
insurance policy that may be partially explained by unawareness of their flood risk (Suykens et al., 2016).
Based on our survey data, only 2 percent of Dutch homeowners report that they currently have flood
insurance and < 0.5 percent have purchased this coverage in the past. 3 The insured homeowners are also
more likely to have suffered flood damage in the past than those who have never purchased a flood
insurance policy. 4

The Dutch scheme is distinct from the UK, which has for a long time promoted homeowner responsibility
for flood recovery with an emphasis on insurance (Penning-Rowsell and Priest, 2015). Private flood
insurance in the UK was established in 1961, and is purchased as part of standard home insurance policies
(Paudel et al., 2012). Since the 1970s, penetration rates have been quite high in part due to an agreement
between government and the insurance industry that mortgage holders are required by financial institutions
to carry flood insurance, although those at the very high risk were excluded from the agreement (Huber,
2004; Penning-Rowsell et al., 2014).

The UK has also made efforts over the years to enhance flood insurance availability for high risk
homeowners. For example, in the past insurers agreed to provide flood insurance to homeowners up to a 1
in 75 years return period (Surminski and Eldridge, 2017), and a recently established reinsurance pool (Flood
Re) is used to subsidize the premiums paid by high risk households (Surminski, 2018).

According to our sample data, 39 percent of homeowners in the UK report that they currently have flood
insurance and 6 percent had flood insurance in the past. This is consistent with expectations that a much
higher percentage of homeowners will have purchased flood insurance in the UK than the Netherlands. In
practice, the percentage of homeowners who actually carry flood insurance is much higher (~95 percent)
(HM Government, 2016). Therefore it is likely that many homeowners in our UK sample carry flood
insurance but are not aware of it. Indeed it is not uncommon for homeowners to misreport their insurance




2
  These figures are provided on the Neerlandse website (www.neerlandse.co.uk).
3
  The exact percentage of homeowners who have actually purchased flood insurance is not available in the Netherlands
according to the publicly available information.
4
  Only 1 percent of homeowners who report to have never purchased flood insurance report to have suffered flood
damage to their property in the past, compared to 58 percent for those who currently have or previously had flood
insurance.

                                                         5
status in surveys (Andor et al., 2017). As in the Netherlands, homeowners who know they currently have
flood insurance, or held it in the past are also more likely to have been flooded in the past. 5

    3. HYPOTHESES

A few studies have tested the impact of default assignment on insurance decisions. Johnson et al. (1993)
examined changes in legislature in two states in the U.S. regarding whether auto insurance policies retained
a right to sue for pain and suffering resulting from a car accident. A higher percentage of motorists in
Pennsylvania, where the default policy included the right to sue, have purchased the right to sue compared
to motorists in New Jersey, where the default policy did not include this right. Johnson et al. (2013) also
found that individuals are more likely to choose cost-effective health insurance policies if they are
preselected. Coe et al. (2016) find that compared to active choice, providing life insurance as a default
option increased the rate of coverage. Krieger and Felder (2013) showed that default assignment to a health
insurance policy where the individual pays 0 percent of medical treatment costs positively impacted
coverage levels, compared to active choice. Overall it seems that providing insurance as the default
increases demand for coverage.

H1: More individuals will purchase flood insurance if it is included in an insurance policy by default and
individuals must opt-out to cancel their coverage, than in an opt-in condition where individuals must pay
additional insurance premiums to include flood coverage.

Individual sensitivity to defaults may also be a function of the degree of experience an individual has in a
given decision domain. The impact of health insurance default policies on coverage rates found by Krieger
and Felder (2013) dissipated over later periods of their repeated decision making experiment. Löfgren et al.
(2012) found that experienced individuals (environmental economists attending a conference), who are
more knowledgable about the decision at hand, are not influenced by carbon offsetting default assignments.
In an earlier study, List (2003) showed that anomalies like the endowment effect do not occur among
experienced consumers who have high levels of expertise in the decision domain, compared to those who
have no market experience. 6 Apparently, unexperienced consumer behaviour is better explained by theories
that incorporate psychological aspects like reference dependence and loss aversion, such as prospect theory
(Kahneman and Tversky, 1979) and reference-dependent subjective expected utility (Sugden, 2003),




5
  1 percent of homeowners in the UK who report to have never held flood insurance, also report to have been flooded
in the past. Whereas, 19 percent of homeowners who report to hold flood insurance or held it in the past, report to
have been flooded in the past.
6
  The endowment effect refers to an increase in the value of a good when it is part of an individual's endowment
(Thaler, 1980).

                                                        6
whereas experienced consumer behaviour can be explained by conventional (rational) economic theory
(List, 2004). 7

In this paper we distinguish between two types of experience: that with purchasing flood insurance and that
with flood damage. Note that we do not hypothesize that all homeowners who are insured against flooding
will choose to purchase flood insurance in the survey. Homeowners may be required to carry flood
insurance as part of their mortgage requirements (as in the UK), but given the option would rather face their
flood risk uninsured. We conjecture that UK homeowners are more likely to have focused on their flood
insurance preferences than Dutch homeowners, because nearly every homeowner in the UK has this
coverage whereas the penetration rate in the Netherlands is close to zero (see Section 2). In this regard, we
include a variable indicating whether the homeowner resides in the Netherlands or the UK as an indicator
of whether or not the individual has actually purchased flood insurance. Overall, we expect that
homeowners who have purchased flood insurance previously know more about the benefits (or costs) of
having insurance (e.g., peace of mind), and this type of learning would make them less susceptible to
defaults.

H2: Individuals who have experience with purchasing private flood insurance are less susceptible to
defaults.

When testing for H2 one needs to control for previous flooding experience (which also differs between the
UK and the Netherlands), and its potential interaction with the default condition. We conjecture that
homeowners who have experienced flood damage have learned about the advantages and disadvantages of
(not) having flood insurance, and hence are likely to have strong preferences as to whether or not to
purchase coverage, which would make them less susceptible to defaults.

H3: Individuals who have experience with flood damage are less susceptible to defaults.

Risk preferences are another potential moderator of the effect of the default on flood insurance demand.
Given that we believe that those who choose to opt-out or opt-in are impacted by their risk preferences, we
will examine whether this variable plays a significant role in the insurance purchase decision and its
interaction with the individual's default assignment (i.e., not having flood insurance or having a policy).
According to expected utility theory, flood insurance demand is positively related to the degree of risk
aversion. It is however difficult to determine a priori whether this relation may depend on other aspects like
default assignment and past experience.



7
  Plott and Zeiler (2005) find in a related study that once subjects are given adequate training and practice with
experimental procedures, and incentive compatible remuneration is provided, that the endowment effect is eliminated.

                                                         7
In our analysis we also examine variables which can (partially) account for the relation between the nature
of the default and flood insurance demand. It has been hypothesized that default options represent a
reference point from which individuals judge gains and losses (Dinner et al., 2011). Because losses are
weighted more heavily than gains in decisions (loss aversion) (Kahneman et al., 1991), a change in the
default option can lead to a change in one's decision. Because loss aversion has already been suggested by
a number of authors to be the root cause of default effects (Smith et al., 2013; Johnson et al., 2002;
Jachimowicz et al., 2017), 8 we view this analysis of secondary importance in terms of novelty, compared
to our examination of the role of past experience.

What is perceived as a loss depends on the reference point, which is influenced by the nature of the default
(Sunstein, 2013). Consider an opt-in insurance condition, where individuals must pay an extra premium to
add a flood insurance component to some insurance policy. These additional costs may loom large, and so
individuals may stick with the default (no flood insurance coverage). To assess this, we use perceived
insurance premium, which measures whether individuals find the flood insurance cost too expensive, as a
proxy for how individuals feel about the certain cost of purchasing flood insurance, which is a loss from a
no flood insurance coverage default. In contrast, in an opt-out condition, individuals may instead focus on
the disadvantages of removing the flood insurance component in terms of potential flood losses, and the
regret one might feel in the event of an uninsured loss. For this reason, regret is used as a proxy for how
individuals feel about potential uninsured flood losses if individuals were to opt-out of a flood insurance
coverage default. We predict the following based on loss aversion and reference dependence:

H4: The perceived cost of flood insurance and anticipated regret about not purchasing flood insurance
coverage should a flood occur mediate the impact of the default assignment on flood insurance demand.

         H4a: Compared to the opt-in condition, individuals in the opt-out condition are less likely to
         perceive the flood insurance cost as too expensive, and more likely to feel regret about not
         purchasing flood insurance coverage in the event of a flood.




8
  Loss aversion may be especially applicable to our context, over alternative explanations of default effects, like
whether defaults are perceived as an implicit endorsement (McKenzie et al., 2006), or whether deciding between
alternatives requires significant effort, whereas sticking with the default is perceived as relatively effortless (Johnson
and Goldstein, 2003). In our setting there is little indication of the default insurance policy being implicitly
recommended, and we provided insurance costs with and without the flooding component so the mental burden
involved in making a choice is lower than if we hadn't provided this information. In a separate analysis we also
examined interactions between answers to the question: "How difficult or easy was it to make a choice about including
flood coverage in your insurance policy?" (very difficult = 1; difficult = 2; not difficult/not easy = 3; easy = 4; very
easy = 5), and the default. Individuals who found the decision easier were no more or less responsive to the default
(p-values > 0.05, detailed results not reported here).

                                                            8
        H4b: Individuals who perceive the flood insurance cost as too expensive demand less flood
         insurance, and those who feel regret about not purchasing flood insurance coverage in the event of
         a flood demand more flood insurance.

         H4c: Once one controls for the perceived cost of flood insurance and regret about not purchasing
         coverage should a flood occur, there is a significant reduction in the impact of the default on
         demand for insurance.

     4. SURVEY DESIGN AND DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS

We sampled 599 homeowners in the Netherlands and 588 homeowners in the UK through the survey
company Multiscope (www.multiscope.nl) during February 2019. 9 We employed a non-incentivized survey
given that incentivizing large losses is complicated (Etchart-Vincent, 2009), and it is not clear if it results
in large biases (Robinson and Botzen, 2019) since individuals have a low incentive to lie. An advantage of
our sample over student samples often used in lab experiments is that we examine homeowners facing flood
risk and making insurance purchase choices in real life which ensures higher external validity.

After some initial socio-economic questions, subjects were asked to: "Imagine that you have just moved in
to a new home in the Netherlands (United Kingdom) which you purchased for 260,000 (£227,500). 10 Your
new home is at risk of flooding. The government will not reimburse you for any flood damage you suffer
if you do not insure your home."

Homeowners in the Netherlands and UK were randomly assigned to face either an opt-in condition (300
and 297 subjects, respectively) or an opt-out condition (299 and 291 subjects, respectively). The conditions
used the following wording to describe the flood probability: "Every year there is a 1 in 1,250 chance that
your new home will be flooded." The opt-in condition asked subjects whether they would like to add flood
coverage to a pre-purchased insurance policy which covers fire and burglary related losses. The opt-out
condition asked subjects whether they would like to remove flood coverage from a pre-purchased insurance
policy which covers flood, fire and burglary related losses. Figure 1 presents the way in which flood
insurance demand was elicited over the opt-in and opt-out conditions. Table 1 provides an overview of the
conditions.




9
 A pre-test was conducted initially to refine the survey instructions.
10
  260,000 is the approximate average purchase price for a property in the Netherlands (Statistics Netherlands, 2018).
For the UK version of the survey, 260,000 is replaced by £227,500, which is equal to the Dutch average based on
purchasing power parity figures.

                                                         9
Every year there is a 1 in 1,250 chance that your new home will be flooded. The estimated damage from
a flood to your new home is 80,000 (£70,000).


You have purchased an insurance policy from your insurance agent.


Opt-in


This standard policy covers fire and burglary related losses for the price of 128 (£112) per year.


You may add flood coverage to your insurance policy and it will increase your annual insurance
premiums by 64 (£56) (resulting in a total insurance cost of 192 (£168)).


Do you choose to add flood coverage to your insurance policy? Yes/No


Opt-out


This standard policy covers flood, fire and burglary related losses for the price of 192 (£168) per year.


You may remove flood coverage from your insurance policy and it will decrease your annual insurance
premiums by 64 (£56) (resulting in a total insurance cost of 128 (£112)).


Do you choose to remove flood coverage from your insurance policy? Yes/No




         Figure 1: Flood insurance demand elicitation over the opt-in and opt-out conditions




                                                   10
                  Table 1: Summary of survey conditions
                  Country                    Netherlands                       UK
                  Conditions             opt-in       opt-out         opt-in        opt-out
                  Subjects                300           299            297           291


Naturally there is some variation in actual flood risks faced by homeowners within both the Netherlands
and the UK. We chose one probability and damage amount in order to standardize the decision environment,
and to enable the comparison of default effects between the two countries. Probability 1 in 1,250 reflects
the flood probability for homes situated in the river delta of the Netherlands, based on river-dike safety
norms. The average damage from flooding per residence for homes facing the 1 in 1,250 probability was
calculated in Botzen and van den Bergh (2009; 2012) based on the flood damage model of Wouters (2005).
In today's price levels this is 80,000 (rounded). Moreover, the flood insurance premium was set at the
actuarially fair (64) level (equal to probability multiplied by damage) though individuals were not told this
explicitly. We provide the insurance costs with and without flood insurance, so that potential default effects
cannot be due to subjects' calculation capacities.

Immediately following the flood insurance decision, subjects were asked a number of questions based on
how they made their choices, flood insurance purchasing and flooding experience, trust in flood defenses
as well as to elicit socio-economic variables and risk preferences (see Table 2). We asked subjects "For the
following questions please think about how you made your choice about whether or not to add (remove)
flood coverage to (from) your insurance policy", then consistent with studies by Robinson and Botzen
(2019) and Keller et al. (2011), anticipated regret was elicited by asking subjects their extent of agreement
(on a 7-point scale) with the statement: "I would feel regret about not purchasing flood insurance coverage
if a flood were to occur next year." To determine the degree to which subjects found the survey flood
insurance costs expensive, we included the item: "The annual flood insurance cost 64 (£56) is too
expensive."

Regarding the experiential variables, in the Netherlands we included the following: "Currently flood
insurance is not part of home insurance or home contents insurance policies in the Netherlands. However,
homeowners can purchase a separate insurance policy that covers their flood risk. Have you ever purchased
this insurance policy that covers flood risk?". Response options: "Yes, I currently hold this separate
insurance policy that covers flood risk"; "Yes, I held this separate insurance policy that covers flood risk in
the past, but I decided to cancel my policy"; "No, I never held this separate insurance policy that covers
flood risk". In the UK we asked subjects a slightly modified version: "Currently flood insurance is often
included in home insurance policies in the United Kingdom. So homeowners can purchase a home
insurance policy that covers their flood risk. Have you ever purchased this home insurance policy that
covers flood risk?" Response options: "Yes, I currently hold this home insurance policy that covers flood

                                                      11
risk"; "Yes, I held this home insurance policy that covers flood risk in the past, but I decided to cancel my
policy"; "No, I never held this home insurance policy that covers flood risk". The two versions of this
question are in line with the way in which flood insurance is currently being sold in the Netherlands and
the UK, respectively. To determine whether subjects had experienced flooding in the past (yes/no), we
asked: "Has your home been flooded in the past when you were living in it?"

To examine subjects' extent of trust in flood defenses, we included the item: "I am confident that the dikes
(flood defenses) in the Netherlands (United Kingdom) are well maintained." The item is similar to the way
in which trust in flood defenses was measured among Dutch residents in Terpstra (2011). We use trust to
proxy for flood risk perceptions among homeowners. Other measures of flood risk perception, like the
perceived likelihood of flooding at one's current home, may not apply to the new home we ask subjects to
imagine in the survey. We assume that subjects who have higher trust in their country's flood defenses have
lower general flood risk perceptions, consistent with Terpstra (2011).

Risk preferences were elicited following Dohmen et al. (2011), who asked respondents to rate their
willingness to take risks in general: "How do you see yourself: are you generally a person who is willing
to take risks or do you try to avoid taking risks? Please use a scale from 0 to 10, where a 0 means you are
`completely unwilling to take risks', and a 10 means you are `very willing to take risks'. You can also
answer values in-between to indicate where you fall on the scale." Their survey-based measure is validated
in the sense that it is strongly correlated with the way in which individuals make choices in paid lottery
experimental decisions. Moreover, the authors showed that the measure is a good all-round predictor of a
range of risky behaviours in practice.

It is notable that flood insurance demand is significantly higher in the UK than in the Netherlands (Chi-
squared test statistic = 71.97, p-value = 0.00). Compared to the Netherlands, UK respondents are also more
likely to feel regret about not purchasing flood insurance coverage if a flood were to occur next year
(Wilcoxon rank-sum test statistic = -6.10, p-value = 0.00), and less likely to deem the flood insurance cost
as too expensive (Wilcoxon rank-sum test statistic = 4.68, p-value = 0.00). They also trust less that their
flood defenses are well maintained (Wilcoxon rank-sum test statistic = 16.96, p-value = 0.00).

The increased willingness of UK respondents to purchase flood insurance may be due to potential regret
should they experience flood damage in the future given that the country has experienced flood events in
recent years that has been given significant media coverage (Cologna et al., 2017). Moreover, it is
reasonable to assume that homeowners are more aware that flood insurance can be purchased in the UK
than the Netherlands. Overall the percentage of respondents whose home is reported to have been flooded
in the past is 2 percent in the Netherlands, whereas the corresponding figure for the UK is 9 percent. The


                                                     12
differences in trust in flood defenses and perceptions about the flood insurance cost between the
Netherlands and the UK are also unsurprising given the differences in flooding experience and media
attention given to flooding events.

Apart from the perceived cost of flood insurance and anticipated regret about not purchasing flood insurance
coverage variables, which are treated as mediators in Section 5, there are no significant differences in the
flood experience, insurance purchasing experience, trust in flood defenses, socio-economic and preferences
variables between treatment conditions (opt-in and opt-out) within the Netherlands (p-values > 0.05).
Furthermore, within the UK there are also no significant differences for these variables between treatment
conditions except for the proportion of respondents who indicated that they currently hold flood insurance,
which is higher in the opt-out than the opt-in condition (Chi-squared test statistic = 8.91, p-value = 0.00).
However, given that we find no significant difference in flood insurance demand by treatment condition
within the UK (Section 5), the relation between treatment condition and flood insurance demand is not
driven by the reported holding of flood insurance.




                                                     13
Table 2: Summary of variables by country
Dependent variable     Measurement                                 Coding                           Netherlands M (SD)a       UK M (SD)
Flood insurance        Dummy variable measure of flood             Insure = 1 and do not insure             0.61                0.83
demand                 insurance demand.                           =0
Condition              Measurement                                 Coding                           Netherlands M (SD)        UK M (SD)
Opt-out                Dummy variable measure of default           Opt-out = 1 and opt-in = 0              0.50                 0.49
                       assignment.
Questions related to   Measurement                                 Coding                           Netherlands M (SD)        UK M (SD)
flood insurance choice
Regret                 I would feel regret about not               Strongly disagree = 1 to              5.55 (1.58)          6.00 (1.44)
                       purchasing flood insurance coverage         strongly agree = 7b
                       if a flood were to occur next year.
Insurance cost         The annual flood insurance cost 64          Strongly disagree = 1 to              4.08 (1.72)          3.62 (1.63)
                       (£56) is too expensive.                     strongly agree = 7
Flood experience       Measurement                                 Coding                           Netherlands M (SD)        UK M (SD)
Flooding experience    Dummy variable measure of previous          Flooded in the past = 1 and             0.02                 0.09
                       flood.                                      not flooded in the past = 0
Insurance purchasing Measurement                                   Coding                           Netherlands M (SD)        UK M (SD)
experience
Hold insurance         Dummy variable measure of holding           Hold flood insurance = 1                 0.02                 0.39
                       flood insurance.                            and do not hold flood
                                                                   insurance = 0
Held insurance            Dummy variable measure of held           Held flood insurance in the              0.00                 0.06
                          flood insurance in the past.             past = 1 and did not hold
                                                                   flood insurance in the past =
                                                                   0
Trust in flood            Measurement                              Coding                           Netherlands M (SD)        UK M (SD)
defenses
Trust                     I am confident that the dikes (flood     Strongly disagree = 1 to              5.30 (1.26)          3.89 (1.37)
                          defenses) in the Netherlands (United     strongly agree = 7
                          Kingdom) are well maintained.
Socio-economic            Measurement                              Coding                           Netherlands M (SD)        UK M (SD)
variables and
preferences
Age                       Age in years                             Age in years                        54.47 (13.59)         50.35 (14.76)
Male                      Dummy variable measure of gender.        Male = 1 and female = 0                 0.53                  0.53
Higher educationc         Dummy variable measure of higher         Higher education = 1 and no             0.52                  0.51
                          education.                               higher education = 0
Risk preference           General willingness to take risks.       Completely unwilling to               5.72 (2.07)          5.44 (2.41)
                                                                   take risks = 1 to very willing
                                                                   to take risks = 11
Notes:
a
  The mean or proportion (M) is provided with the standard deviation (SD) in parentheses.
b
  Interior agreement categories are: disagree = 2; somewhat disagree = 3; neither disagree nor agree = 4; somewhat agree = 5; agree = 6.
c
  Higher education refers to the respondent holding a Bachelor's degree, Master's degree or PhD.


                 5. RESULTS

           Section 5.1 examines the impact of default assignment on flood insurance demand via a simple graphical
           analysis. Section 5.2 provides a regression analysis of the impact of default assignment that enables one to
           control other observable characteristics such as the moderating roles of flooding experience, reported


                                                                    14
insurance purchasing experience and risk preference on the influence of default assignment and the role of
variables regret and insurance cost in mediating the influence of default assignment. 11 We consider flooding
experience, reported insurance purchasing experience and risk preference as moderators because we expect
these variables may influence the strength of the relation between default assignment and flood insurance
demand. In contrast, we expect regret and insurance cost to (partially) account for the relation between
default assignment and flood insurance demand, therefore we consider them as mediators.

         5.1 Graphical analysis

Figure 2 displays the default effect i.e., the difference in the proportion of flood insurance purchase between
the opt-out and opt-in conditions, by country. The figure is based on a Probit model analysis of the
likelihood of flood insurance purchase with independent dummy variables opt-out, UK and an interaction
between the two. According to the analysis, there is a significant default effect (a positive difference in the
proportion of insurance purchase between opt-out and opt-in) in the Netherlands, but an insignificant default
effect in the UK. Therefore, the results are consistent with our expectations that defaults are more influential
in the Netherlands, where flood insurance penetration rates and flooding experiences are lower in practice
than the UK. Moreover, flood insurance demand in the survey is higher overall in the UK than in the
Netherlands.

Figure 3 shows the default effect in the UK over the variables hold insurance, held insurance and flooding
experience. The figure is based on a Probit model analysis of the likelihood of flood insurance purchase
within the UK with independent dummy variables opt-out, hold insurance, held insurance and flooding
experience, as well as interactions between the latter three variables and opt-out.12 The analysis shows that
the reported holding of flood insurance is positively related to flood insurance demand in the survey. This
relation is significant within the opt-in condition. Furthermore, there is an insignificant difference in flood
insurance purchase between subjects who report to have held flood insurance and not. The confidence
intervals are large when held insurance = 1, because the subgroup of subjects who report to have held
insurance in the past (and do not hold it now) is rather small (6 percent of subjects in the UK). Lastly, there
is a negative impact of flooding experience on flood insurance demand in the UK. This relation is significant
within the opt-out condition. One explanation for this finding is that homeowners who have been flooded
exhibit more risk seeking preferences, perhaps because individuals tend to be more risk seeking following
losses due to reference dependence (Eckel et al., 2009; Page et al., 2014; Islam et al., 2018). Our data

11
   The explanatory variables were checked for high correlations. All correlation coefficients are lower than 0.5,
therefore multicollinearity should not pose a problem for our analysis (Hensher et al., 2005).
12
   In a separate analysis we examined interactions between hold insurance and flooding experience as well as held
insurance and flooding experience. These interactions are insignificant according to a Probit model analysis (p-values
> 0.05, detailed results not reported here).

                                                         15
support this account, because there is a positive significant coefficient estimate on the variable flooding
experience in an Ordered Probit model analysis of the likelihood of more risk seeking preferences in the
UK (coefficient estimate = 0.78, p-value = 0.00). Another explanation is that subjects who have been
flooded in the past are more likely to opt-out because they are more inclined to view the insurance cost in
the survey as expensive due to premium increases which have followed flood events in the past in the UK
(Institute and Faculty of Actuaries, 2016). 13 More specifically, previously flooded homeowners may have
developed a "bad taste" for insurance, and may reflect this aversion by stating that the insurance is too
expensive. Indeed, there is a positive significant coefficient estimate on the variable flooding experience in
an Ordered Probit model analysis of the likelihood of finding the flood insurance cost too expensive in the
UK (coefficient estimate = 0.72, p-value = 0.00). 1415

Figure 4 displays the marginal effect of opt-out on the likelihood of flood insurance purchase across levels
of risk preference within the Netherlands and the UK. The figure is based on a Probit model analysis of the
likelihood of flood insurance purchase within the Netherlands and the UK separately, with independent
dummy variable opt-out and risk preference, as well as an interaction between the two. There is no evidence
of an interaction effect in the Netherlands because the marginal effect of opt-out on the likelihood of flood
insurance purchase remains fairly constant across levels of risk preference. In the UK there is a significant
default effect for more risk averse subjects, i.e., compared to opt-in, the opt-out condition leads to higher
flood insurance demand. However, the more comfortable a subject is with risk, the lower the impact of the
default, and for those with the highest tolerance for risk, the opt-out condition actually "backfires" and
decreases flood insurance demand relative to opt-in. That is, more risk seeking subjects are less likely to
purchase insurance coverage in the opt-out condition (more likely to opt-out) (Probit model interaction term
coefficient estimate = -0.26, p-value = 0.00).




13
   According to a report written after the 2007 floods in England, some premiums in one area were quadrupled and
excess levels were raised by up to £30,000 (Pitt, 2008).
14
   According to two-way tables all five subjects in the opt-in condition and four of six subjects in the opt-out condition
who reported having flood insurance currently in the Netherlands bought insurance in the survey. These results are
consistent with those in the UK, where those reporting having flood insurance had a larger effect on insurance demand
in the opt-in than in the opt-out condition. There is only one subject in the Netherlands who reported having flood
insurance in the past, and chose to purchase insurance; this subject was assigned to the opt-in condition, Six of seven
subjects and four of five subjects in the opt-in and opt-out conditions respectively, who reported having been flooded
in the past chose to buy the insurance in the survey. Flood insurance premiums in the Netherlands are risk-based, and
have not previously been impacted by flood events (unlike the UK). The relatively large proportion of previously
flooded Dutch homeowners who purchased insurance in the survey may be due to flooding being more available in
their minds (Tversky and Kahneman, 1974).
15
   Together, the variables risk preference and insurance cost explain 30 percent of the relationship between flooding
experience and insurance demand in the opt-out condition for the UK sample (12 percent via risk preference and 18
percent via insurance cost), according to a mediation analysis (p-values < 0.05).

                                                           16
One possible reason why we find that risk preference moderates the impact of the default in the UK, but
not the Netherlands is that in the UK flood insurance demand is overall higher, so subjects who choose not
to have it are perhaps making a more deliberate decision which should be identified by strong risk
preferences. Fewer subjects in the Netherlands demand insurance, so there is in general a relative disinterest
in it. Another potential explanation could be related to differences in flood risk perceptions. According to
the analysis in Section 4, trust in flood defenses is much lower in the UK than the Netherlands. This may
indicate that UK subjects have elevated flood risk perceptions, and risk preferences matter more for these
subjects for which the risk of flooding is more salient. A subgroup of Dutch subjects who have low trust in
flood defenses (using the median cut-off value we define these subjects as trust < 6) are more likely to opt-
out of flood coverage if they are more risk seeking, although this effect is only of marginal significance
(Probit model coefficient estimate = -0.11, p-value = 0.07) probably because the subgroup is rather small,
i.e., most Dutch subjects have high levels of trust in flood defenses.




                                                     17
                                    Default effect between country

               1
Proportion insurance purchase
  .2      .4   0  .6     .8




                                0                                      1
                                                        UK

                                               Opt-in        Opt-out



Figure 2: Default effect between the Netherlands (UK = 0) and the UK (UK = 1)




                                                   18
   Figure 3: Default effect within the UK over whether subjects report to currently hold flood
insurance (hold insurance = 1) and not (hold insurance = 0), whether subjects report to have held
flood insurance in the past (held insurance = 1) and not (held insurance = 0), and whether subjects
report to have been flooded in the past (flooding experience = 1) and not (flooding experience = 0)




                                                19
 Figure 4: Marginal effect of opt-out on the likelihood of flood insurance purchase across levels of
   risk preference within the Netherlands and the UK; higher (lower) values represent more risk
                                           seeking (aversion)

        5.2 Regression analysis
            5.2.1 Default effect in the Netherlands and the UK

Table 3 provides a Probit model analysis of the likelihood of flood insurance purchase. Model I contains a
dummy variable for UK subjects and opt-out as well as their interaction. Being a UK subject has overall a
positive effect on flood insurance demand. The significant coefficient estimates on the opt-out dummy
variable and its interaction with the UK dummy variable shows that on aggregate default assignment is only
a predictor of flood insurance demand in the Netherlands. This shows the analysis in Figure 2 numerically,
that opt-out leads to a higher proportion of flood insurance purchase in the Netherlands where flood
insurance demand and flooding experiences are low in practice, compared to opt-in, but opt-out has an
insignificant influence on flood insurance purchase in the UK where penetration rates and flooding
experiences are higher in practice.


                                                   20
Note that model I cannot shed light on whether country level differences in default effects are due to current
or previous purchase of flood insurance or flooding experience. By controlling for flooding experience and
its interaction with opt-out we can filter out whether there is a difference due to actual insurance purchasing
decisions in accordance with H2 (model II). There is a significant coefficient estimate on the opt-out and
UK interaction term after controlling for flooding experience, but the estimate is lower in magnitude and
significance compared to model I. This implies that flooding experience explains some of the difference in
default effects between the Netherlands and the UK. Moreover, the variable decreases the effectiveness of
opt-out in increasing flood insurance demand, consistent with H3.

However, there is still some variation left to explain regarding the impact of opt-out on insurance demand
between the Netherlands and the UK, which we suspect is due to current or previous purchase of flood
insurance. To add credence to this conjecture we control for this variable and its interaction with opt-out in
model III. The interaction between the opt-out dummy variable and the UK dummy variable becomes
insignificant once flooding experience and current or previous purchase of flood insurance as well as their
interaction with the opt-out dummy variable have been controlled for. In other words, once we control for
these two variables that moderate the influence of the default on flood insurance demand, there is also a
statistically significant default effect in the UK, meaning the default assignment to opt-out increases flood
insurance demand.

Flooding experience has a negative impact on flood insurance demand in the opt-out condition (see also
Figure 3). That is, subjects who have experienced at least one flood in the past at their home are more likely
to opt-out of flood insurance coverage. We suspect that this effect is driven by UK homeowners who
experienced significantly higher premium costs and excesses following flood events in the past and changes
in risk preferences. Unfortunately we do not have data on whether homeowners actually dropped their
policies after they were flooded, or would rather face flood risk uninsured despite possible mortgage
requirements.

Moreover, homeowners who report to currently hold flood insurance in practice are more likely to purchase
flood insurance in the survey (particularly in the opt-in condition, see also Figure 3). These subjects may
be more inclined to rely on their experience than the default, according to which opting in is more attractive
than the default of no flood insurance coverage. We do not find any influence as to whether subjects held
insurance in the past but then cancelled their policy.

We also find that more risk seeking subjects are more likely to opt-out of flood insurance coverage (model
IV). This effect is presumably due to the interaction effect between risk preference and opt-out we find in
the UK in Figure 4.


                                                      21
Note that although we have explained the variance in default effects between the Netherlands and the UK
with the experience variables, which is relevant for testing our hypotheses, there is still some variation left
to explain regarding differences in flood insurance demand, because UK dummy remains a significant
predictor. Some of this variation is explained in model V which controls for regret, insurance cost, trust
and socio-economic variables. 16 Responses to the regret question are skewed to the left (more so in the
UK), indicating that a large proportion of subjects would regret uninsured flood losses (Appendix, Figure
A2), whereas responses to the insurance cost item are more normally distributed (Figure A3). Responses
to the trust item are more skewed to the left in the Netherlands than in the UK, indicating that a larger
proportion of subjects have high levels of trust in flood defenses in the Netherlands, compared to the UK
(Figure A4). As expected, subjects who would feel regret about not purchasing flood insurance coverage if
a flood were to occur next year are more likely to purchase flood insurance. Whereas, subjects who viewed
the annual flood insurance cost as too expensive and have higher trust in flood defenses are less likely to
purchase flood insurance.




16
  In separate regression models we find no interaction between regret, insurance cost, trust and opt-out (p-values >
0.05), therefore we choose to only include their main effects in Table 3.

                                                        22
Table 3: Probit model of the likelihood of flood insurance purchase
                                      Model I:          Model II:              Model III:         Model IV:            Model V:
                                   Condition and        Including               Including         Including            Including
                                      country            flooding               insurance            risk                regret,
                                     variables          experience             purchasing         preference      insurance cost,
                                                                               experience                         trust and socio-
                                                                                                                       economic
                                                                                                                        variables
UK dummy                            0.93*** (0.11)        0.91*** (0.11) 0.72*** (0.12)     0.74*** (0.13)           0.42** (0.16)
Opt-out                             0.51*** (0.11)        0.54*** (0.11) 0.54*** (0.11)     1.15*** (0.24)          1.16*** (0.28)
UK dummy X opt-out                  -0.52** (0.16)         -0.39* (0.17)   -0.28 (0.19)       -0.31 (0.19)            -0.19 (0.22)
Flooding experience                                         0.36 (0.27)    -0.13 (0.32)       -0.14 (0.32)             0.57 (0.37)
Flooding experience X opt-out                            -1.48*** (0.37) -1.08** (0.41)      -1.05* (0.42)         -1.69*** (0.49)
Hold insurance                                                           0.83*** (0.23)     0.82*** (0.23)          0.97*** (0.28)
Hold insurance X opt-out                                                  -0.61* (0.30)       -0.55 (0.30)           -0.86* (0.37)
Held insurance                                                              0.53 (0.42)        0.50 (0.42)             0.46 (0.46)
Held insurance X opt-out                                                   -0.67 (0.56)       -0.51 (0.56)            -0.07 (0.61)
Risk preference                                                                                0.03 (0.03)             0.06 (0.03)
Risk preference X opt-out                                                                   -0.11** (0.04)          -0.13** (0.04)
Regret                                                                                                              0.36*** (0.03)
Insurance cost                                                                                                     -0.32*** (0.03)
Trust                                                                                                               -0.11** (0.04)
Age                                                                                                                    0.00 (0.00)
Male                                                                                                                  -0.06 (0.10)
Higher education                                                                                                      -0.14 (0.10)
Constant                              0.04 (0.07)           0.03 (0.07)     0.03 (0.07)       -0.13 (0.17)            -0.15 (0.41)
Observations                             1,187                 1,187           1,187              1,186                   1,132
Pseudo-R2                                 0.07                 0.09            0.10               0.10                     0.31
Log-likelihood                            -653                 -642            -634               -628                    -466
Notes:
***Significant at 0.1%; **Significant at 1%; *Significant at 5%.
Coefficient estimates are provided with standard errors in parentheses.
Observations are lower in model IV and V due to one subject not providing his/her risk preference and subjects providing their
education level as "Other".


                        5.2.2 Mediation analysis

      We now examine mediators of the default effect we find in the Netherlands. Subjects in the opt-out
      condition were significantly more likely to feel regret about not purchasing flood insurance coverage if a
      flood were to occur next year (Ordered Probit model coefficient estimate = 0.22, p-value = 0.01), and less
      likely to find the annual flood insurance cost too expensive (Ordered Probit model coefficient estimate = -
      0.16, p-value = 0.05). Regret and insurance cost are also significantly related to the likelihood of flood
      insurance purchase in the Netherlands (Probit model coefficient estimates = 0.35 and -0.27, p-values =
      0.00). 17


      17
        In the UK, the influence of opt-out on regret is insignificant (Ordered Probit model coefficient estimate = 0.02, p-
      value = 0.81), although regret is a positive predictor of flood insurance demand (Probit model coefficient estimate =
      0.28, p-value = 0.00). Perhaps opt-out does not impact regret in the UK because the average value is very high overall.

                                                                23
Following Kohler et al. (2011), we examine the degree to which regret and insurance cost mediate the
default effect. Their method provides unbiased decompositions of total effects into direct and indirect
effects for nonlinear binary probability models, such as Probit. It has been shown to perform as well as, or
better than other available methods (Breen et al., 2013).

Table 4 displays the total effect of opt-out on insurance demand divided into direct effect and indirect effect
via regret and insurance cost using the Probit model. Overall, the opt-out condition increases the likelihood
of insuring in the Netherlands by between 17 and 18 percentage points. Controlling for regret and insurance
cost leaves a direct effect of between 11 and 12 percentage points. Therefore the indirect effect, which is
the share of the relationship between opt-out and insurance demand which is due to regret and insurance
cost is 6 percentage points. Approximately one-third (between 34 and 37 percent) of the relationship
between opt-out and insurance demand is due to regret and insurance cost. 18 Moreover, regret explains a
larger proportion of this relationship than insurance cost. Insurance cost mediation becomes only
marginally significant (p-value < 0.1) after including control variables, although this may be due to lower
observations once control variables are included (see Table 4). The partial mediation we find is consistent
with other default effects studies (Keller et al., 2011; Dinner et al., 2011). Partial mediation means that
regret and insurance cost account for only some of the relationship between opt-out and flood insurance
demand. It may also either indicate that our variables are a noisy measure of loss aversion, or that there are
other mediating factors which are not accounted for in the analysis (Johnson et al., 2007).




There is also lower variation in the variable regret in the UK compared to in the Netherlands, and so less variation in
regret to explain. Consistent with the Netherlands, UK subjects in the opt-out condition are less likely to find the
annual flood insurance cost too expensive (Ordered Probit model coefficient estimate = -0.23, p-value = 0.01), and
the variable insurance cost is negatively related to flood insurance demand (Probit model coefficient estimate = -0.34,
p-value = 0.00).
18
   In a separate mediation analysis for the UK, we find that after omitting subjects with previous flooding experience
and those who report to currently hold flood insurance, as well as risk seeking subjects (defined as subjects who
responded to the right of the central response category), the opt-out condition increases the likelihood of insuring in
the UK by between 10 and 12 percentage points (Probit model p-values < 0.05). Between 19 and 23 percent of the
relationship is due to insurance cost, however this mediation is not significant (p-values > 0.05) which may be due to
the low number of observations (254) within this subgroup. Detecting mediated effects is typically challenging in
small subgroups due to issues of statistical power (Fairchild and MacKinnon, 2009).

                                                          24
             Table 4: Decomposition of total effect of opt-out on flood insurance demand into
             direct effect and indirect effect via regret and insurance cost in the Netherlands
             using the Probit model
                                         Without control variables Including control variables
             Total effect                      0.18*** (0.03)                  0.17*** (0.03)
             Direct effect                     0.12*** (0.03)                  0.11*** (0.03)
             Indirect effect                         0.06                           0.06
                via regret                      0.04** (0.01)                   0.04** (0.01)
                via insurance cost              0.02* (0.01)                     0.02 (0.01)
             Mediation percentage                     34                              37
                via regret                            21                              23
                via insurance cost                    13                              14
             Observations                            599                             586
             Notes:
             ***Significant at 0.1%; **Significant at 1%; *Significant at 5%.
             Marginal effects are provided with standard errors in parentheses.
             Standard errors of difference are not known.
             Observations are lower with control variables due to one subject not providing his/her
             risk preference and subjects providing their education level as "Other".
             Control variables are flooding experience, hold insurance, risk preference, trust, age,
             male and higher education. We do not control for held insurance due to insufficient
             observations.


    6. DISCUSSION

Section 6.1 provides a discussion of our results related to the hypotheses presented in Section 3, and Section
6.2 outlines some directions for future research.

        6.1 Hypotheses

The present research demonstrates how default assignment can impact flood insurance demand. We find
clear evidence that the opt-out condition increases the likelihood of insuring (H1) by between 17 and 18
percentage points in the Netherlands, where flood insurance penetration rates are currently low and flooding
experiences are minor. However, there is no impact of the default on aggregate in the UK, where flood
insurance purchasing and actual flooding experience are considerably higher than in the Netherlands. After
controlling for these factors, the difference between the two countries becomes insignificant. Given that we
show flood insurance purchasing decisions and flooding experience lower the effectiveness of opt-out in
increasing flood insurance demand, H2 and H3 are supported.

The effects we find are consistent with List (2003), who showed that a greater level of expertise makes one
less prone to the endowment effect, and Löfgren et al. (2012) who found that individuals who have more
knowledge about their alternative choices are not impacted by defaults. In particular, one is likely to better
understand the impacts of flooding if they have experienced a disaster. They know about the costs and
benefits of having insurance (psychological or monetary) if they have purchased coverage.


                                                       25
Another result from the survey is that risk preferences moderate the default effect in the UK, where more
risk seeking subjects are less likely to purchase flood insurance coverage in the opt-out condition, but there
is no moderation effect in the Netherlands. We suspect that this may be because risk preferences are a more
powerful explainer of flood insurance demand in countries where individuals have higher flood risk
perceptions and a more general interest in flood insurance, which is the case in the UK.

We additionally show that subjects in the Netherlands in the opt-out condition were more likely to feel
regret about not purchasing flood insurance coverage if a flood were to occur, and less likely to deem the
annual flood insurance cost as too expensive. Subjects in the opt-out condition are likely to be more focused
on the potential uninsured flood losses and the regret associated with not insuring, and place lower weight
on the cost of insurance than those in the opt-in condition.

Subjects may also be less likely to deem the flood insurance cost as expensive in opt-out compared to opt-
in because of mental accounting, according to which individuals use cognitive operations to organize,
evaluate, and keep track of financial activities (Thaler, 1999). In opt-out, individuals may have explicitly
designated the spent money as "insurance purchases", and perceive flood insurance coverage as a small
portion of the total cost of the insurance policy, whereas individuals in opt-in may have labelled the money
required to add flood coverage to the insurance policy differently e.g., "cash on hand". The unequal
treatment of money, and in particular different marginal propensities for spending between mental accounts
entails a violation of standard economic theory which assumes fungibility (Thaler, 1990).

Together, the variables regret and insurance cost explain around one-third of the relationship between opt-
out and flood insurance demand in the Netherlands, so H4 is supported here. These findings are consistent
with the reference dependence and loss aversion account of the default effect found in some previous studies
(Dinner et al., 2011; Johnson et al., 2007), as well as the influence of anticipated emotions in explaining
anomalies like the endowment effect (Zhang and Fishbach, 2005; Kogler et al., 2013).

        6.2 Directions for future research

Given that flooding events are uncommon, one may question whether it is ethical to nudge individuals
towards more insurance. Without detailed information on individual consumers, such as their risks of
flooding and preferences towards risk, any attempt to nudge individuals towards more coverage may be
nudging the wrong way with respect to consumer welfare (Harrison and Ng, 2016). Some researchers have
encouraged the use of "smart defaults" to overcome the ethical issues involved in nudging (Goldstein et al.,
2008; Smith et al., 2013). Smart defaults collect consumer information (like socio-economic and geographic
factors) to set default options in a way that is more likely to benefit individual consumers. For example,
defaults may be set according to objective risk information like property elevation, distance to the nearest

                                                     26
river and whether or not additional protection measures are in place. The use of smart defaults in the flood
insurance market may provide a fruitful avenue for future research in order to achieve that those who need
insurance coverage the most are likely to carry it.

The results from this study should also be replicated in a field experiment so that the data would be based
on actual insurance purchases, rather than choices over a virtual insurance product. Even though a recent
meta-analysis by Jachimowicz et al. (2017) found no difference in default effect sizes between field
experiments and lab experiments, it is worthwhile to rule out that artificiality could be influencing
behaviour (Harrison and List, 2004), and to examine how the effect sizes might change when it comes to
choices in actual markets.

    7. CONCLUSION

Default assignment has been well researched in certain areas of decision making, like stimulating retirement
saving, organ donation, pro-environmental choices and healthy eating. To the best of our knowledge there
have been no studies on the impact of default options in the context of the insurance purchase decision for
LPHI impacts such as damage to ones property from floods. Another novelty of our study is that we focus
on whether past experience with respect to flood insurance purchase and past flood damage to one's
property may moderate the impact of the default.

Our results reveal that providing flood insurance as a default option can be an effective way of increasing
the insurance penetration rate in relatively new markets like the Netherlands. Raising the rates of insurance
purchase may be seen as societally desirable in light of evidence that flood losses are predicted to rise in
the future due to climate change. Moreover, in more established markets like the UK, there may exist
subgroups of the population for which defaults are most effective if they are risk averse, and have no
reported previous experience of flooding and purchasing flood insurance.

Our analysis suggests that defaults are effective in part due to the anticipated regret one might feel about
not purchasing flood insurance coverage if a flood were to occur. Policymakers may design default flood
insurance policies in a way that fosters this type of regret. That is, in addition to implementing flood
insurance coverage as the default option, framing flood risk so that individuals pay attention to the worst-
case scenario may be one such way. In particular, one might highlight the possible impact (monetary and/or
psychologically) of experiencing a catastrophic flood event uninsured to increase anticipated regret
saliency.




                                                      27
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This study received financial support from the Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research (NWO)
VIDI Grant No. 452.14.005 and Alfred P. Sloan Foundation Grant No. G-2018-11100.

APPENDIX




             Figure A1: Distribution of risk preference in the Netherlands and the UK

       Notes: higher values represent more risk seeking.




                                                  28
          Figure A2: Distribution of regret in the Netherlands and the UK

Notes: higher values represent more regret.




                                              29
      Figure A3: Distribution of insurance cost in the Netherlands and the UK

Notes: higher values represent higher perceived insurance cost.




                                           30
           Figure A4: Distribution of trust in the Netherlands and the UK

Notes: higher values represent more trust in flood defenses.




                                            31
REFERENCES

Aerts, J.C. and Botzen, W.W., 2011. Climate change impacts on pricing long-term flood insurance: A
      comprehensive study for the Netherlands. Global Environmental Change, 21(3), pp.1045-1060.
Andor, M., Osberghaus, D. and Simora, M., 2017. Natural disasters and governmental aid: Is there a
     charity hazard?. ZEW-Centre for European Economic Research Discussion Paper. Available at
     SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3087900
Bhargava, S. and Loewenstein, G., 2015. Behavioral economics and public policy 102: Beyond nudging.
     American Economic Review, 105(5), pp.396-401.
Bos, F. and Zwaneveld, P., 2017. Cost-benefit analysis for flood risk management and water governance
      in the Netherlands: An overview of one century. CPB Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy
      Analysis.
Botzen, W.W. and van den Bergh, J.C., 2009. Bounded rationality, climate risks, and insurance: Is there a
     market for natural disasters?. Land Economics, 85(2), pp.265-278.
Botzen, W.W. and van den Bergh, J.C., 2012. Risk attitudes to low-probability climate change risks:
     WTP for flood insurance. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 82(1), pp.151-166.
Bradt, J., 2019. Comparing the effects of behaviorally-informed interventions on flood insurance demand:
      An experimental analysis of `boosts' and `nudges'. Behavioural Public Policy, forthcoming.
      Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3424279
Breen, R., Karlson, K.B. and Holm, A., 2013. Total, direct, and indirect effects in logit and probit models.
     Sociological Methods & Research, 42(2), pp.164-191.
Browne, M.J., Knoller, C. and Richter, A., 2015. Behavioral bias and the demand for bicycle and flood
    insurance. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 50(2), pp.141-160.
Chaudhry, S.J., Hand, M. and Kunreuther, H., 2018. Extending the time horizon: Elevating concern for
     rare events by communicating losses over a longer period of time. The Wharton School, University
     of Pennsylvania Working Paper.
Coe, N.B., Belbase, A. and Wu, A.Y., 2016. Overcoming barriers to life insurance coverage: A behavioral
     approach. Risk Management and Insurance Review, 19(2), pp.307-336.
Cohen, J.F., Richardson, S.A., Cluggish, S.A., Parker, E., Catalano, P.J. and Rimm, E.B., 2015. Effects of
     choice architecture and chef-enhanced meals on the selection and consumption of healthier school
     foods: A randomized clinical trial. JAMA Pediatrics, 169(5), pp.431-437.
Cologna, V., Bark, R.H. and Paavola, J., 2017. Flood risk perceptions and the UK media: Moving beyond
     "once in a lifetime" to "be prepared" reporting. Climate Risk Management, 17, pp.1-10.
Dinner, I., Johnson, E.J., Goldstein, D. and Liu, K., 2011. Partitioning default effects: Why people choose
     not to choose. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 17(4), p.332.
Dohmen, T., Falk, A., Huffman, D., Sunde, U., Schupp, J. and Wagner, G.G., 2011. Individual risk
    attitudes: Measurement, determinants, and behavioral consequences. Journal of the European
    Economic Association, 9(3), pp.522-550.




                                                    32
Eckel, C.C., El-Gamal, M.A. and Wilson, R.K., 2009. Risk loving after the storm: A Bayesian-Network
      study of Hurricane Katrina evacuees. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 69(2),
      pp.110-124.
Etchart-Vincent, N., 2009. Probability weighting and the `level' and `spacing' of outcomes: An
      experimental study over losses. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 39(1), pp.45-63.
Fairchild, A.J. and MacKinnon, D.P., 2009. A general model for testing mediation and moderation
      effects. Prevention Science, 10(2), pp.87-99.
Goldstein, D.G., Johnson, E.J., Herrmann, A. and Heitmann, M., 2008. Nudge your customers toward
     better choices. Harvard Business Review, 86(12), pp.99-105.
Harrison, G.W. and List, J.A., 2004. Field experiments. Journal of Economic Literature, 42(4), pp.1009-
      1055.
Harrison, G.W. and Ng, J.M., 2016. Evaluating the expected welfare gain from insurance. Journal of Risk
      and Insurance, 83(1), pp.91-120.
Hensher, D.A., Rose, J.M. and Greene, W.H., 2005. Applied choice analysis: A primer. Cambridge
     University Press.
HM Government, 2016. National Flood Resilience Review. Available at:
    https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/national-flood-resilience-review
Huber, M., 2004. Insurability and regulatory reform: Is the English flood insurance regime able to adapt
     to climate change?. The Geneva Papers on Risk and Insurance. Issues and Practice, 29(2), pp.169-
     182.
Huber, O., Wider, R. and Huber, O.W., 1997. Active information search and complete information
     presentation in naturalistic risky decision tasks. Acta Psychologica, 95(1), pp.15-29.
Institute and Faculty of Actuaries, 2016. The future of UK flood policy: Policy summary. Available at:
       https://www.actuaries.org.uk/news-and-insights/media-centre/media-releases-and-
       statements/increased-spending-flood-defences-not-enough-solve-flooding-problems
Islam, A., Mahmud, M. and Raschky, P.A., 2018. Natural disaster and risk-sharing behavior: Evidence
      from rural Bangladesh. Monash University Working Paper.
Jachimowicz, J.M., Duncan, S., Weber, E.U. and Johnson, E.J., 2017. When and why defaults influence
      decisions: A meta-analysis of default effects. Behavioural Public Policy, doi:10.1017/bpp.2018.43
Johnson, E.J., Bellman, S. and Lohse, G.L., 2002. Defaults, framing and privacy: Why opting in-opting
     out. Marketing Letters, 13(1), pp.5-15.
Johnson, E.J. and Goldstein, D., 2003. Do defaults save lives?. Science, 302, pp.1338-1339.
Johnson, E.J., Häubl, G. and Keinan, A., 2007. Aspects of endowment: A query theory of value
     construction. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 33(3).
Johnson, E.J., Hassin, R., Baker, T., Bajger, A.T. and Treuer, G., 2013. Can consumers make affordable
     care affordable? The value of choice architecture. PloS One, 8(12).
Johnson, E.J., Hershey, J., Meszaros, J. and Kunreuther, H., 1993. Framing, probability distortions, and
     insurance decisions. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 7(1), pp.35-51.


                                                    33
Kahneman, D., Knetsch, J.L. and Thaler, R.H., 1991. Anomalies: The endowment effect, loss aversion,
     and status quo bias. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 5(1), pp.193-206.
Kahneman, D. and Tversky, A., 1979. Prospect theory: An analysis of decisions under risk.
     Econometrica, 47.
Keller, P.A., Harlam, B., Loewenstein, G. and Volpp, K.G., 2011. Enhanced active choice: A new method
      to motivate behavior change. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 21(4), pp.376-383.
Kogler, C., Kühberger, A. and Gilhofer, R., 2013. Real and hypothetical endowment effects when
     exchanging lottery tickets: Is regret a better explanation than loss aversion?. Journal of Economic
     Psychology, 37, pp.42-53.
Kohler, U., Karlson, K.B. and Holm, A., 2011. Comparing coefficients of nested nonlinear probability
     models. The Stata Journal, 11(3), pp.420-438.
Kousky, C., 2018. Financing flood losses: A discussion of the National Flood Insurance Program. Risk
     Management and Insurance Review, 21(1), pp.11-32.
Krieger, M. and Felder, S., 2013. Can decision biases improve insurance outcomes? An experiment on
     status quo bias in health insurance choice. International Journal of Environmental Research and
     Public Health, 10(6), pp.2560-2577.
Kunreuther, H., 2015. The role of insurance in reducing losses from extreme events: The need for public­
     private partnerships. The Geneva Papers on Risk and Insurance-Issues and Practice, 40(4), pp.741-
     762.
Kunreuther, H., Novemsky, N. and Kahneman, D., 2001. Making low probabilities useful. Journal of Risk
     and Uncertainty, 23(2), pp.103-120.
Kunreuther, H. and Pauly, M., 2004. Neglecting disaster: Why don't people insure against large losses?.
     Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 28(1), pp.5-21.
Kunreuther, H. and Pauly, M., 2018. Dynamic insurance decision-making for rare events: The role of
     emotions. The Geneva Papers on Risk and Insurance-Issues and Practice, 43(2), pp.335-355.
List, J.A., 2003. Does market experience eliminate market anomalies?. The Quarterly Journal of
       Economics, 118(1), pp.41-71.
List, J.A., 2004. Neoclassical theory versus prospect theory: Evidence from the marketplace.
       Econometrica, 72(2), pp.615-625.
Löfgren, Å., Martinsson, P., Hennlock, M. and Sterner, T., 2012. Are experienced people affected by a
     pre-set default option--Results from a field experiment. Journal of Environmental Economics and
     Management, 63(1), pp.66-72.
McCarthy, M., Spillane, S., Walsh, S. and Kendon, M., 2016. The meteorology of the exceptional winter
    of 2015/2016 across the UK and Ireland. Weather, 71(12), pp.305-313.
McKenzie, C.R., Liersch, M.J. and Finkelstein, S.R., 2006. Recommendations implicit in policy defaults.
    Psychological Science, 17(5), pp.414-420.
Meyer, R. and Kunreuther, H., 2017. The ostrich paradox: Why we underprepare for disasters.
     Philadelphia, PA: Wharton Digital Press.



                                                    34
Muchan, K., Lewis, M., Hannaford, J. and Parry, S., 2015. The winter storms of 2013/2014 in the UK:
    Hydrological responses and impacts. Weather, 70(2), pp.55-61.
Page, L., Savage, D.A. and Torgler, B., 2014. Variation in risk seeking behaviour following large losses:
      A natural experiment. European Economic Review, 71, pp.121-131.
Paudel, Y., Botzen, W.W. and Aerts, J.C., 2012. A comparative study of public--private catastrophe
     insurance systems: Lessons from current practices. The Geneva Papers on Risk and Insurance-
     Issues and Practice, 37(2), pp. 257-285.
Penning-Rowsell, E.C., 2014. The 2013/14 floods: What do they tell us about overall flood risk in
     England and Wales. Circulation, 121.
Penning-Rowsell, E.C. and Priest, S.J., 2015. Sharing the burden of increasing flood risk: Who pays for
     flood insurance and flood risk management in the United Kingdom. Mitigation and Adaptation
     Strategies for Global Change, 20(6), pp.991-1009.
Penning-Rowsell, E.C., Priest, S. and Johnson, C., 2014. The evolution of UK flood insurance:
     Incremental change over six decades. International Journal of Water Resources Development,
     30(4), pp.694-713.
Pitt, M., 2008. Learning lessons from the 2007 floods: An independent review by Sir Michael Pitt.
       London: Cabinet Office.
Plott, C.R. and Zeiler, K., 2005. The willingness to pay-willingness to accept gap, the "endowment
       effect", subject misconceptions, and experimental procedures for eliciting valuations. American
       Economic Review, 95(3), pp.530-545.
Robinson, P.J. and Botzen, W.W., 2019. Flood insurance demand and probability weighting: The
     influences of regret, worry, locus of control and the threshold of concern heuristic. Water Resources
     and Economics, in press.
Samuelson, W. and Zeckhauser, R., 1988. Status quo bias in decision making. Journal of Risk and
    Uncertainty, 1(1), pp.7-59.
Sautua, S.I., 2017. Does uncertainty cause inertia in decision making? An experimental study of the role
     of regret aversion and indecisiveness. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 136, pp.1-14.
Smith, N.C., Goldstein, D. and Johnson, E.J., 2013. Choice without awareness: Ethical and policy
     implications of defaults. Journal of Public Policy & Marketing, 32(2), pp.159-172.
Statistics Netherlands, 2018. StatLine Database. Centraal Bureau voor de Statistiek, http://www.cbs.nl
Sugden, R., 2003. Reference-dependent subjective expected utility. Journal of Economic Theory, 111(2),
     pp.172-191.
Sunstein, C.R., 2013. Deciding by default. University of Pennsylvania Law Review, 162.
Surminski, S., 2018. Fit for purpose and fit for the future? An evaluation of the UK's new flood
     reinsurance pool. Risk Management and Insurance Review, 21(1), pp.33-72.
Surminski, S., Aerts, J.C., Botzen, W.W., Hudson, P., Mysiak, J. and Pérez-Blanco, C.D., 2015.
     Reflections on the current debate on how to link flood insurance and disaster risk reduction in the
     European Union. Natural Hazards, 79(3), pp.1451-1479.



                                                    35
Surminski, S. and Eldridge, J., 2017. Flood insurance in England­an assessment of the current and newly
     proposed insurance scheme in the context of rising flood risk. Journal of Flood Risk Management,
     10(4), pp.415-435.
Suykens, C.B.R., Priest, S., van Doorn-Hoekveld, W.J., Thuillier, T. and van Rijswick, H.F.M.W., 2016.
     Dealing with flood damages: Will prevention, mitigation, and ex post compensation provide for a
     resilient triangle?. Ecology and Society, 21(4).
Terpstra, T., 2011. Emotions, trust, and perceived risk: Affective and cognitive routes to flood
      preparedness behavior. Risk Analysis, 31(10), pp.1658-1675.
Thaler, R.H., 1999. Mental accounting matters. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 12(3), pp.183-
      206.
Thaler, R.H., 1990. Anomalies: Saving, fungibility, and mental accounts. Journal of Economic
      Perspectives, 4(1), pp.193-205.
Thaler, R.H., 1980. Toward a positive theory of consumer choice. Journal of Economic Behavior &
      Organization, 1(1), pp.39-60.
Thaler R.H. and Sunstein C.R., 2008. Nudge: Improving decisions about health, wealth, and happiness.
      Yale University Press, New Haven.
Tversky, A. and Kahneman, D., 1974. Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Science,
     185(4157), pp.1124-1131.
Ungemach, C., Camilleri, A.R., Johnson, E.J., Larrick, R.P. and Weber, E.U., 2017. Translated attributes
    as choice architecture: Aligning objectives and choices through decision signposts. Management
    Science, 64(5), pp.2445-2459.
Wallemacq, P., 2018. Economic losses, poverty & disasters: 1998-2017. Centre for Research on the
     Epidemiology of Disasters, CRED.
Wouters, K., 2005. Veiligheid Nederland in Kaart Globale Schadeberekening: Achtergronddocument.
     Rijkswaterstaat, Delft.
Zhang, Y. and Fishbach, A., 2005. The role of anticipated emotions in the endowment effect. Journal of
     Consumer Psychology, 15(4), pp.316-324.




                                                    36
