                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          DYNAMICS OF MARKUPS, CONCENTRATION AND PRODUCT SPAN

                                       Elhanan Helpman
                                     Benjamin C. Niswonger

                                       Working Paper 27389
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27389


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2020




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Elhanan Helpman and Benjamin C. Niswonger. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Dynamics of Markups, Concentration and Product Span
Elhanan Helpman and Benjamin C. Niswonger
NBER Working Paper No. 27389
June 2020
JEL No. D43,L11,L13,L25

                                          ABSTRACT

We develop a model with a finite number of multi-product firms that populate an industry
together with a continuum of single product firms, and study the dynamics of this industry that
arises from investments in the invention of new products. Consistent with the available evidence,
the model predicts rising markups and concentration and a declining labor share. We then
examine the dynamics of market shares and product spans in response to improvements in the
technologies of the multi-product and single product firms, and the impact of these changes on
the steady state distribution of market shares and product spans. Our model predicts the
possibility of an inverted-U relationship between labor productivity and product span in the cross-
section of firms, for which we provide suggestive evidence. It also predicts that rising entry costs
of single-product firms may flatten the relationship between labor productivity and market shares
of the large multi-product firms.


Elhanan Helpman
Department of Economics
Harvard University
1875 Cambridge Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and CEPR
and also NBER
ehelpman@harvard.edu

Benjamin C. Niswonger
Harvard University
niswonger@g.harvard.edu
1    Introduction
A number of recent studies have investigated the evolution of markups and the growth of concentra-
tion in U.S. industries, finding that both markups and concentration have increased; see Autor et al.
(2020); De Loecker et al. (2020). These studies find that the ascent in average markups was driven
by rising markups of the largest firms and market share reallocation from low- to high-markup firms.
Contemporaneously, the labor share declined. We develop a model of firm dynamics that generates
these patterns, as well as rich predictions about the unfolding of the cross-section of firms. Our
theory focuses on the evolution of a sector rather than on long-run growth of the entire economy.
    An industry has a continuum of varieties of a differentiated product and it is populated by
a continuum of single-product firms and a finite number of large multi-product firms. While the
turnover of single-product firms is very high, the large multi-product firms have long life spans.
Large firms lose some products over time, but they can invest in innovation in order to replenish
or expand the range of their products. Free entry of the single-product firms, which engage in
monopolistic competition, creates a competitive fringe that impacts the oligopolistic competition of
the large firms. The interaction between the single- and multi-product firms plays a key role in the
dynamics of this industry, both during transition and in steady state.1
    Our assumptions capture salient feature of the data. According to Cao et al. (2019), 95% of
firms in the U.S. economy are single-establishment firms, but their share in employment is only
45%. Furthermore, Kehrig and Vincent (2019) report that during 1972-2007 an average of 72%
of the plants in manufacturing belonged to single-plant firms and 28% belonged to multi-plant
firms (see their Table A1). At the same time, single-plant firms manufactured 22% of value added
compared to 78% of the value added manufactured by multi-plant firms. Both studies point out
that firm growth took place mostly through the extensive margin, by opening new plants that
often produced new products. In addition Hsieh and Rossi-Hansberg (2020) provide evidence that
firm growth through the acquisition of new product lines played an important role in the business
strategies of U.S. corporations in three major sectors: services, retail and wholesale. Growth of
firms in these sectors was driven by expansions to new locations, i.e., new product lines. Finally,
studying the size distribution of firms between 1995 and 2014, Cao et al. (2019) conclude that the
largest contributors to the increase in the number of establishments per firm were declining costs of
innovation and declining exit rates.
    The theory developed in this paper predicts that large multi-product firms grow through inno-
vation that expands their product lines, eventually reaching a steady state. In the processes, these
firms raise their markups and reduce their labor share. As a result, the aggregate markup rises and
the aggregate labor share declines. The aggregate markup rises as a result of rising markups of
   1
     Interactions between a monopolistically competitive fringe of single-product firms and oligopolistic large firms
have been studied in a static framework by Shimomura and Thisse (2012) in a closed economy and by Parenti (2018)
in an open economy. Cavenaile et al. (2019) develop a model of endogenous growth with quality-ladders, in which
there is a fringe of competitive small firms that produce a homogenous good. In addition, there are single-product
large firms that produce different varieties of a product. Their model is mostly quantitative, used to study the
relationship between innovation and competition.



                                                         2
the multi-product firms and the reallocation of market shares from single- to multi-product firms.
The steady state size distribution of firms is driven by heterogeneity of labor productivity, with
more productive firms having larger market shares. Nevertheless, this monotonic relationship does
not translate into a monotonic relationship between productivity and product span. The reason
is that the marginal profitability of investment in innovation is larger when manufacturing costs
are lower, but larger market shares reduce the incentives to invent new products. We show this
tension can produce an inverted-U relationship between labor productivity and product span in the
cross-section of firms. Using the Compustat data for 2018, we provide evidence that supports this
prediction. Our model also predicts that improvements in the technology of single-product firms,
which raise the competitive pressure on the multi-product oligopolies, lead to a decline in the market
share of every large firm on impact. Still, the resulting transition dynamics to a new steady state
vary across the large firms according to size. In particular, multi-product firms with large market
shares compensate for the initial loss of competitiveness, as reflected in the loss of market share, by
gradually expanding their product span and raising their market share over time, while firms with
small market shares further reduce their product span and market shares over time. As a result,
the size distribution of multi-product firms becomes more unequal in the new steady state.
        We describe some basic elements of the model in the next section. In Section 3 we detail the
entry decisions of single-product firms and their impact on the pricing strategy of large firms. These
results are then used in Section 4 to study the innovation decisions of large firms and the resulting
transition dynamics. We show that whenever multi-product firms widen their product span in the
transition, they grow in size and so do their markups, while the labor share declines. In the following
Section 5 we study comparative dynamics, some of which were described above. Section 6 concludes.


2        Preliminaries
We consider an economy with a continuum of individuals of mass 1, each one providing l units of
labor. The labor market is competitive and every individual earns the same wage rate.
        There are two sectors. One sector produces a homogeneous good with one unit of labor per unit
output and there is always positive demand for its product. We normalize the price of this good to
equal one. Therefore the competitive wage also equals one. The other sector produces varieties of
a differentiated product.2
        Every individual has a utility function:

                                                          N
                                                                       -1       (-1)
                                u = x0 +                      x(  )         d   ( -1)   ,  >  > 1,           (1)
                                            -1        0

where x0 is consumption of the homogeneous good, x( ) is consumption of variety  of the differ-
entiated product,  is the elasticity of substitution between varieties of the differentiated product
and  gauges the degree of substitutability between varieties of the differentiated product and the
    2
        It is straightforward to generalize the analysis to multiple sectors with differentiated products.



                                                                  3
homogeneous good. The assumption  >  asserts that brands of the differentiated product are
better substitutes for each other than for the homogeneous good. The assumption  > 1 ensures
that aggregate spending on the differentiated product declines when its price rises (see below).
       Real consumption of the differentiated product is:

                                                       N            -1        
                                          X=               x(  )         d    -1   .
                                                   0

Using this definition, the price index of X is:

                                                       N                      1
                                          P =              p( )1- d          1-    ,
                                                   0

where p( ) is the price of variety  . In this setup utility maximization subject to the budget
constraint x0 + P X = I yields X = P - , where I is income, as long as consumers purchase the
homogenous good and varieties of the differentiated product, which we assume always to be the
case (this requires l to be large enough). The demand for variety  is:


                                       x (  ) = P  p (  ) -  ,  =  -  > 0.                                       (2)

Aggregate spending on the differentiated product equals P X = P 1- , which declines in P , because
 > 1. An individual's consumption choice yields the indirect utility function

                                                             1
                                              V =I+             P 1-  ,
                                                             -1

where the second term on the right-hand side represents consumer surplus. Aggregating across all
individuals we obtain the aggregate indirect utility function

                                                              1
                                             VA = I A +          P 1-  ,                                         (3)
                                                              -1

where IA is aggregate income.
       Two types of firms operate in sector X : atomless single-product firms and large multi-product
firms, each one with a positive measure of product lines (recall the discussion in the introduction
of evidence in support of this specification). Single-product firms produce r > 0 varieties, each one
specializing in a single brand. Large firm i has ri > 0 product lines, i = 1, 2, ..., m, where m is the
number of large firms. All the brands supplied to the market are distinct from each other.
       All single-product firms share the same technology, which requires a
                                                                          ¯ unit of labor per unit out-
put.3 Facing the demand function (2), a single-product firm maximizes profits P  p( )- [p( ) - a
                                                                                               ¯ ],
taking as given the price index P . Therefore, a single-product firm prices its brand  according to
   3
    It is straightforward to allow for heterogeneity of the single-product firms, by assuming that each one of them
draws a unit labor requirement from a known distribution. Since this type of heterogeneity plays no essential role in
our analysis, we have chosen to work with the simpler formulation.




                                                             4
p( ) = p, where:
                                                          
                                                    p=       a
                                                             ¯.                                       (4)
                                                          -1
This yields the standard markup µ = / ( - 1) for a monopolistically competitive firm.
        A large firm i has a technology that requires ai units of labor per unit output, and it faces the
demand function (2) for each one of its brands. As a result, it prices every brand equally. We
denote this price by pi . The firm chooses pi to maximize profits ri P  p- 
                                                                         i (pi - ai ). However, unlike
a single-product firm, a large firm does not view P as given, because it recognizes that

                                                                              1
                                                            m                1- 

                                        P = r p1- +               rj p1
                                                                      j
                                                                        - 
                                                                                   ,                  (5)
                                                           j =1

and therefore that its pricing policy has a measurable impact on the price index of the differentiated
product. Accounting for this dependence of P on the firm's price, the profit maximizing price is:

                                                         - si
                                                pi =             ai ,                                 (6)
                                                        - si - 1
where si is the market share of firm i and:4

                                            ri p1
                                                i
                                                  -               1- 
                                                              ri pi
                                     si =           =                        1-  .                    (7)
                                             P 1-     r p1-  + m    j =1 rj pj


Equations (6) and (7) jointly determine prices and market shares of large firms. The markup factor
of firm i is µi = ( - si )/( - si - 1), which is increasing in its market share. When the market
share equals zero the markup is /( - 1), the same as the markup of a single product firm. The
markup factor varies across firms as a result of differences in either the product span, ri , or the
marginal production cost, ai . We analyze the dependence of prices, market shares and markups on
marginal costs and product spans in the next section.


3        Entry of Single-Product Firms
We take as given the number of large firms, and focus the analysis on the evolution of their product
spans, ri , in the next section. Unlike large firms, single-product firms enter the industry until their
profits equal zero. Firms in this sector play a two-stage game: in the first stage single-product
firms enter; in the second stage all firms play a Bertrand game as described in the previous section.
Under these circumstances, (4) and (6) portray the equilibrium prices, except that the number of
single product firms, r
                      ¯, is endogenous. We seek to characterize a subgame perfect equilibrium of
this game.
        To determine the equilibrium number of single-product firms, assume that they face an entry
cost f and they enter until profits equal zero. In a subgame perfect equilibrium every entrant
    4
        Note that  - si - 1 =  (1 - si ) + si - 1 > 0 and  - si =  (1 - si ) + si > 0.



                                                           5
correctly forecasts the number of entrants, and the price that will be charged for every variety in
the second stage of the game. Therefore, every single-product firm correctly forecasts the price index
P . Using the optimal price (4) and the profit function P  p- (p - a
                                                                   ¯), this free entry condition can
be expressed as:
                                                        1- 
                                         1      
                                          P        a
                                                   ¯          = f.                                 (8)
                                                -1
The left-hand side of this equation describes the operating profits, which equal a fraction 1/ of
revenue, while the right-hand side represents the entry cost. In these circumstances the price index
P is determined by f and a
                         ¯, and it is rising in both f and a
                                                           ¯. Importantly, it does not depend on
the number of large firms nor on their product spans.
   We now use (6) and (7) to calculate the response of prices and market shares to changes in the
number of product lines, changes in marginal costs, and changes in the price index P . Denoting by a
hat the proportional rate of change of a variable, i.e., x
                                                         ^ = dx/x, differentiating these two equations
yields the solutions:

                                    i                1             ( - 1)i ^
                        p
                        ^i =               r
                                           ^i +             ^i +
                                                            a                P,                    (9)
                               1 + ( - 1)i      1 + ( - 1)i      1 + ( - 1)i

                                    1               -1               -1      ^.
                        s
                        ^i =               r
                                           ^i -             ^i +
                                                            a                P                    (10)
                               1 + ( - 1)i      1 + ( - 1)i      1 + ( - 1)i
where:

                                                   si
                                     i =                       > 0.                               (11)
                                           ( - si - 1)( - si )
   Due to the fact that the price index P responds neither to changes in ri nor changes in ai , an
increase in ri raises pi and si , but it has no impact on prices and market shares of the other large
firms. For the same reason, an increase in ai raises pi and reduces si , but has no impact on prices
and market shares of the other large firms. Moreover, an increase in ai raises the price of firm i less
than proportionately, and therefore there is only partial pass-through of marginal costs to prices.
The extent of the pass-through is smaller for a firm with a larger i , which is a firm with a larger
market share. Finally, an increase in the price index P , which represents a decline in the competitive
pressure in the industry, raises the price and the market share of every large firm. However, the
price rises proportionately more and the market share rises proportionately less in firms with larger
i s, which are firm with larger market shares. Finally, the market share of a firm is larger the larger
is its product span or the lower is its marginal cost of production. Noting again that the markup
of every firm i is larger the larger its market share, we summarize these findings in

Proposition 1. Suppose that the number of large firms and their product spans are given, but there
is free entry of single-product firms. Then: (i) an increase in ri raises the price, markup and market
share of firm i, but has no impact on prices, markups and market shares of the other large firms;
(ii) a decline in ai reduces the price and raises the markup and market share of firm i, but has no


                                                    6
impact on prices, markups and market shares of other large firms; (iii) a decline in the price index
P , either due to a decline in a
                               ¯ or a decline in f , reduces the price, markup and market share of every
large firm, with prices changing proportionately more and market shares changing proportionately
less for firms with initially larger market shares.

        It is clear from this proposition that free entry of single-product firms leads large firms to
compete for market share with single-product firms rather than with each other.5 An increase in
ri or a decline in ai , each of which raises the market share of firm i, does not impact the market
share of other large firms, but do reduce the market share of single-product firms. Since the price
index P does not change in response to changes in the number of product lines ri or the marginal
cost ai , the decline in the market share of the single-product firms is attained via a decline in their
joint product span r
                   ¯. We therefore have

Proposition 2. Suppose that the number of large firms and their product spans are given, but there
is free entry of single-product firms. Then a decline in ai or an increase in ri reduces the number
of single-product firms and their market share.


4        Transition Dynamics
We next study the dynamics that arise when large firms can expand their product lines. Time is
continuous and the economy starts at time t = 0. The range of products of firm i at time t is ri (t)
                       0 is given.
for t  0 and ri (0) = ri
        Similarly to Klette and Kortum (2004), at every point in time firm i can invest in innovation in
order to increase the number of its product lines. An investment flow of i per unit time expands ri
by  (i ) units per unit time, where  (i ) is the innovation function, assumed to be increasing and
concave and  (0) = 0. Furthermore, ri depreciates at the rate  per unit time, which randomly
hits the continuum of available brands. It follows that the product span ri satisfies the differential
equation:
                                         i = (i ) - ri , for all t  0,
                                         r                                                                     (12)

where we have suppressed the time index t in r
                                             i , ri and i .
        The endogenous expansion of product lines plays an important role in our theory. Hsieh and
Rossi-Hansberg (2020) provide evidence that it also played an important role in the business strate-
gies of U.S. corporations in three key sectors--services, retail and wholesale--where firm growth
was dominated by expansion to new locations, i.e., new product lines. Cao et al. (2019) make a
similar argument more broadly; firms grew predominantly on the extensive margin, through new
establishments that often represented new product lines.6
    5
     This is different, for example, from Atkeson and Burstein (2008), who have a continuum of industries, each one
populated by a finite number of large single-product firms, and no small firms. Nevertheless, our and their pricing
formulas have common elements.
   6
     Aghion et al. (2019) develop a model of economic growth in which the total number (measure) of product lines is
constant, but a single firm can operate multiple product lines. They focus on explaining the decline in the long-run


                                                         7
    At every point in time the firms play a two stage game. In the first stage single-product firms
enter and large firms invest in innovation. Single-product firms live only one instant of time. For
this reason they make profits only in this single instant. This assumption captures in extreme form
the empirical property that the turnover of plants of small firms is much larger than the turnover
of plants of large firms. In the second stage all firms choose prices, in the manner described in
the previous section. Under the circumstances the price index P is determined by the free entry
condition (8), and it remains constant as long as the cost of entry and the cost of production of the
single-product firms do no change. It follows that the profit flow of large firm i is:

                                  i = ri P  p- 
                                             i (pi - ai ) - i , for all t  0,


where P is the same at every t while i , ri , pi and i change over time, and pi is given by (6).
    In this economy the state vector is r = (r1 , r2 , ..., rm ), a function of time t, and the price pi is a
function of r. Note, however, from (9) and (10) that pi and si depend only on the element ri of r.
We therefore can express the profit function as:

                         i (i , ri ) = ri P  pi (ri )- [pi (ri ) - ai ] - i , for all t  0,                   (13)

where pi (ri ) is the price of firm i's brands as a function of ri . This firm's market share is also a
function of ri , si (ri ). From (9) and (10) we obtain the elasticities of the functions pi (ri ) and si (ri ):

                                            pi ri        i
                                                  =             ,                                             (14)
                                            ri pi   1 + ( - 1)i

                                            si ri        1
                                                  =             ,                                             (15)
                                            ri si   1 + ( - 1)i
where i is defined in (11). Note that i is increasing in si and that, due to (10), si is increasing
in ri . Therefore i is increasing in ri . As a result, the elasticity of the price function is larger the
larger is si while the elasticity of the market share function is smaller the larger is si .
    Next assume that the interest rate is constant and equal to . This interest rate can be derived
from the assumption that individuals discount future utility flows (1) with a constant rate , so that
                                                                    -t
they maximize the discounted present value of utility             0 e  u(t)dt.       Under these circumstances
firm i maximizes the discounted present value of its profits net of investment costs. It therefore
solves the following optimal control problem:
growth rate. The key trigger of their dynamics is a decline in a static cost function c(n) that describes a firm's
overhead cost of operating n product lines. They argue that a fall in these costs was caused by the IT revolution.
Their firms have constant unit costs and the quality of products can be improved by investing in innovation, as in
standard models of endogenous growth with quality ladders (see Grossman and Helpman (1991) and Aghion and
Howitt (1992)). A firm acquires new product lines by gaining leadership positions through quality competition.
They characterize a steady state of an economy with two types of firms--high- and low-productivity (unit labor
requirements)--and study the impact of a decline in c(n) on concentration, labor shares, the reallocation of market
shares and the long-run growth rate.




                                                         8
                                                            
                                          max                  e-t i [i (t) , ri (t)] dt
                                     {i (t),ri (t)}t0   0

                                 0 , and a transversality condition to be described below. In this
subject to (12), (13), ri (0) = ri
problem i is a control variable while ri is a state variable. The current-value Hamiltonian of this
problem is:


                    H(i , ri , i ) = ri P  pi (ri )- [pi (ri ) - ai ] - i + i [ (i ) - ri ] ,

where i is the co-state variable of constraint (12). The co-state variable i varies over time. The
first-order conditions of this optimal control problem are:

                                             H
                                               = - 1 + i   (  i ) = 0 ,
                                             i

                                  H      ri P  p- 
                                                i ( pi - a i )        i - i ,
                              -      =-                        + i = 
                                  ri            ri
and the transversality condition is:


                                               lim e-t i (t) ri (t) = 0.
                                              t

In addition, the optimal path of (i , ri ) has to satisfy the differential equation (12).
    The above first-order conditions can be expressed as:

                                                        i  (i ) = 1,                                          (16)

        i = ( + ) i - P  pi (ri )- pi (ri ) - ai - ri pi (ri )-1 [pi (ri ) - ai ] - 1 p (ri ) .
                                                                                                              (17)

From (16) we obtain the investment level i as an increasing function of i , which we represent as
i (i ). Substituting this function into (12) yields the autonomous differential equation:

                                                 r
                                                 i =  [i (i )] - ri .                                         (18)

Next we substitute (6), (11) and (14) into (17) to obtain a second autonomous differential equation:

                                               i = (  +  )  i - i ( r i ) ,
                                                                                                              (19)

where:
                                                                    -
                           1-              - si (ri )                                  1
                 i (ri )  ai P                                                                            .   (20)
                                          - si (ri ) - 1                [ - si (ri ) - 1]  + si (ri )2  ²
The function i (ri ) represents the profitability of a new product line, given the firm's product span
ri ; that is, it represents the marginal profitability of ri . We show in the Appendix that this marginal
profitability declines in ri , i.e., i ( r i ) < 0.




                                                                9
                                           Figure 1: Transition Dynamics


      A solution to the autonomous system of differential equations (18) and (19) that satisfies the
transversality condition is also a solution to the firm's optimal control problem, because H(i , ri , i )
is concave in the first two arguments. This can be seen by observing that the Hamiltonian is
additively separable in i and ri , and it is strictly concave in i and in ri . The steady state of these
differential equations is characterized by:

                                                     [i (i )] = ri ,                                                 (21)

                                                 ( + ) i = i (ri ) .                                                 (22)

The left-hand side of (21) is an increasing function of i . Therefore the curve in (ri , i ) space
along which ri is constant is upward sloping. The right-hand side of (22) is declining in ri , because
i (ri ) < 0. Therefore the curve in (ri , i ) space along which i is constant is downward sloping.
These curves are depicted in Figure 1. Based on the differential equations (18)-(19), the figure also
depicts the resulting dynamics. There is a single stable saddle-path along which (ri , i ) converge
to the steady state and the transversality condition is satisfied in this steady state. On this saddle
                                                                                      0 is below or
path either ri rises and i declines or ri declines and i rises, depending on whether ri
above its steady-state value.
                                0 s are below their steady state values (this case arises, for example,
      Now suppose that all the ri
when the economy is in steady state and innovation costs decline; see below). Then every large firm
expands its range of products over time. As a result, the number of single-product firms shrinks.
This process continues until the economy reaches a steady state.
      If at some point in time the number of single-product firms drops to zero, the dynamics change.7
  7
      From that point on the optimal strategy of large firm i depends on the entire state vector r. As a result, the firms


                                                            10
We focus, however, on the case in which r
                                        ¯ > 0 for all t  0. In this case the price index P remains
constant as long as f and a
                          ¯ do not change.
    What can be said about the dynamics of profits of a large firm i? Changes of profits over time
can be expressed as:
                                 i (i , ri )    i  ri P  p- 
                                                          i (pi - ai ) ri
                                             =-   +                       .
                                   t            t         ri           t
From (16) we see that i is an increasing function of i , and since for a firm that expands its product
range i declines, it follows that the investment level i also declines over time, raising profits net
of investment costs. From (17) and (19) we see that:

                                         ri P  p- 
                                                i ( pi - a i )
                                                               = i (ri ) > 0.
                                                ri

Therefore, profits grow in a firm that adds new product lines. We conclude that profits net of
investment costs rise in growing firms. Since wages are constant, this implies that in an economy
in which all large firms grow, the share of labor in national income declines.
    While the share of labor declines over time, average markups are rising. To see the sources of
variation in average markups, note that the average markup µav can be expressed as a weighted
average of the markups of all single- and multi-product firms:

                                                          m                 m
                                         µav =      1-          si   µ
                                                                     ¯+            s i µi ,
                                                          i=1              i=1

where the markup of a single product firm is µ
                                             ¯ = / ( - 1) and the markup of large firm i is
µi = ( - si ) / ( - si - 1). Since the markup of every large firm is higher than the markup
of every single-product firm and the market share of every large firm rises over time, the average
markup also increases. The increase in the average markup is driven by two forces: rising markups
of the large firms and market share reallocation from low-markup (single-product) to high-markup
(multi-product) firms.8 We summarize these findings in
engage in a differential game. Since no firm can commit to the entire path of its investments i , one needs to adopt
the closed loop solution to this game, in which the investment level i is a function of the state vector r. There do
not exist user-friendly characterizations of solutions to such games. Instead, we provide in the Appendix an analysis
of the impact of changes in the state variables ri on prices, markups and market shares of the large firms.
    8
      Using a dynamic model of monopolistic competition with a Kimball aggregator, Edmond et al. (2019) decompose
the welfare cost of markups into three sources of influence: (i) aggregate markup; (ii) misallocation of inputs; and
(iii) inefficiently low entry of firms. Their quantitative model implies that (i) accounts for 3/4 of the welfare cost while
(ii) accounts for 1/4. The impact of entry is negligible. They show that in the Compustat data the sales-weighted
aggregate markup is higher than the cost-weighted aggregate markup and that the gap between them has widened
over time (see their Figure 8). In their model the cost-weighted aggregate markup turns out to be the relevant
measure for (i). Our aggregate markup µav has been constructed using sales shares, which seems to be suited for our
purpose. Nevertheless, we discuss in the Appendix a cost-weighted measure of the aggregate markup:
                                                           m              m
                                            µc
                                             av =    1-         i    µ
                                                                     ¯+          i µi ,
                                                          i=1             i=1

where i is the variable cost share of firm i. This measure does not necessarily rise on the transition path, but neither
does it play a distinct role in our analysis. We show in the Appendix that the cost weight i is rising in ri if and


                                                               11
                                                                           0 is smaller than its
Proposition 3. Consider an economy in which the initial range of products ri
steady state value for every i, and in which r
                                             ¯ > 0 at all times. Then over time: (i) every large firm
i widens its product span, raises its markup, and experiences rising profits net of investment costs;
(ii) the average markup rises and the labor share declines.

Since wages are constant, so is wage income. Nonetheless, in view of Proposition 3(i), aggregate
income--which consists of labor income plus aggregate profits net of investment costs--is rising
during the transition to a steady state. In view of the indirect utility function (3), this implies
that aggregate utility rises over time (recall that P remains constant). Moreover, if this economy is
populated by some individuals who own shares in large firms and other individuals who do not, the
growth of large multi-product firms widens the disparity of well-being between these two groups.
We summarize this finding in
                                                                         0 is smaller than its
Corollary 1. Consider an economy in which the initial range of products ri
steady state value for every i, and in which r
                                             ¯ > 0 at all times. Then over time the well-being of
individuals who derive income from labor only is constant while the well-being of individuals who
own shares in large firms rises.


5     Comparative Dynamics
For an economy that is initially in steady state, we study in this section the dynamics that arise
in response to changes in the cost of inventing new product lines, the marginal costs of production
and the cost of entry of single-product firms.
    First, consider a change in the cost of innovation, as reflected in a shift of the function  (i ).
We take  > 0 to be a productivity measure of innovation and express the modified innovation
function as  (i ). Initially  = 1. An upward shift in  represents a rise in the productivity of
investment in innovation or a decline in innovation costs, while a decline in  represents a decline in
the productivity of investment in innovation or a rise in innovation costs. The latter may arise when
it becomes harder to invent new product lines. With the new innovation function the dynamics of
product span, (12), become:


                                           i = (i ) - ri , for all t  0.
                                           r                                                                          (23)

In this case the first-order condition of the optimal control problem (16) becomes:

                                                     i  (i ) = 1,                                                     (24)

while the differential equation (19) does not change. From (24) we obtain the investment level i as
an increasing function of i , which we express as i (i ). This is the same i (·) function that we
only if i < 1 and it is declining in rj , j = i, if and only if j < 1. As a result, µc  av is rising due to increases in the
markups of the large firms, µi , i = 1, 2, ..., m, but the shifts in the cost shares may bring it down.



                                                            12
had before. Substituting this function into (23) yields the autonomous differential equation:

                                       r
                                       i =  [i (i )] - ri .

The steady state of this differential equations is characterized by:

                                            [i (i )] = ri ,

while the second steady state equation, (22), does not change, because the differential equation (19)
remains the same. For  = 1, the steady state and the dynamics depicted in Figure 1 remain the
same.
   Now consider an increase in , which represents a decline in the costs of inventing new product
lines. Since  [i (i )] is increasing in , this leads to a downward shift of the r     i = 0 curve
without changing the  i = 0 curve. As a result, i declines on impact to a new saddle path, starting
transition dynamics with declining values of i and rising values of ri . This process takes place in
every large firm, leading to a new steady state in which every large firm has a larger product span,
a larger market share and a higher markup. The average markup rises during the transition and it
is higher in the new steady state. The flow of aggregate utility also rises during this transition and
is higher in the new steady state. The flow utility rises because profits net of investment costs rise
while the price index P remains the same. We therefore have

Proposition 4. Suppose that every large firm i is in steady state and r
                                                                      ¯ > 0 at all times. Then a
decline in the cost of innovation, i.e., an increase in , leads all large firms to expand their product
range, raise their market shares and raise their markups. Contemporaneously, average markups
increase and so does the aggregate flow of utility.

   We next turn to changes in the marginal costs of production and the cost of entry of single-
product firms. As is evident from (21) and (22), such changes impact the new steady state through
the function i (ri ) only. A change that raises i (ri ) shifts upward the  i = 0 curve in Figure 1.
After the impact effect, which results from the upward jump in i , the dynamic process leads to a
gradual widening of the span of products and increases in the markup and profits net of investment
costs. In contrast, a change that reduces i (ri ) shifts downward the    i = 0 curve. After the
downward jump of i on impact, the dynamic process then leads to a gradual narrowing of the span
of products and declines in markups and profits net of investment costs.
   First, consider a decline in ai , resulting from a technical improvement in the firm's technology.
We show in the Appendix that the impact of ai on i can be expressed as:

                      ^i = - ( - 1) a        i si      si ai
                                    ^i +                        a
                                                                ^i                                (25)
                                             si i      ai si
                                                      2
                            ( - 1) s2                   2 2 2
                                    i  ² - ( - si - 1)  -  si
                        =                                   2          ( - 1) a
                                                                              ^i .
                                    ( - si - 1)  + s2
                                                    i ²




                                                  13
The relationship between ai and i portrayed by this equation does not depend on the cost structure
of other firms. Moreover, it implies that a decline in ai shifts upward the  i = 0 curve if and only
if:
                              ( - si - 1)2  2 -  2 s2           2
                                                    i > ( - 1) si  ².                                (26)

The potential ambiguity of the response of i to changes in ai results from the existence of two
channels through which the marginal cost impacts the profitability of a new variety (the marginal
profitability of ri ), as can be seen from (20). A decline in ai raises i for a given market share si ,
due to cost savings in production. But, as shown in (10), a decline in ai raises the market share
of firm i and a rise in the firm's market share reduces the profitability of a new variety. It follows
that the shift of the   i = 0 curve depends on the strength of these two effects: if the response of
the market share dominates, the curve shifts down; and if the response of the market share does
not dominate, the curve shifts up. The strength of the market share effect depends in turn on the
firm's initial size. For low values of si the impact through the market share channel is small, and
(26) is satisfied. But (26) is less likely to be satisfied the larger si is, because the left-hand side of
this inequality is declining in si while the right-hand side is increasing. This leads to the following

Lemma 1. If ( -  - 1)2  2 -  2                 > ( - 1)  ², then (26) is satisfied for all market shares
                               2
si  [0, 1]. And if ( -  - 1)       2   -   2    < ( - 1)  ², then there exists a market share so  (0, 1),
defined by:


                           ( - so - 1)2  2 -  2 (so )2 = ( - 1) (so )2  ²,

such that (26) is satisfied for si < so and violated for si > so .

      Given the assumption  >  > 1, the inequality ( -  - 1)2  2 -  2 > ( - 1)  ² is satisfied
when  is close to  and violated when  is close to one (recall that  =  - ). We therefore have

Proposition 5. Suppose that firm i is in steady state and r
                                                          ¯ > 0 at all times. Then a decline in
ai triggers an adjustment process that gradually raises ri as well as i's markup and profits net of
investment costs if either ( -  - 1)2  2 -  2 > ( - 1)  ² or ( -  - 1)2  2 -  2 < ( - 1)  ²
and si < so , where so is defined in Lemma 1. Otherwise, this technical improvement triggers an
adjustment process that gradually reduces ri while i's markup and profits net of investment costs
decline gradually after increasing on impact.

      Using these results, we can examine the dynamics of firm i's market share. Since on impact
the span of products does not change (ri is a state variable), (10) implies that the decline in the
marginal cost raises on impact firm i's market share. Moreover, if the adjustment process leads
to a gradual expansion of its product span, i's market share rises over time until it reaches a new
steady state. In this case the firm has a larger market share in the new steady state. If, however,
the adjustment process leads to a narrowing of the firm's product span, then (10) implies that the
initial upward jump in firm i's market share is followed by a gradual decline in its market share. A


                                                       14
                       




                      



                     


                      
                      
                      


                                                                              
                      0

     Figure 2: Dynamics of the market share in response to a decline in the marginal cost ai


question then arises whether this firm's market share is larger or smaller in the new steady state.
We prove the following

Proposition 6. Suppose that firm i is in steady state and r
                                                          ¯ > 0 at all times. Then a decline in ai
triggers an adjustment process that raises si in the new steady state.

Proof. We have shown that the market share is larger in the new steady state when the adjustment
process involves expansion of the firm's product span. It therefore remains to show that this is also
true when the adjustment process involves contraction of the product span. To this end note that
a decline in ri on the transition path is triggered by a decline in the marginal profitability of ri in
response to a decline in ai , which leads in turn to a downward shift in the   i = 0 curve in Figure
1. In this case the new steady state has a lower ri as well as a lower i . Next note from the steady
state condition (22) that a lower i implies a lower i . Recall, however, that for a constant si a
fall in ai raises i , and therefore i can be lower in the new steady state only if si is higher. In
sum, independently of whether a decline ai shifts upward or downward the   i = 0 curve, the market
share si is larger in the new steady state.

   This result yields the following

Corollary 2. Consider an economy in steady state with active single-product firms. Then large
firms with lower marginal costs have larger market shares.

   The dynamic patterns of the market share that have been uncovered by this analysis are depicted
in Figure 2, where s1
                    i is the market share in the initial steady state. First, the market share jumps up
to sim
    i on impact when ai declines. Afterward, the market share rises continuously until it reaches
s2                                                                                  3
 i , as portrayed by the upper curve, or it declines continuously until it reaches si , as portrayed


                                                  15
                                       5




                                       4



                 Mean Observed Count
                                       3


                                                                                                       Inudstries
                                                                                                       Segments


                                       2




                                       1




                                       0

                                           1   2   3       4      5       6      7        8   9   10
                                                       Decile of Log Labor Productivity


           Figure 3: Average Number of Product Lines vs. Labor Productivity Deciles


by the lower curve. In both cases the new steady state market share exceeds s1
                                                                             i . The former case
applies when ( -  - 1)2  2 -  2 > ( - 1)  ² or ( -  - 1)2  2 -  2 < ( - 1)  ² and s1   o
                                                                                   i <s ,
and the latter case applies otherwise.
   These results suggest three possible steady state patterns for the relationship between ai and
ri in the cross section of multi-product firms: lower-cost firms have larger product spans, lower-
cost firms have smaller product spans, or the relationship between marginal costs and product
spans has an inverted U shape. The first pattern holds for all marginal cost structures when
( -  - 1)2  2 -  2 > ( - 1)  ². In the opposite case, when ( -  - 1)2  2 -  2 < ( - 1)  ²,
there exist high values of ai at which si < so , and among firms with such high marginal costs firms
with lower marginal costs have larger product spans. Moreover, there exist low values of ai at which
si > so , and among firms with such low marginal costs lower-cost firms have smaller product spans.
Combining these results we have

Proposition 7. Consider an economy in steady state with active single-product firms. Then, in the
cross section of multi-product firms ri is declining in si , rising in si , or rising in si among firms
with low market shares and declining in si among firms with high market shares.

   Combining this Proposition with Corollary 2, we note that our model raises the possibility of an
inverted-U relationship between labor productivity, as measured by 1/ai , and the number of product
lines, ri . We now show that this prediction is not only a theoretical possibility, but that there is
suggestive evidence for such a relationship in the Compustat data set. To this end we collected
data on revenue, employment, the number of sectors in which a firm operated and the number of
segments in which a firm operated, all for 2018. We computed labor productivity as revenue per

                                                                         16
                   Number of Listed Business Segments
                                                        20




                                                        10




                                                         0



                                                             5                   10                       15           20
                                                                                      Log Labor Productivity


                                                                 Figure 4: Number of Segments vs. Labor Productivity


worker and we treat the number of segments as a proxy for the number of product lines. As a
robustness check, we also consider the number of industries in which a firm operated as a proxy
for the number of its product lines.9 Figure 3 depicts the relationships between our two proxies
for ri and our proxy for 1/ai . On the horizontal axis the firms are divided into deciles, based on
their labor productivity. On the vertical axis we report the mean number of segments and the mean
number of industries in each decile. As is evident, these relationships exhibit an inverted-U.
       To further examine these relationships, we regressed the number of segments or the number
of sectors in which a firm operates on a second-order polynomial of the log of labor productivity.
We report in the Appendix the resulting OLS estimates. The coefficient on log labor productivity
is positive and the coefficient on the log of labor productivity squared is negative in both case.
Moreover, all four coefficients are significantly different from zero. Figure 4 plots the data points
that we have used (more than 4,000 observations) as well as the fitted quadratic curve. The first
thing to note is that there are many firms with similar numbers of segments and different labor
productivity levels, especially when the number of segments is low. Nevertheless, the estimated
curve has the shape of an inverted-U. We report in the Appendix a similar graph for the number
of industries in which a company operates. In conclusion, while we view this paper as a theoretical
contribution, we have also provided suggestive evidence for the inverted-U curve predicted by our
model.
   9
     About 70% of the firms in the Compustat database breakdown the company into segments. Segments include
different business lines or geographic locations. We use a company's number of business segments as a proxy for the
number of product lines. Within each segment, the firm can list up to two SIC codes in which the business segment
operates. The total number of unique SIC codes listed across business segments is what we define as the number of
industries in which a firm operates. This is our second proxy for the number of product lines.


                                                                                             17
5.1      Costs of Single-Product Firms
We next examine the impact of the cost structure of single-product firms. As is evident from (8), a
decline in either the marginal cost or the entry cost of single-product firms reduces the price index
P , thereby raising the competitive pressure in the economy. How do the large firms respond to this
rise in competition? To answer the question, suppose that all firms are in steady state. Equation
(20) implies:
                                          ^i =  P
                                                ^i +      i si          si P     ^.
                                                                                 P                    (27)
                                                          si i          P si
A decline in the price index P , which elevates the competitive pressure on every large firm, reduces
the marginal value of ri . For this reason the first term on the right-hand side of this equation is
negative when P^i < 0. In response, firm i reduces its price and market share (see (9) and (10)) and
the fall in market share raises the marginal value of ri . For this reason the second term on the right-
hand side is positive when P  ^i < 0. It follows that a decline in P shifts the   i = 0 curve downward
in Figure 1 if the competition effect dominates and upward if the market share effect dominates.
Using (10), it is evident that for   1 (27) is similar to (25), except for the opposite sign on their
right-hand sides. Therefore, in this case a decline in P shifts down the  i = 0 curve if and only if a
decline in ai shifts it up. Under these conditions a lower P may lead to a lower or higher value of
ri in steady state, and moreover, its impact may vary across firms with different marginal costs and
therefore different market shares si . For   1 the inequality ( -  - 1)2  2 -  2 > ( - 1)  ² is
violated, implying that there exists an so such that the decline in P shifts the  i = 0 curve down
                                                    P
for si < so                  o
          P and up for si > sP . Therefore, in this case a rise in the competitive pressure shrinks the
product span of multi-product firms with si < so
                                               P and expands the product span of multi-product
firms with si > so
                 P . As a result, the gaps in market shares between large and small multi-product
firms widens, thereby increasing the inequality in the size distribution of firms.10 Alternatively, for
   , the competition effect is negligible and the shift in the market share dominates the impact
on i . As a result, the  i = 0 curve shifts up for all multi-product firms, raising their product spans.
      Finally, note that a decline in P reduces the steady state market share of every large firm.
This is clearly the case when every firm's product span declines because in this case both P and
ri diminish the market share (see (10)). Alternatively, for a firm that expands its steady state ri ,
the value of i is higher in the new steady state (see (21)). Therefore this firm's i is also larger in
the new steady state (see (22)). But the direct impact of the decline in P on i is negative, and
therefore si has to be smaller for i to be larger. We therefore have

Proposition 8. Consider an economy in steady state with r
                                                        ¯ > 0 at all times. Then, a technical
improvement that reduces either f or a
                                     ¯ may raise ri in the new steady state for all i, reduce ri
for all i, or reduce ri of the small multi-product firms and raise ri of the large multi-product firms.
Nevertheless, si is smaller in the new steady state for all large firm i.

      Figure 5 depicts the dynamics of two firms, i and j , for the case in which si < so           o
                                                                                        P and sj > sP ,
 10
      From (10), s
                 ^i - s
                      ^j = (^    ^j ) / [1 + ( - 1) i ]. Therefore s
                            ri - r                                      ^j if and only if r
                                                                   ^i > s                      ^j .
                                                                                          ^i > r


                                                              18
                      , 


                     
                     
                                                                

                    



                     
                     
                    

                                                                

                                                                             
                      0

                Figure 5: Dynamics of market shares in response to a decline in P


where so                                                                                     1
       P is the cutoff market share for the opposite firm dynamics. Firm i starts with si = si while
firm j starts with sj = s1
                         j . In both firms the market share jumps down on impact as a result of the
decline in P , to sim     im
                   i and sj , respectively. After that, the market share of the smaller firm declines
while the market share of the larger firm rises. Yet in both cases, the market share is lower in the
new steady state.
    Gutierrez and Philippon (2019) find that the elasticity of the number of firms with respect to
Tobin's Q declined during 1995-2010. They argue that this resulted from increased entry costs due
to regulation rather than due to technological developments or financial frictions. In our model an
increase in f generates the above described dynamics independently of the source of variation in the
fixed cost of entry. According to Proposition 8, an increase in f raises the long-run market share of
all large multi-product firms and reduces the joint market share of the small single product firms.
Yet, it may have an uneven impact on the span of products of the large firms. That is, it may
increase the number of product lines of the smaller multi-product firms and reduce the number of
product lines of the large ones, thereby flattening the relationship between labor productivity (i.e.,
1/ai ) and product span.


6    Conclusion
We have developed a parsimonious model of industry evolution, in which large multi-product firms
grow via investment in new product lines. While these firms are oligopolies, they face competitive
pressure from small single-product firms that engage in monopolistic competition. These features
accord with the evidence discussed in the introduction. Our model generates time patterns of
markups, concentration, and labor shares that are consistent with the data. Moreover, it predicts



                                                 19
rich patterns for the cross-section of firms. In particular, it predicts an inverted-U relation between
labor productivity and product span, for which we provide supportive evidence. It also predicts that
rising competitive pressure from small single-product firms flattens the cross-sectional relationship
between labor productivity and product span among the large multi-product firms. Although this
study consists of a theoretical contribution, we believe that our model delivers valuable insights into
industry dynamics, which can be empirically studied. There are few data sets containing information
on product span of individual firms, and these data are mostly confidential. Nevertheless, we hope
that the predictions of our model will eventually be examined with some of the existing rich data
sets.




                                                  20
References
Aghion, P., Bergeaud, A., Boppart, T., Klenow, P. J. and Li, H. (2019) A theory of falling growth
  and rising rents, NBER Working Papers 26448, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Aghion, P. and Howitt, P. (1992) A model of growth through creative destruction, Econometrica,
  60, 323­51.

Atkeson, A. and Burstein, A. (2008) Pricing-to-market, trade costs, and international relative prices,
  American Economic Review, 98, 1998­2031.

Autor, D., Dorn, D., Katz, L. F., Patterson, C. and Van Reenen, J. (2020) The Fall of the Labor
  Share and the Rise of Superstar Firms, The Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Cao, D., Hyatt, H., Mukoyama, T. and Sager, E. (2019) Firm growth through new establishments,
  SSRN Electronic Journal.

Cavenaile, L., Celik, M. A. and Tian, X. (2019) Are markups too high? competition, strategic
  innovation, and industry dynamics, SSRN Electronic Journal.

De Loecker, J., Eeckhout, J. and Unger, G. (2020) The Rise of Market Power and the Macroeconomic
  Implications, The Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Edmond, C., Midrigan, V. and Yi Xu, D. (2019) How costly are markups?, mimeo.

Grossman, G. M. and Helpman, E. (1991) Quality Ladders in the Theory of Growth, The Review
  of Economic Studies, 58, 43­61.

Gutierrez, G. and Philippon, T. (2019) The failure of free entry, NBER Working Paper Series 26001,
  National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Hsieh, C.-T. and Rossi-Hansberg, E. (2020) The industrial revolution in services, Tech. rep., Prince-
  ton.

Kehrig, M. and Vincent, N. (2019) Good dispersion, bad dispersion, NBER Working Paper Series
  25923, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Klette, T. J. and Kortum, S. (2004) Innovating firms and aggregate innovation, Journal of Political
  Economy, 112, 986­1018.

Parenti, M. (2018) Large and small firms in a global market: David vs. goliath, The Journal of
  International Economics, 110, 103­118.

Shimomura, K.-I. and Thisse, J.-F. (2012) Competition among the big and the small, The RAND
  Journal of Economics, 43, 329­347.



                                                 21
Appendix
Comparative Dynamics
We first derive the slope of the  i =0 curve. Differentiation of the right-hand side of (22) yields:

           ^i = - ( - 1) a     ^-              si                    si ( - 2si )
                         ^i +  P                             s
                                                             ^i +                      s
                                                                                       ^i .
                                        ( - si - 1) ( - si )      ( - si - 1)  +  2 s2
                                                                                     i

This equation implies that the right-hand side of (22) is declining in ri because i is declining
in si and si is rising in ri (see (10)). The former is seen from this equation by observing that
si > si ( - 2si ) and ( - si - 1) ( - si ) <( - si - 1)  + s2
                                                            i  ². Collecting terms we can
rewrite this equation as:

          ^i = - ( - 1) a     ^ -  2 s2          2 ( - si - 1) ( - si ) +  ( - 1)
                        ^i +  P       i                                                s
                                                                                       ^i .       (28)
                                             ( - si - 1) ( - si ) ( - si - 1)  +  2 s2
                                                                                     i

   Next consider the total effect of a shift in the marginal cost ai on i . From (10) we have:

                              -1                ( - 1) ( - si - 1) ( - si )
                 s
                 ^i = -                a
                                       ^i = -                                  a
                                                                               ^i .
                          1 + ( - 1) i        ( - si - 1) ( - si ) + ( - 1) si

Substituting this expression into (28) we obtain the total impact of ai on i :

                        ^i                  2 ( - si - 1) ( - si ) +  ( - 1)
                               = -1 +  2 s2
                                          i                            2
                     ( - 1) a
                            ^i                    ( - si - 1)  + s2  ²                  i
                                                              2
                                    ( - 1) s2                   2 2 2
                                            i  ² - ( - si - 1)  -  si
                                =                                                  2        .
                                                ( - si - 1)  + s2
                                                                i ²


It follows that a decline in the marginal cost ai shifts upward the  i =0 curve if and only if
                          2
( - 1) s2                   2 2 2
        i  ² < ( - si - 1)  -  si .
   Now consider the cost-wighted average markup:

                                                      m                 m
                                    µc
                                     av =      1-          i       µ
                                                                   ¯+         i µ i ,
                                                     i=1                i=1

where i is the variable cost share of firm i. The variable cost of firm i is:

                                     a i ri x i = a i r i P  p-
                                                              i
                                                                

                                                                               -
                                                             - si
                                     = a1
                                        i
                                          -
                                            ri P 
                                                            - si - 1




                                                          22
and the variable costs of the small firms are:

                                            a
                                            ¯r¯x
                                               ¯=a
                                                 ¯r    ¯-
                                                   ¯P  p
                                                                               -
                                                                     
                                             ¯ 1- r
                                            =a    ¯P                               .
                                                                     -1

Therefore:
                                                       1- 
                                                      ai   ri µ -
                                                                i
                                                                  
                           i =                         -
                                                                     m     1- 
                                  ¯ 1-  r
                                  a     ¯     
                                              -1           +         j =1 aj   rj µ -
                                                                                    j
                                                                                      

                                                                            -
                                                   1-             -si
                                                  ai  ri         -si -1
                           =                      -                                        - .
                                                                m     1-             -sj
                               ¯ 1- r
                               a    ¯     -1           +        j =1 aj   rj        -sj -1


      On the dynamic path with a constant P , the market share of firm i rises with ri according to
(see (10) and (11)):

                                                            1
                                             s
                                             ^i =                  r
                                                                   ^i ,
                                                       1 + ( - 1)i
where:

                                                    si .
                                      i =                        > 0.
                                             ( - si - 1)( - si )
It follows that:
                                                                                -
                                                                       -si
                                                       d ri
                                  d    ri µ -i
                                                                      -si -1
                                           -       =                           -
                                      ri µ i               ri       -si
                                                                   -si -1

                                                   =r
                                                    ^i - i s
                                                           ^i
                                                                          i
                                                   =r
                                                    ^i 1 -                       .
                                                                     1 + ( - 1)i

The expression in the square bracket in the last line of this equation is positive if and only if i < 1.
Therefore, during the transition with rising product spans of all large firms i is rising in response
to the increase in ri if and only if i < 1 and declining in response to the increase in rj if and only
if j < 1. Note, however, that i < 1 if and only if:

                                        si < ( - si - 1)( - si ),

or:
                                                   ( - si )2 > .




                                                                23
Using  =  - , this implies that j < 1 if and only if:
                                                                                
                                                      si  + (1 - si )  >           .

                                                           
This inequality is always satisfied for  >                    .

                   Table 1: Average Number of Product Lines vs. Productivity Deciles
                             Decile Log (P rod) M eanInd M eanSegs
                                  1       10.05       1.89          2.93
                                  2       11.54       2.14          3.65
                                  3       12.04       2.27          4.00
                                  4       12.31       2.48          4.47
                                  5       12.54       2.64          4.84
                                  6       12.77       2.67          4.98
                                  7       13.06       2.63          4.83
                                  8       13.42       2.53          4.79
                                  9       13.91       2.29          4.57
                                 10       15.31       1.92          3.99
    Note: This table shows the deciles of average log labor productivity for firms in the Compustat database for the year 2018, available
    through WRDS. Labor productivity is defined as the ratio of total sales to employment. It also shows the mean number of industries
    and business segments that are reported in the Compustat Segments Data. The data was accessed on June 2, 2020.




              Table 2: Regression of the Number of Product                         Lines on Labor Productivity
                                                Industries                         Segments
                                log (P rod)      2.36                               2.99
                                                (0.61)                             (0.99)
                                              2
                                [log (P rod)]   -0.07                              -0.09
                                                (0.02)                             (0.04)
                                Obs             4123                               4123
                                R 2             0.048                              0.022
                                          Standard errors in parentheses
                                          
                                             p < 0.05,  p < 0.01,  p < 0.001
              Note: This table shows the results of an OLS quadratic regression of the number of industries or segments on
              the log of labor productivity. The data includes all firms with positive sales and employment in the Compustat
              database for the year 2018. Labor productivity is defined as the ratio of total sales to employment. Segments
              refers to the total number of business segments listed in the Compustat Segments Data by firm. The number
              of industries is the number of primary and secondary SIC codes listed across all business segments. The data
              was accessed on June 2, 2020.



   We now provide addition information on the empirical analysis in this section. Table 1 presents
the data that has has been used to construct Figure 4 while Table 2 presents the regression results.
As pointed out in the main text, the coefficient for log productivity is positive and significantly
different from zero and the coefficient for the square of log productivity is negative and significantly
different from zero in both specifications; i.e., when we use the number of industries or the number
of segments to measure a firm's product span. While in the main text we reported in Figure 3 the
curvature of this quadratic form for the number of segments as a proxy for the number of product
lines, we now report a similar figure when the number of industries is used as a proxy for the number
of product lines. As is evident, the two figures are quite similar.


                                                                    24
                                              15




                Number of Listed Industries
                                              10




                                               5




                                               0




                                                   5                   10                        15                             20
                                                                             Log Labor Productivity


                                                   Figure 6: Number of Industries vs. Labor Productivity


Comparative Statics: Given Number of Brands
In this section we examine the case in which the number of single-product firms, r, as well the
number of products available to each one of the large firms, ri , are given. Equations (6) and (7)
imply:

                                                                                    si
                                                            p
                                                            ^i = a
                                                                 ^i +                           s
                                                                                                ^i ,                                        (29)
                                                                            ( - si - 1)( - si )

                                                                     m                                m
                                                         ^i = r
                                                         s    ^i -             ^j - ( - 1)(^
                                                                            sj r           pi -              sj p
                                                                                                                ^j ).
                                                                     j =1                             j =1

Substituting the last equation into (29) yields:

                                                                               m                                m
               [1 + i ( - 1)]^
                             pi - i ( - 1)                                           sj p
                                                                                        ^j = a       ri -
                                                                                             ^i + i (^                   ^j ), for all i.
                                                                                                                      sj r
                                                                              j =1                             j =1

These equations can also be expressed as:


                                                                             p = R^
                                                                            B^    r+^
                                                                                    a,                                                      (30)

where B is an m × m matrix with elements:


                                                                bii = 1 + i ( - 1)(1 - si ),



                                                                                      25
                                             bij = -i ( - 1)sj , for j =i,

^ is an m × 1 column vector with elements pi , where a hat represents a proportional rate of change
p
(i.e., p
       ^i = dpi /pi ), R is an m × m matrix with elements:


                                                   rii = i (1 - si ),


                                                rij = -i sj , for j = i,

r is an m × 1 column vector with elements r
^                                         ^i , where a hat represents a proportional rate of change,
and ^
    a is an m × 1 column vector with elements a
                                              ^i , where a hat represents a proportional rate of
change.
   Since

                                                                                 m
                           |bii | -          |bij | = 1 + i ( - 1)(1 -                 sj ) > 1,
                                      j =i                                      j =1

B is a diagonally dominant matrix with positive diagonal and negative off-diagonal elements. It
                                                                                             ~ = B- 1 ,
therefore is an M -matrix and its inverse has all positive entries. This inverse, denoted by B
is therefore an m × m matrix with elements ~  bij > 0. Next note that B can be expressed as:


                                                 B = I + ( - 1)R,

where I is the identity matrix. Therefore:

                                                 ~ + ( - 1)BR
                                        B- 1 B = B         ~ = I.                                  (31)

It follows from this equation that:

                                                               m
                                             ~
                                             bii + ( - 1)            ~
                                                                     bij rji = 1,
                                                              j =1

                                                       m
                                  ~
                                  bik + ( - 1)               ~
                                                             bij rjk = 0, for k =i.
                                                      j =1

Summing these up yields:

                             m                         m           m
                                  ~
                                  bik + ( - 1)               ~
                                                             bij         rjk = 1, for all i.       (32)
                            k=1                       j =1         k=1

Since:




                                                             26
                                      m                   m
                                           rjk = j (1 -         sk ) > 0
                                     k=1                  k=1

and ~
    bik > 0 for all i and k, it follows from (32) that:


                                      0<~
                                        bik < 1 for all i and k.

Equation (31) implies:

                                                 ~ =I-B
                                           ( - 1)BR   ~,

              ~ has positive diagonal elements and negative off-diagonal elements.
and therefore BR
   Going back to the comparative statics equations (30), we have:

                                                 ~ r + B^
                                             ^ = BR^
                                             p         ~ a.

                                  ~ that a decline in ai reduces every price pj , but less than pro-
It follows from the properties of B
portionately. Equation (29) than implies that all market share sj , j = i, decline while the market
                                                      ~ and (29) that an increase in ri raises the
share si rises. And it follows from the properties of BR
price and market share of firm i and reduces the price and market share of every other firm j = i.
Noting that the markup of every firm i is larger the larger its market share, we therefore have:

Proposition 9. Suppose that the number of firms and their product range are given. Then: (i) an
increase in ri raises the price, markup and market share of firm i, and reduces the price, markup
and market share of every other large firm; (ii) a decline in ai reduces the price of every large firm
less than proportionately, raises the markup and market share of firm i, and reduces the markup and
market share of every other large firms.




                                                   27
