                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   INSIDER-OUTSIDER LABOR MARKETS, HYSTERESIS AND MONETARY POLICY

                                                Jordi Galí

                                         Working Paper 27385
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w27385


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2020




I am grateful for comments and suggestions to Sanjay Chugh, Juanjo Dolado, Yuriy
Gorodnichenko, Nils Gottfries, Andy Levin, Silvana Tenreyro, Antonella Trigari, and two
anonymous referees, as well as seminar and conference participants at the NBER Summer
Institute, Oxford-NY Fed workshop, Banque de France, EUI-ADEMU, IAE-MacFinRobods
Workshop, ECB-Fed International Research Forum on Monetary Policy, EABCN-University of
Zurich Conference, Colegio Carlo Alberto, Riksbank, Norges Bank, IIES, Einaudi Institute and
National Bank of Ukraine. Christian Hoynck, Cristina Manea, and Alain Schlaepfer provided
excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Jordi Galí. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Insider-Outsider Labor Markets, Hysteresis and Monetary Policy
Jordi Galí
NBER Working Paper No. 27385
June 2020
JEL No. E24,E31,E32

                                         ABSTRACT

I develop a version of the New Keynesian model with insider-outsider labor markets and
hysteresis that can account for the high persistence of European unemployment. I study the
implications of that environment for the design of monetary policy. The optimal policy calls for
strong emphasis on (un)employment stabilization which a standard interest rate rule fails to
deliver, with the gap between the two increasing in the degree of hysteresis. Two simple
targetiing rules are shown to approximate well the optimal policy. The properties of the model
and effects of different policies are analyzed through the lens of the labor wedge and its
components.


Jordi Galí
Centre de Recerca en Economia Internacional (CREI)
Ramon Trias Fargas 25
08005 Barcelona
SPAIN
and NBER
jgali@crei.cat
    Much discussion on the European unemployment problem has tended to
focus on its high level, relative to the U.S. and other advanced economies.
But a look at the path of the European unemployment rate over the past
four decades points to another de...ning characteristic of that variable: its
high persistence. The latter property has been emphasized by many authors,
going back to Blanchard and Summer'       s in uential hysteresis paper.1
    Can the standard New Keynesian model, the workhorse framework of
modern macroeconomics, account for the high persistence of European un-
employment? The analysis below suggests that the answer is a negative one.
In particular, I show that simulations of a (realistically calibrated) version of
that model tend to generate       uctuations in the unemployment rate that are
too short-lived relative to the data.
    Motivated by the previous observation, I develop a variant of the New
Keynesian model whose equilibrium properties can be more easily reconciled
with the evidence on unemployment persistence. The modi...ed model, in-
spired by the seminal work of Blanchard and Summers (1986), Gottfries and
Horn (1987) and Lindbeck and Snower (1988), has two key distinctive fea-
tures: (i) insider-outsider labor markets, and (ii) hysteresis. The ...rst feature
leads unions to give a disproportionate weight to a subset of the labor force­
the insiders­ when setting wages.2 The second feature implies that the mea-
sure of insiders evolves endogenously over time as a function of employment.
I show how a calibrated version of the modi...ed model can generate a de-
gree of unemployment persistence comparable to that observed in the data,
in response to a variety of shocks, and under a "realistic" monetary policy
rule that responds to in    ation and output growth. Under such a rule, large
negative deviations of employment from its e¢ cient level do not bring about
signi...cant de ationary pressures, since unions largely ignore the interests of
outsiders (the non-employed) when setting wages. As a result, such devia-
tions do not elicit a stabilizing response from the central bank, thus rendering
them highly persistent, even in the face of transitory shocks.
    Having made a case for insider-outsider labor markets and hysteresis as a
potential explanation for the high persistence of European unemployment, I
   1
     Blanchard and Summers (1986). See Ball (2008, 2014) and Blanchard (2018) for an
empirical analysis of hysteresis across a number of OECD countries.
   2
     Wage setting by insiders is only one of the several mechanisms that have been proposed
in the literature as a source of hysteresis in the unemployment rate. Other mechanisms
include the lower employability of long-term unemployed, or the impact of unemployment
on labor market institutions. See Blanchard (2018) for a discussion.


                                            1
turn to the implications of that environment for the design of monetary pol-
icy. I derive the optimal policy with commitment, characterize its equilibrium
implications and compare them to those implied by the baseline simple inter-
est rate rule. I show that the gap between the economy'    s response to di¤erent
shocks under the two policies is increasing in the degree of hysteresis. Fur-
thermore, the welfare gains induced by a switch from the simple rule to the
optimal policy are shown to be large, the more so the higher the degree of
hysteresis.
     Motivated by the behavior of the insider-outsider economy under the op-
timal policy, I propose two simple targeting rules that get around the com-
plexity of the optimal policy while approximating the latter'    s outcomes. The
...rst rule, which I label n-targeting, seeks to fully stabilize employment (or,
equivalently, wage in    ation). The second, labeled u-targeting, keeps the un-
employment rate constant. Both rules do an excellent job at approximating
the outcomes of the fully optimal policy, including its welfare consequences.
     Finally, I study the model'  s implications regarding the relation between
hysteresis and labor wedge volatility, and how that relation is a¤ected by the
policy rule in place. The analysis yields a number of interesting insights. In
particular, it shows that the adoption of the optimal policy (or the simple
targeting rules that approximate it) reduce dramatically the volatility of
the labor wedge by stabilizing one of its two components, namely, the wage
markup. That reduction is larger the higher is the degree of hysteresis in the
economy.
     The analysis and ...ndings below, though based on a highly stylized model,
convey a message that is likely to remain valid in more general settings:
monetary policies that focus excessively on in       ation stabilization may fail
to keep the economy close to its optimal level of activity in environments
in which in    ation is not responsive to such gaps, even if the latter are large
and persistent. The economy with insider-outsider labor markets and strong
hysteresis analyzed below provides a clear example of such an environment.
    The paper is organized as follows. Section 1 presents evidence of high
unemployment persistence in the euro area. Section 2 develops the New
Keynesian model with insider-outsider labor markets. Section 3 analyzes the
ability of that model to generate unemployment persistence, and contrasts
it with the standard New Keynesian model. Section 4 derives the optimal
monetary policy in the presence of insider-outsider labor markets, and char-
acterizes the implied equilibrium. Section 5 analyzes the properties of two


                                       2
alternative simple targeting rules. Section 6 studies the connection between
hysteresis and the labor wedge. Section 7 concludes.


1       Evidence
The high persistence of European unemployment is apparent in Figure 1,
which displays the unemployment rate for the euro area over the sample
period 1970Q1-2019Q4, together with CEPR-dated recessions (as shaded ar-
eas).3 The unemployment rate can be seen to wander about a (seemingly)
upward trend, showing variations that are smooth and highly persistent, and
with no clear tendency to gravitate towards some constant long-run equilib-
rium value.4 . Each recession episode seems to pull the unemployment rate
towards a new plateau, around which it appears to stabilize. The unemploy-
ment rate eventually declines as the economy recovers, or increases further
if a new recession hits (as in 1980 or 2012). While the upward trend seems
to have   attened out since the 1990s,   uctuations in the unemployment rate
have remained highly persistent through the end of the sample.
    The previous visual assessment is con...rmed by the estimated autocorrel-
ogram for the euro area unemployment rate over the 1970Q1-2019Q4 period,
which is displayed in Figure 2.a (line with circles). The estimated autocor-
relations decay very slowly, a trademark of highly persistent time series. As
a benchmark for comparison, the ...gure also shows the median and mean
estimates (as well as 95 per cent con...dence bands) of the distribution of the
estimated autocorrelogram for a random walk (without drift), based on 5000
simulated time series with the same number of observations as our sample
(200 observations). Note that the estimated autocorrelogram for the euro
area unemployment rate lies outside the con...dence interval, and well above
the median and mean autocorrelations associated with the random walk,
pointing to greater persistence than the latter process.
    Measures of persistence of the unemployment rate over the full sample
    3
     Source: ECB' s Area Wide Model quarterly data set, originally constructed by Fagan,
Henry and Mestre (2001) and subsequently updated by ECB. I am using update 18 of
that data set, extended to include observations for 2018 and 2019 drawn from the ECB
Statistical Data Warehouse.
   4
     The latter observation is in stark contrast to the U.S. unemployment rate, which has
 uctuated around a value close to 5 percent throughout the Postwar period. See Galí
(2015b) for a comparison of the persistence of the unemployment rate in the U.S. and the
euro area.


                                           3
may be distorted by the large upward adjustment experienced by that vari-
able in the 1970s and 1980s. When I restrict the sample to the monetary
union period (1999Q1-2019Q4; henceforth, the EMU period) the estimated
autocorrelogram comes down quite a bit, but keeps pointing to very high
persistence in the unemployment rate, with most of the estimates lying well
inside the con...dence interval associated with the random walk. See Figure
2.b.5
    The outcome of unit root tests applied to the euro area unemployment
rate tends to accord with the previous evidence. In particular, and as re-
ported in Table 1, an Augmented Dickey-Fuller (ADF) test (with 1 and 4
lags) does not reject the null of unit root in the unemployment rate at a 5
percent signi...cance level for the full sample period. An identical outcome
obtains when I start the sample period in 1999Q1.
    The evidence above makes it clear that the unemployment rate in the
euro area displays very high persistence. Here I do not take a stance as
to whether it has or does not have a unit root. Yet, it is clear that the
observed persistence is not far from that of a random walk, even during the
more recent EMU period. As I argue below, the standard New Keynesian
model has a hard time accounting for that persistence. Next I propose a
variation on that model that has the potential to generate highly persistent
unemployment     uctuations.


2       A New Keynesian Model with Insider-Outsider
        Labor Markets
In the present section I modify an otherwise standard New Keynesian frame-
work by embedding in it a model of wage setting along the lines of insider-
outsider models of the labor market. With the exception of the assumptions
on wage setting, the environment is similar to that described in Galí (2015a,
chapter 7), in which the household block of the New Keynesian model is
reformulated in order to generate a meaningful concept of unemployment.
    5
    The statistics for the random walk shown in Figure 2.b are based on 5000 simulations
of 84 observations each.




                                           4
2.1     Households
I assume a large number of identical households. Each household has a
continuum of members distributed uniformly over the unit square. Each
member is indexed by a pair (j; s) 2 [0; 1] [0; 1]. The ...rst index, j 2 [0; 1],
represents the type of labor service ("occupation") that she is specialized
in. The second index, s 2 [0; 1], determines her disutility from work. The
latter is given by s' if she is employed and zero otherwise, where > 0
and ' > 0 are exogenous parameters. Employed individuals work a constant
number of hours. Employment for each occupation, Nt (j ) 2 [0; 1], is demand-
determined and taken as given by each household, which allocates it to the
members with the lowest work disutility among those specialized in the given
occupation, i.e. s 2 [0; Nt (j )]. Full risk sharing within the household is
assumed. Given the separability of preferences, this implies the same level of
consumption for all household members, independently of their occupation
or employment status.
    The household'    s period utility is given by the integral of its members'
utilities:
                                                 Z 1 Z Nt (j )       !
                                                                '
           U (Ct ; fNt (j )g; Zt )     log Ct                  s dsdj Zt
                                                           0        0
                                                       Z       1
                                                                   Nt (j )1+'
                                =         log Ct                              dj Zt
                                                           0        1+'
                                   p;t
               R1       1 1
                                  p;t 1
where Ct        0
                  Ct (i) p;t di      is a consumption index, with Ct (i) being
the quantity consumed of good i, for all i 2 [0; 1]. Parameter p;t denotes the
elasticity of substitution, which is (possibly) time-varying. The exogenous
preference shifter zt log Zt is assumed to follow an AR(1) process:
                                  zt =     z zt 1   + "z
                                                       t

where z 2 [0; 1] and "z
                      t is a white noise process.
   Each household seeks to maximize
                            X1
                                 t
                         E0        U (Ct ; fNt (j )g; Zt )
                               t=0

subject to a sequence of     ow budget constraints given by
          Z 1                                Z 1
              Pt (i)Ct (i)di + Qt Bt Bt 1 +      Wt (j )Nt (j )dj + Dt                (1)
            0                                          0

                                            5
where Pt (i) is the price of good i, Wt (j ) is the nominal wage for occupation
j , Bt represents purchases of a nominally riskless one-period discount bond
paying one unit of account ("money"), Qt is the price of that bond, and Dt
denotes dividends from the ownership of ...rms.6 2 [0; 1] is the household'    s
discount factor.
    Independently of the nature of wage setting, the household'       s problem
above gives rise to two types of optimality conditions: a set of optimal de-
mand schedules for each consumption good and a standard intertemporal
optimality condition (or Euler equation). Those take the familiar form (us-
ing lower case letters to denote logs):

                            ct (i) =        p;t (pt (i)        p t ) + ct

for all i 2 [0; 1], and
                                                     p
                ct = Et fct+1 g     (it      Et f    t+1 g          ) + (1   z )zt

where p  t  pt pt 1 denotes price in  ation, and           log is the discount
     7
rate.
    Following Galí (2011, 2015a), I de...ne Lt (j ) as the marginal participant
for occupation j , determined by condition:
                                  1 Wt (j )
                                            = Lt (j )'
                                  C t Pt
   Taking logs and aggregating over all occupations one can derive the fol-
lowing aggregate participation equation:

                                   ! t = ct + 'lt +                                  (2)
                                                              R1
where ! t    wt pt is the average (log) real wage, wt            wt (j )dj is the
                                    R1                         0
average (log) nominal wage, lt         l (j )dj can be interpreted as the (log)
                                     0 t
labor force (or participation), and      log .
   The unemployment rate can be (naturally) de...ned as:

                                       ut       lt        nt                         (3)
   6
     The above sequence of period budget constraints is supplemented with a solvency
condition that prevents the household from engaging in Ponzi schemes.
   7
     See Woodford (2003) or Galí (2015b) for a derivation of these and other equilibrium
conditions unrelated to the labor market.


                                                6
           R1
where nt      n (j )dj is (log) aggregate employment, which is demand de-
            0 t
termined. The unemployment rate thus de...ned satis...es the relation:
                                          w
                                          t   = 'ut                                (4)
         w
where    t   is de...ned by
                              w
                              t      !t       (ct + 'nt + )                        (5)

i.e. w t is the gap between the average (log) real wage and the average
(log) marginal rate of substitution between employment and consumption,
mrst     ct + 'nt + . Henceforth, I refer to w   t as the wage markup and
assume w  t   0.8
                  Note  also that, under the above assumptions, relation (4)
holds independently of how wages are set.

2.2     Firms
I assume the existence of a continuum of di¤erentiated goods i 2 [0; 1], each
produced by a monopolistic competitor, with a production function:

                                  Yt (i) = At Nt (i)1                              (6)

where Yt (i) denotes the output of good i, At is an exogenous technology
parameter common to all ...rms, and Nt (i) is a CES function of the quantities
of the di¤erent types of labor services employed by ...rm i, whose elasticity of
substitution is given by w . Cost minimization by ...rms gives rise to the labor
demand schedule (13) introduced below. Technology is assumed to follow an
AR(1) process in logs, i.e.

                                   at =       a at 1   + "a
                                                          t

where at log At and a 2 [0; 1].
    Price-setting is staggered à la Calvo, with a constant fraction p of ...rms
that keep prices unchanged in any given period. Aggregation of price-setting
decisions, gives rise to an ination equation of the form (around a zero in    a-
tion steady state)
                           p         p          p
                           t = Et f t+1 g    p( t   xt )                     (7)
   8
    A negative wage markup would imply that at least some individuals are working for
a wage below their relevant marginal rate of substitution, which would amount to forced
labor.


                                               7
where
                   p
                   t       log(1        ) + at               nt       !t              log(1      )                (8)
                                                   (1       p )(1        p)       1
is the average price markup,                p                  p              1       +   p
                                                                                              > 0,      is a constant
                                            p;t
wage subsidy, and xt     log p;t 1 is the desired or natural price markup.9
The latter is assumed to follow an AR(1) process with mean p        log p p 1
and autoregressive coe¢ cient x 2 [0; 1).
   Note that we can rewrite the price markup gap as follows:
                                   p
                                   t        xt =                    et
                                                                    y         et
                                                                              !                                   (9)
                                                        1
                   n
where yet   yt yt        et
                     and !     !t !n   t denote, respectively, the output and
wage gaps, de...ned as the log deviation between the each of those variables
                                                                 n
and their natural (i.e.  exible price and wage) counterparts, yt   and ! n
                                                                         t (to
be determined below). By combining (7) and (9) we obtain a version of the
New Keynesian Phillips curve:
                              p                   p
                              t   = Et f          t+1 g          et +
                                                            + {p y                  et
                                                                                   p!                           (10)

where {p 1 p .
   Goods market equilibrium requires that ct = yt for all t, which combined
with the household'
                  s Euler equation implies:
                                                              p
                yt = Et fyt+1 g         (it        Et f       t+1 g               ) + (1        z )zt           (11)

      Given equilibrium output, employment is given by

                                       (1         )nt = yt               at                                     (12)

2.3      Wage Setting
Next I turn to a description of wage setting. First I describe the features of
wage setting that are common to both versions of the New Keynesian model
  9
   See chapter 3 in Galí (2015a) for a derivation of (7). Note that the average (log)
marginal cost t is given by

                       t   = wt + log(1            )        log(1         )        at + nt

  The expression for the average price markup follows from combining the previous ex-
pression with the de...nition p
                              t pt     t.


                                                        8
analyzed below. In both cases, I adopt the Calvo model of staggered nominal
wage setting, which assumes that a constant fraction 1      w of occupations
(or the unions representing them), drawn randomly from the set of existing
occupations, are allowed to reset their nominal wage in any given period.
When setting the new wage wt (j ), a union representing occupation j takes
into account current and (expected) future demand for the labor services of
its members, as given by:

                        nt+kjt (j ) =     w (wt (j )    wt+k ) + nt+k                   (13)

for k = 1; 2; 3; :::where nt+kjt (j ) denotes period t + k (log) employment for
occupation j whose wage has been reset for the last time in period t, and
nt+k is (log) aggregate employment in period t + k . Note that w > 1 is the
wage elasticity of labor demand. Equation (13) can be derived from ...rms'
cost minimization.10 The wage set by the union for a speci...c occupation is
assumed to be enforceable, i.e. it cannot be underbid by the unemployed.
    As a result the evolution of the average (log) nominal wage is described
by the di¤erence equation:

                              wt =      w wt 1   + (1     w )wt                         (14)
                       1
                         R
where wt    (1     w)           w (j )dj , where Jt [0; 1] represents the subset
                           j 2Jt t
of occupations resetting their wage in period t: Thus, wt is the average newly
set wage in period t, expressed in logs.11
    The previous features are common to the two models of wage setting
considered below. Next I describe the features that are speci...c to each
model.

2.3.1    Wage Setting in the Standard New Keynesian Model
In the standard New Keynesian model (e.g. Erceg, Henderson and Levin
(2001)) it is assumed that, when resetting the wage, each union seeks to max-
imize the utility of the representative household, to which all union members
(employed or unemployed) belong.12 This gives rise to a (log-linearized) wage
  10
      See, e.g., chapter 6 in Galí (2015a).
  11
      The previous equation, like others used in the present analysis, are log-linear approx-
imations of the exact equilibrium conditions in a neighborhood of a zero in       ation steady
state. See Galí (2015a) for detailed derivations.
   12
      See, e.g., Galí (2015a, chapter 6) for a discussion of the union's problem and a deriva-
tion of the optimal wage setting rule.


                                                 9
setting rule of the form:
                                                   X
                                                   1
                         w                                    k
                 wt =        + (1             w)     (     w ) Et   wt+kjt      (15)
                                                   k=0

where wt+kjt pt+k + ct+k + 'nt+kjt + is the "target wage" in t + k for a union
that is resetting its wage in period t, and where w log ww 1 is the desired
or natural wage markup, which is assumed to be constant. It is easy to show
that the latter is the wage markup that any union (acting independently)
would choose if wages were fully     exible (i.e. adjusted every period), given
a labor demand schedule with a constant wage elasticity w > 1.
    Combining (14) and (15) allows one to derive the wage in    ation equation:
                         w                   w              w       w
                         t   = Et f          t+1 g       w( t           )       (16)
where w t   wt wt 1 denotes wage in    ation, w
                                              t = !t     (ct + 'nt + ) is the
                                                  (1 w )(1     w)
average wage markup introduced above, and w          w (1+ w ')
                                                                  > 0.
   One can combine (16) with the relation between the age markup and the
unemployment rate (4) derived above to obtain the following New Keynesian
wage Phillips curve, linking wage ination and unemployment:
                         w                   w
                         t   = Et f          t+1 g       w '(ut     u)          (17)
             w
where u       '
                is the natural rate of unemployment, i.e. the unemployment
rate that would obtain under      exible wages (and, hence, a constant wage
markup w ).
    It is easy to see that the previous model of wage setting guarantees the
tendency of the unemployment rate to gravitate towards its natural rate.
Thus, equation (17) implies that in the face of a current or anticipated high
(low) unemployment rate (relative to the natural rate u), wages will tend to
decrease (increase), thus lowering (raising) marginal cost, in   ation, and the
interest rate (through a policy rule like the one introduced below) and, as
a result, boosting (dampening) output and reducing (increasing) the unem-
ployment rate. Greater wage      exibility (i.e. a low w ) would be re  ected in
a larger w value and, ceteris paribus, a faster convergence of the unemploy-
ment rate to its natural counterpart.
    The implied stationarity of the unemployment rate becomes apparent by
noting that the wage setting rule (15) can be equivalently rewritten as
                                   X
                                   1
                                                  k        w                w
                    (1        w)         (     w ) Et      t+kjt    =           (18)
                                   k=0


                                                10
where w   t+kjt     wt    wt+kjt is the prevailing markup k periods after the
wage is set and conditional on the latter remaining in place. Thus, when
reoptimizing, unions choose a wage such that a weighted average of the wage
markups expected to prevail over the life of the newly set wage equals the
desired or frictionless wage markup w . Since all wage-setting unions behave
in a similar way, the economy'   s average wage markup w  t will uctuate about
  w
    . Accordingly, and given (4), the unemployment rate will display mean-
reverting    uctuations about the constant natural rate u.
     For future reference I derive the natural level of employment in the stan-
dard New Keynesian model by combining (5) and (8) after imposing w      t =
                                                                              w

and p  t = xt for all t, the wage and price markups prevailing in the equilib-
rium with      exible wages and prices. This yields:
                                                w
                        log(1   )       (xt +       )   log(1   )
                 nn
                  t =
                                        1+'
                                                                    n
with the corresponding natural levels of output and wages given by yt =
             n      n                        n
at + (1   )nt and ! t = log(1    ) + at    nt xt log(1       ).

2.3.2     An Insider-Outsider Model of Wage Setting
Insider-outsider models of the labor market, as originally developed in Blan-
chard and Summers (1986), Gottfries and Horn (1987) and Lindbeck and
Snower (1988), emphasize the segmentation of the labor force between insid-
ers and outsiders and the dominant role of the former in wage determination.
In the words of Blanchard and Summers (1986):

           "...there is a fundamental asymmetry in the wage-setting process
        between insiders who are employed and outsiders who want jobs.
        Outsiders are disenfranchised and wages are set with a view to
        ensuring the jobs of insiders. Shocks that lead to reduced em-
        ployment change the number of insiders and thereby change the
        subsequent equilibrium wage rate, giving rise to hysteresis..."

    Here I adapt the Blanchard-Summers (1986) version of the insider-outsider
model in order to make it consistent with the Calvo wage setting formalism
so that it can be readily embedded in the standard New Keynesian model.
thus, I assume that a union resetting the wage for occupation j in period t


                                       11
chooses a wage, wt (j ), such that the following condition is satis...ed
                                X
                                1
                                             k
                   (1      w)         (   w ) Et   nt+kjt (j ) = nt (j )          (19)
                                k=0

with nt+kjt (j ) given by (13), for k = 0; 1; 2:::In words, the wage is set so
that a weighted average of expected employment in occupation j conditional
on the wage remaining e¤ective equals some employment target nt (j ). The
latter target can be interpreted as representing the measure of insiders in
occupation j .13
    Thus, and in contrast with the standard NK model in which, when setting
a nominal wage, unions target a weighted average of expected wage markups,
in the insider-outsider model they target an identical weighted average of
expected employment levels.
    I follow Blanchard and Summers (1986) and assume that the measure
of insiders (and, hence, the employment target) in any given occupation j
evolves over time according to the di¤erence equation:

                           nt (j ) = nt 1 (j ) + (1         )n                    (20)

where n is the union'   s long run target for (log) employment, which is as-
sumed to be common across occupations. Parameter 2 [0; 1] determines
the extent to which actual employment in a given occupation changes the
measure of insiders. This is the property referred to in the literature as
hysteresis.
    Beyond the particular speci...cation chosen, the motivation behind that
assumption is the notion that the concerns of employed workers are given a
disproportionate weight in the bargaining of wages. This may be the case for
a variety of reasons: they are more likely to participate or remain close to the
bargaining process, they are the ones with the ability to strike and hence are
an important source of the union'  s bargaining power, they are more likely to
pay their union fees, etc. On the other hand, those who are unemployed are,
to some extent, disenfranchised from the wage setting process.
    When wages are fully      exible ( w = 0), all unions reset wages every
period, with (19) implying nn       n
                              t = nt (j ) = nt for all j 2 [0; 1] and all t. Under
  13
    A possible justi...cation for this type of behavior may involve some deviation from
perfect consumption risk sharing within households, with each individual's consumption
being related to her individual wage income. A formal treatment is beyond the scope of
the present model.


                                             12
the assumption that initial employment is at its target level (i.e. n 1 = n ),
it follows from (20) that nn
                           t = n for all t, i.e. the natural level of employment
in the insider-outsider model is constant and equal to the target employment
n at all times. Accordingly, the corresponding natural levels of output and
                 n
wage are given yt  = at +(1 )n and ! n   t = log(1     )+at n xt log(1 )
for all t.
     Next I derive an equation describing the evolution of wage in       ation in
the insider-outsider model when wages are sticky. Substituting (13) into
(19) yields the wage setting rule:

                     1                           X
                                                 1
                                                                                       1
                                                                     k
     wt (j ) =           nt (j ) + (1       w)           (      w)       Et wt+k +             nt+k   (21)
                     w                                                                     w
                                                 k=0

   Averaging (21) over all the unions resetting
                                           R     their wage in period t (i.e.
                                         1
over all j 2 Jt ) and letting nt (1   w)         n (j )dj is the average (log)
                                            j 2Jt t
employment target for those unions we have:

                         1                       X
                                                 1
                                                                                       1
                                                                  k
          wt =               nt + (1        w)           (     w ) Et         wt+k +       nt+k       (22)
                         w                                                             w
                                                 k=0

                                   nt = nt       1   + (1                )n                           (23)
  Combining (22) with (14) yields (after some algebra) the following wage
ination equation for the insider-outsider economy:
                 w               w
                 t   = Et f      t+1 g   + (1        )       n (1            bt
                                                                          w )n    +    n       nt     (24)

where n bt nt n and n 1 w w          w
                                       , which is decreasing in the degree of wage
rigidities ( w ) and the wage elasticity of labor demand ( w ). Note that both
the (log) employment change nt and the deviation of employment from
steady state, n bt , are the drivers of  uctuations in wage in   ation. The larger
is the degree of hysteresis , the smaller is the weight of n bt and the larger that
of nt in the determination of wage in        ation. To the extent that the respon-
siveness of wage in     ation to the degree of labor market tightness nbt acts as a
stabilizing device, one may conjecture from the previous ...nding that, ceteris
paribus, a large value of will tend to weaken that stabilizing mechanism,
leading to more persistent      uctuations in employment (and unemployment).
This conjecture is con...rmed by the simulations reported below.


                                                  13
   Two limiting cases of the model are worth pointing out. When           = 0,
then we have
                     w         w
                     t = Et f t+1 g + n (1        bt
                                               w )n                       (25)
with only the employment gap n  bt emerging as a driving variable. At the
opposite extreme we have the case of = 1. In that case, singled out in
Blanchard and Summers (1986) as one of special interest, the set of insid-
ers corresponds to the workers employed at the end of the previous period,
with no weight attached to the unemployed in the wage setting decision.
Accordingly equation (24) collapses to
                           w            w
                           t   = Et f   t+1 g   +   n   nt                (26)
with the change in employment being the only driving force of wage in   ation.
Accordingly, the level of employment itself does not generate the pressure on
wage in   ation that would act as a self-correcting mechanism. As shown
below, stabilization of (un)employment in that extreme case will require a
more direct policy response, one not intermediated by in   ation.
    Wage in   ation equation (24), like its counterpart in the standard New
Keynesian model (17), abstracts from many features that are likely to be
relevant in actual economies, including indexation and nonlinearities (e.g.
resulting from downward nominal wage rigidities). The simplicity of both
formulations, however, facilitates the optimal monetary policy analysis be-
low, while focusing on the qualitative di¤erences between the two models.
Despite that simplicity, evidence favorable to the presence of a hysteresis ef-
fect in European wage in   ation dynamics is reported in a companion paper
(Galí (2015b)). In particular, I show how equation (26), which assumes full
hysteresis, can account reasonably well for the evolution of wage in  ation in
the euro area over the 1999-2014 period. By contrast, wage in     ation equa-
tion (17), associated with the standard New Keynesian model, is shown to
imply    uctuations in wage in  ation of an order of magnitude larger than
those observed during that period.

2.4     E¢ cient Allocation, Steady State and Equilibrium
        Dynamics
2.4.1   E¢ cient Allocation
The e¢ cient allocation, i.e. the one that maximizes households'utility given
the economy' s resource constraints, is easy to characterize. Employment

                                        14
is identical across ...rms and occupations, and all goods are consumed in
identical quantities. The e¢ ciency condition equating the marginal rate of
substitution and the marginal product of labor implies a constant optimal
level of employment, given by:
                                log(1     )
                           ne
                            t                     ne
                                     1+'
    The e¢ cient level of output is thus given by
                               e
                              yt       at + (1           )ne
i.e., it responds one for one to changes in technology, while being invariant
to preference and/or markup shocks.
     The e¢ cient allocation provides a useful benchmark in some of the analy-
ses below.

2.4.2   Steady State
The (zero in ation) steady state of the decentralized economy is not invariant
to the assumed wage setting environment. Thus in the standard model steady
state employment is given by
                     log(1    ) ( + w + p ) log(1           )
                n
                                       1+'
while the steady state unemployment rate satis...es:
                                                   w
                                       u=
                                          '
    Note that steady state e¢ ciency can be attained by setting a wage subsidy
  = 1 expf ( w + p )g > 0.
    In the model with insider-outsider labor markets with 2 [0; 1) the (zero
in  ation) steady state is given by the long run employment target n , which
is assumed to be common across unions. Thus, n = n in that case. The
steady state unemployment rate is given by:

               w
        u =
           '
           1                               p
         =   [(log(1      )        n                   log(1   ))   (y + 'n + )]
           '
           1                                             p
         =   [(log(1      )    log(1           )                (1 + ')n ]
           '

                                          15
    On the other hand, when = 1 there is no well de...ned (zero in        ation)
steady state: any (constant) level of employment is in principle consistent
with a steady state. The welfare analysis below is restricted to the case in
which a well de...ned steady state exists (i.e., 2 [0; 1)), with the employment
target assumed to correspond to the e¢ cient level of employment, i.e. n =
n = ne . In that special case, we have
                                                         p
                                   log(1            )+
                            u=                                              (27)
                                                '
which, in turn requires   1 expf p g in order to rule out "forced labor"
(i.e. negative unemployment) in the steady state.

2.4.3    Equilibrium Dynamics
Equations (2), (3), (10), (11), (12), the identity
                                                w        p
                             !t    !t   1   +   t        t                  (28)

and wage in   ation equation (17) (standard model) or (24) (insider-outsider
                                                           n
model), together with the corresponding expressions for yt   and ! n
                                                                   t de...ne the
non-policy block of the model. In order to close the model one must supple-
ment the previous equilibrium conditions with a description of a monetary
policy rule that (directly or indirectly) determines the nominal interest rate
it . For the baseline simulations below I assume an interest rate rule of the
form:
                                                 p
                    it = i it 1 + (1    i )[ +   t + y yt ]                 (29)
    For values of i close to unity (as assumed in the simulations below) the
previous rule is similar to the one proposed in Orphanides (2006) and Smets
(2010) as a good approximation to ECB policy. Below I used their proposed
calibration and interpret (29) as a stylized but "realistic" simple interest rate
rule.


3       Unemployment Persistence in the New Key-
        nesian Model
Can the New Keynesian model account for the observed persistence of euro
area unemployment? In the present section I try to provide an answer to that

                                        16
question by simulating a calibrated version of the New Keynesian model un-
der the two wage setting regimes considered (standard and insider-outsider),
and use the generated time series to determine the persistence of unemploy-
ment, which are then compared to the corresponding properties in the data.

3.1        Calibration
Table 2 lists the baseline settings for the model parameters used in the simu-
lations. The relevant period is taken to be a quarter. Parameters p is set to
3:8. That value is associated with a steady state price markup of 35 percent,
and is consistent with the evidence used in the calibration of the ECB' s New
Area Wide Model (NAWM) of Christo¤el et al. (2008). Given that setting, a
value of 1=4 for parameter is roughly consistent with the observed average
labor income share in the euro area.14 Parameter w is set to 4:3, again based
on the evidence discussed in Christo¤el et al. (2008). Given that setting for
 w , and using the approach developed in Galí (2011), a value of ' equal to 3:4
can be shown to be consistent with a steady state unemployment rate of 7:8
percent, the average unemployment rate in the euro area over the 1970-2019
period.15 As to the discount factor, I set = 0:99, as is common practice
in the business cycle literature. I set the Calvo wage and price stickiness
parameters, p and w , to 0:75, which implies an average duration of indi-
vidual wages and prices of four quarters. That setting is roughly consistent
with the bulk of the micro evidence for the euro area (see, e.g. Álvarez et
al. (2006) and ECB (2009)). As to the interest rate rule coe¢ cients, I as-
sume       = 1:5; y = 0:5, and i = 0:9. That calibration is close to the
one proposed in Orphanides (2006) and Smets (2010) as a good approxima-
tion to ECB policy. Finally, I calibrate the persistence and volatility of the
exogenous driving forces based on the estimates of the NAWM in Christof-
  14
       Note that in the steady state the following relation holds:

                                   WN                           1
                                      = (1          ) 1
                                   PY                           p


  15
    Galí (2015a) shows that the ',       w   and the steady state unemployment rate u are
related according to equation:
                                                        w
                                        'u = log
                                                    w       1
 Interestingly, the resulting setting for ' is nearly identical to the calibrated value in the
NAWM of Christo¤el et al. (2008).


                                               17
fel et al. (2008). Speci...cally, I set a = 0:89, x = 0:39, and z = 0:91,
which correspond, respectively to their estimates of the autoregressive coef-
...cient of transitory technology shocks, (domestic) price markup shocks, and
(domestic) risk premium shocks.16

3.2      Unemployment Persistence in the Standard New
         Keynesian Model
I simulate the standard New Keynesian model under the above baseline cal-
ibration to evaluate its ability to generate the degree of unemployment per-
sistence observed in euro area data. In what follows I take the estimated
autocorrelogram for the unemployment rate over the EMU period (1999Q1-
2019Q4) as a rough "target" to match. More speci...cally, I generate 500
draws of 84 observations each, conditional on each of the three exogenous
shocks being the driver of    uctuations (one at a time). For each draw I es-
timate the autocorrelation of the simulated unemployment rate, for up to 8
lags. Figure 3.a shows, for each type of shock, the median as well as the
(centered) 95 percent band of the distribution of estimated unemployment
autocorrelations (across 500 simulations) of the standard model under the
baseline calibration. In addition, each plot also displays, as a benchmark,
the corresponding empirical autocorrelogram for the EMU period.
    The ...ndings reported in Figure 3.a suggest that the standard New Keyne-
sian model has clear di¢ culties to match the persistence of European unem-
ployment, independently of the nature of the shock driving those    uctuations:
the autocorrelations generated by the model, while positive and high at short
lags, decline much faster than in the data. Furthermore, the empirical auto-
correlation lies well outside the 95 percent con...dence interval for the three
shocks.
    Figure 3.b displays similar statistics based on model simulations that
assume extreme persistence of the three driving forces. Speci...cally, I set
 a =    x =    z = 0:99, instead of the settings based on the estimates in
Christo¤el et al (2008). Despite the (counterfactual) extreme persistence of
the shocks, the median autocorrelation generated by the model remains well
   16
      The analysis below focuses on the persistence of unemployment and is always condi-
tional on a speci...c shock, so I do not need to calibrate the variance of the driving forces. It
should also be clear that I restrict the analysis to the three assumed shocks for simplicity,
with no claim that they span the range of relevant shocks in the euro area.



                                               18
below its empirical counterpart for all shocks. Only in the case of markup
shocks does the con...dence band for the model autocorrelations contains the
empirical autocorrelogram. The previous ...ndings suggests that the stabi-
lizing mechanisms embedded in the standard model and discussed above,
are quite e¤ective at (partly) insulating unemployment from the exogenous
disturbances hitting the economy.
    The adjustment of wages in response to the unemployment gap, captured
in equation (17), is a key element in the stabilization of unemployment. In
other words, the degree of unemployment persistence is not independent of
the degree of wage rigidities. This is illustrated by the unemployment auto-
correlations generated by the model when I modify the baseline calibration
by increasing the degree of wage stickiness. In particular, I assume w = 0:95,
which implies an average duration of an individual wage of 5 years (!). Figure
3.c displays the median autocorrelogram (with the corresponding con...dence
bands) across simulations under the modi...ed w value, together with the
empirical autocorrelogram. Note that the model'     s unemployment autocorre-
lations are now uniformly higher at all lags, and for all shocks, but they still
remain below their empirical counterparts. Note that the latter fall within
the 95% con...dence interval in the case of demand shocks. But not even the
previous ...nding can be seen as a success for the standard model, since the
required level of wage stickiness needed to match the observed unemploy-
ment persistence is highly unrealistic, being clearly at odds with the micro
evidence.
    From the previous exercise I conclude that a calibrated version of the
standard New Keynesian model, under a "realistic" policy rule, cannot ac-
count for the high persistence of European unemployment, at least under
plausible calibrations of the persistence of shocks and the degree of wage
stickiness. A reasonable conjecture is that the failure of the standard model
may lie in its treatment of the labor market itself, which may be at odds with
the European reality. Next I study whether the insider-outsider version of
the New Keynesian model does a better job at accounting for the observed
unemployment persistence.17
  17
    In Galí (2015b) I discuss possible sources of unemployment rate nonstationarity in
the New Keynesian model. In addition to the hysteresis model proposed below, I point
to nonstationarity in the desired wage markup and/or in the in ation target as possible
addition sources of a unit root in the unemployment rate. As argued in that paper,
however, some of the implications of those alternative hypothesis are hard to reconcile
with the observed joint behavior of wage in ation and the unemployment rate.


                                          19
3.3       Unemployment Persistence in the New Keynesian
          Model with Insider-Outsider Labor Markets and
          Hysteresis
Next I repeat the exercise described in the previous subsection using a version
of the New Keynesian model with insider-outsider labor markets, as described
above. Again, I simulate the model 500 times, conditional on each shock
and obtain a set of arti...cial time series with 84 observations for each draw.
All parameters are set to their baseline values. The insider-outsider model
contains an additional parameter measuring the degree of hysteresis ( ).
     After experimenting with alternative settings, a number of ...ndings emerge
that I summarize next. First, under = 0, i.e. in the absence of hysteresis
(and, hence, with a constant employment target), the persistence of unem-
ployment is very similar (though not identical) to that in the New Keynesian
model. This is true even though even though, as discussed above, their wage
setting rules are di¤erent (one targets a constant level of employment, the
other targets a constant wage markup). Secondly, and irrespective of the
shock considered, the model'    s implied autocorrelation of unemployment in-
creases with . Thirdly, given the assumed shock persistence and degree of
wage stickiness, a value close to one is needed in order to approximate the
unemployment persistence observed in the data. The latter ...nding is illus-
trated in Figure 4, which displays the model-based autocorrelations (median
and 95% con...dence bands) under the assumption that = 0:99, together
with the empirical autocorrelogram. While the empirical autocorrelations
still remain above the corresponding medians across model simulations at
most lags, the gap between the two is noticeably smaller than that observed
in Figure 3.a for the standard model. As shown in Figure 4, this is especially
true when demand shocks are the source of          uctuations, in which case the
model-based and empirical autocorrelograms lie almost on top of each other.
     Figure 5 illustrates graphically the role of hysteresis as a source of unem-
ployment persistence, by showing the dynamic responses of the unemploy-
ment rate to each of the three shocks considered, in both the standard and
the insider-outsider models, and in the latter case under three alternative set-
tings of the hysteresis parameter: = 0 , = 0:9 and = 1. The size of the
shock is normalized to one percent in all cases, while their sign is chosen so
that the unemployment rate increases on impact.18 Several results captured
 18
      This leads to a choice of a positive technology and markup shocks, and a negative


                                           20
in Figure 5 are worth mentioning. Firstly, the unemployment response in the
insider-outsider model when = 0 is very similar (though not identical) to
that generated by the standard model. Secondly, there is a strong positive
relation between the size of and the observed persistence of the unemploy-
ment response. Finally, under full hysteresis ( = 1), and under the assumed
policy rule, the unemployment rate (as well as employment and output, not
shown) changes permanently in response to any of the shocks, i.e. it displays
a unit root. Accordingly, any shock will generally have a permanent e¤ect
on the level of those variables, even when the shock itself is transitory. Such
large and persistent e¤ects on unemployment (and other variables) in the
presence of strong hysteresis are due to the lack of signi...cant de   ationary
pressures despite the persistent low activity, since the employment gap has
little inuence on wage in    ation when is high, and none when it is equal
to one (see equation (24)). As a result, such deviations do not elicit a suit-
able response from the central bank, unless the latter seeks to prevent those
deviations to begin with (as in the optimal policy analyzed below).
     Next I turn to the analysis of the implications of the insider-outsider
model for the design of monetary policy.


4     Optimal Monetary Policy with Insider-Outsider
      Labor Markets
In the present section I derive the optimal monetary policy in the New Key-
nesian model with insider-outsider labor markets developed above. In doing
so, I examine the role played by the degree of hysteresis (as measured by
parameter ) in shaping the response of unemployment to di¤erent shocks,
with a focus on the di¤erential response under the optimal policy relative to
a simple interest rate rule.

4.1     The Optimal Monetary Policy Problem
In the analysis below I assume that unions'long term employment goal cor-
responds to the e¢ cient level of employment. Formally,
demand shock. The fact that, under a simple interest rate rule like the one assumed here,
a positive technology shock raises the unemployment rate in the New Keynesian model
is well known from the literature (see, e.g. Galí, Smets and Wouters (2012)). It is also
consistent with the empirical evidence (e.g. Barnichon (2010)).


                                           21
                                                        log(1  )
                                     n = ne =
                                                            1+'
    The previous assumption simpli...es the analysis while allowing me to focus
on the role of hysteresis without the (well understood) complications arising
from an ine¢ cient steady state.19 In addition, I restrict myself to model
calibrations consistent with stationarity of employment and the output gap,
which rules out the extreme case of full hysteresis ( = 1). Under the previous
assumptions, one can approximate (up to second order) the representative
household' s welfare losses in a neighborhood of the steady state, expressed
as a fraction of steady state consumption, by the function:


       1 X
             1
                                                             p                   w (1       )
         E0          t
                         (1 + ')(1                b2
                                                 )n t +          ( p 2
                                                                   t) +                         (   w 2
                                                                                                    t )    (30)
       2    t=0                                              p                          w


    The loss function (30) is equivalent to that used in the standard New
Keynesian model. The reason is that while the Calvo wage dynamics equation
(14) (which holds in both the standard and the insider-outsider model) is used
in the derivation of the loss function, this is not the case for the wage setting
equation (15), so the latter' s replacement by (21) has no impact on the form
of the welfare loss function.20
    The monetary authority seeks to minimize (30) subject to:
                                p                 p
                                t   = Et f        t+1 g   +          p   bt +
                                                                         n        et
                                                                                 p!                        (31)
                 w                  w
                 t   = Et f         t+1 g   +    n (1        )(1                  bt
                                                                               w )n    +    n       nt ]   (32)
                                                    w            p
                           et
                           !        1       et
                                            !       t   +        t   +    at           xt                  (33)
                                                             e 1 and n
for t = 0; 1; 2; ::together with some initial conditions for !       b 1 . Note
that (31) and (32) correspond to equations (10) and (24) derived above, while
(33) uses the de...nition of the wage gap and the expression for the natural
wage for the insider-outsider model derived above.
  19
     See, e.g., chapter 5 in Galí (2015a). That assumption plays a role similar to the pres-
ence of an "optimal" employment subsidy in standard analyses of the optimal monetary
policy in the New Keynesian model.
  20
     Note that the loss function is often expressed in terms of the output gap instead of
the output gap (see, e.g. Galí (2015a, chapter 6). The relation between the two is given
   et = (1
by y              bt , given the constacy of the natural level of employment.
                 )n


                                                        22
    Let f 1;t g, f 2;t g, and f 3;t g denote the sequence of Lagrange multipli-
ers associated with the previous constraints, respectively. The optimality
conditions for the optimal policy problem are thus given by

 (1+ ')(1      bt +
              )n      p   1;t +      n (1          (1         )         w ) 2;t      n   Et f   2;t+1 g   = 0 (34)

                                 p       p
                                         t              1;t   +         3;t   =0                              (35)
                                 p

                          w (1           )     w
                                               t                  2;t         3;t   =0                        (36)
                                 w

                           p 1;t     +       3;t         Et f       3;t+1 g       =0                          (37)
for t = 0; 1; 2; :::which, together with the constraints (31), (32), and (33)
given 1; 1 = 2; 1 = 0 and an initial condition for ! e 1 and n
                                                             b 1 , characterize
the solution to the optimal policy problem.
    Next I describe the economy'   s response to shocks under the optimal pol-
icy, and compare it to that under the simple rule.

4.2    Dynamic Responses to Shocks and Welfare: Opti-
       mal Policy vs. Simple Rule
Figures 6a through 6c display the response of several macro variables to
shocks to technology (Figure 6.a), desired markups (Figure 6.b) and demand
(Figure 6.c), under two policies: the optimal policy (represented by the lines
with circles) and the simple rule (lines with diamonds). The six variables
considered are: the unemployment rate, (log) employment, price in         ation,
wage in   ation and the nominal and real interest rate. The degree of hys-
teresis is set at = 0:99, a value in the range needed to generate realistic
unemployment persistence. The remaining parameters (including the coe¢ -
cients in the simple policy rule) are kept at their baseline settings, as in the
simulations of section 3. As in the latter, the size of the shock is normalized
to 1 percent in all cases, while the sign is chosen so that under the simple
rule unemployment increases on impact.
    Several ...ndings are worth stressing. Firstly, under the optimal policy the
unemployment rate remains highly stable, in comparison to the responses
under the simple rule, which display very high persistence. This is true
independently of the shock impinging on the economy. It takes an extreme


                                                        23
form in the case of demand shocks, in response to which the optimal policy
fully stabilizes the unemployment rate.21
     The large discrepancies between the optimal and simple rules observed
for unemployment are also visible for the remaining variables, irrespective
of the shock. The gap is more persistent in the case of the unemployment
rate and (log) employment, but shorter lived (albeit sizable) for the other
variables.
     Due to the high degree of hysteresis assumed, the large and persistent
negative deviations of employment from its (constant) e¢ cient level do not
bring about signi...cant de ationary pressures, since the employment gap has
little in uence on wage in    ation when is high (see equation (24)). As
a result, such deviations do not elicit a suitable response from the central
bank under the simple rule. On the other hand, the optimal policy seeks
to prevent those deviations to begin with, through a more aggressive and
persistent reduction in interest rates, either on impact or over time.
     The nontrivial gap between the responses of employment and price and
wage in   ation under the two policies suggests that the adoption of the opti-
mal policy may bring about considerable welfare gains relative to the simple
rule. Next I show that this is the case, especially when, as in the previous
analysis, the degree hysteresis is high.
     Figure 7 displays the welfare losses under both the simple rule and the
optimal policy, conditional on each shock, and as a function of the degree of
hysteresis . For each shock, welfare losses, expressed as a fraction of steady
state consumption, are normalized to be equal to one under the simple rule
and in the absence of hysteresis ( = 0). The plots show that, under the
simple rule (line with diamonds), welfare losses are relatively insensitive to
for low values of the latter, but when reaches a certain level (which varies
across shocks), welfare losses rise very fast. Thus, an economy with strong
hysteresis in which the central bank follows the assumed simple rule may
experience welfare losses that can be a large multiple of those of an economy
with low or no hysteresis (but otherwise identical). This is particularly true
when     uctuations are driven by demand shocks, as implied by the ...ndings
  21
     It is interesting to note that the di¤erence in the sign of the unemployment response
to a positive technology shock. As noted above, it is well known that under a simple rule
like the one assumed here unemployment rises in response to a positive technology shock.
Under the optimal policy, however, unemployment declines (albeit by a small amount).
This raises wage in     ation which, together with the slight price de  ation, contributes to
the increase in real wages needed to approximate the      exible price and wage equilibrium.


                                             24
shown in Figure 7.
    By contrast, under the optimal policy (line with circles) welfare losses
are largely insensitive to the degree of hysteresis. This is literally so in the
case of demand shocks, for which welfare losses under the optimal policy
are zero independently of . In the case of technology and markup shocks
welfare losses under the optimal policy are only a fraction of the welfare losses
under the simple rule and vary little with , with the changes being visually
unperceptible in the Figure.
    The ...ndings reported in Figure 7 make clear that the adoption of the op-
timal policy would imply a substantial reduction of welfare losses relative to
the simple rule. This reduction is, of course, extreme in the case of demand
shocks since in that case welfare losses are brought down to zero under the
optimal policy. For technology and markup shocks the gains from adopting
the optimal policy increase monotonically with the degree of hysteresis (in
absolute as well as in percent terms). To put it di¤erently, the costs of follow-
ing the simple rule as opposed to the optimal policy are larger in economies
that feature strong hysteresis, independently of the source of     uctuations.
    Unfortunately, the large gains that the adoption of the optimal policy
can bring about in an economy with a high degree of hysteresis cannot hide
the fact that, in practice, it is hard to imagine a central bank adopting a
policy of such complexity (as re   ected in the four di¤erence equations that
describe it), with the communication challenges that it would generate. This
motivates the next subsection, where I evaluate the potential of two simple
targeting rules to approximate the optimal policy


5     Simple Targeting Rules for the Insider-Outsider
      New Keynesian Model
A look at the dynamic responses under the optimal policy in Figures 6a-6c
point to a common feature across shocks: the high stability of both unem-
ployment and employment, which hardly respond to any of the shocks. In
the case of demand shocks that stability is complete, since the optimal pol-
icy fully insulates those three variables (as well as price ination) from the
shock, thus preserving the e¢ cient allocation. Note also that wage in  ation
remains nearly unchanged in response to the three shocks, which follows from
the high stability of employment, and given the close relation between wage


                                       25
in  ation and employment implied by the wage Phillips curve (24).
    By contrast, the simple rule analyzed in the previous section (and meant
to approximate the historical behavior of the ECB) focuses instead on the
(partial) stabilization of price in ation and output growth, while failing to
provide the anchor for employment or unemployment that would eliminate
(or at least reduce) the large size and high persistence of the deviations of
those variables from their optimal levels in response to shocks under that
rule. The option of increasing the size of the coe¢ cient on output growth, or
to replace it with (detrended) output does not seem desirable since it may
overstabilize that variable in the face of shocks that change its e¢ cient level,
possibly permanently (e.g. technology shocks), so I choose not to pursue that
avenue.22
    The previous discussion suggests that a rule that seeks to stabilize em-
ployment (or, equivalently, wage in   ation, given (24)) or unemployment may
approximate well the optimal policy rule, independently of the degree of
hysteresis. To assess the merits of those rules, I compute the welfare losses
associated with the following simple targeting rules. The ...rst rule, which
I label n-targeting, requires that nt = ne                                 w
                                            t for all t (or, equivalently, t = 0
for all t). The second rule, labeled u-targeting, calls for ut = u for all t
, where u is the unemployment rate consistent with e¢ cient employment,
given by (27). Figure 8a and 8b display the dynamic responses of the same
six macro variables shown in Figure 6 to (respectively) a technology and
a markup shock, under n-targeting (line with diamonds), u-targeting (line
with squares) and the optimal policy (line with circles). The responses to a
demand shock under the two targeting rules are identical to those implied
by the optimal policy (see Figure 6.c) and are thus not displayed. As Figure
8a-8b make clear, the gap between the response of the di¤erent variables
under the two simple targeting policies and that under the optimal policy
is generally very small, once the scale of the graphs is taken into account.
In the case of the n-targeting rule that gap is close to negligible for both
  22
    Of course, adding the level of the output gap as an argument would help attain the
desired objective, though the unobservability of that variable disquali...es that rule as a
"simple" rule, since it could not be implemented in practice. In fact, as is well known from
textbook analyses of the New Keynesian model (e.g. Woodford (2003) or Galí (2015)) a
policy that fully stabilizes the output gap approximates very well the optimal policy, for
reasonable calibrations. See Coibion et al. (2018) for a discussion of the pitfalls of output
gap measures based on existing estimates of potential output.




                                             26
shocks. In the case of the u-targeting some small but noticeable di¤erences
arise relative to the optimal policy in the short run responses of employment
and unemployment to a technology shock, but the size of the gap is much
smaller than that implied by the simple rule, as shown in Figure 6.
     The previous ...ndings are complemented by Figure 9 which displays the
welfare losses associated with the two simple targeting rules and the optimal
policy, conditional on each shock, and as a function of the degree of hysteresis
  , with all other parameters at their baseline values. The comparable welfare
losses under the simple rule, much larger in size, are displayed in Figure 7
discussed above.
     Given the similarity of the impulse responses, it is not surprising that
the welfare losses under the two targeting rules (relative to the simple rule)
have the same order of magnitude and are quantitatively similar to those
associated with the optimal policy (though obviously larger or equal than
the latter, by construction). In the case of demand shocks the welfare losses
are zero in the three cases, since the two targeting policies, like the optimal
policy, succeed in replicating the e¢ cient allocation. In the case of technol-
ogy shocks, we see that the welfare losses under the n-targeting rule remain
uniformly below those associated with the u-targeting rule, for any value.
This not the case, however, when I condition on markup shocks, in which
case there is an intermediate region of values for which the u-targeting rule
appears to dominate the n-targeting rule, though the di¤erences among the
three rules are quantitatively tiny.
     The previous analysis points to the benr...ts from pursuing a policy rule
that targets employment or unemployment, especially in the presence of
strong hysteresis. The next section I analyze the implications of hysteresis
on the behavior of the labor wedge, and provide some insights on the chan-
nels through which the optimal policy and the two simple targeting rules
improves on the outcomes from the simple rule.


6    Hysteresis and the Labor Wedge
In this section I use the insider-outsider version of the New Keynesian model
developed above to study the relation between hysteresis and the "labor
wedge." The latter variable, denoted by t , is de...ned as

                               t   mpnt     mrst


                                      27
where mpnt is the (log) marginal product of labor and mrst is the (log) mar-
ginal rate of substitution between labor and consumption. That gap, often
referred to in the literature as the "labor wedge," can be interpreted as an
index of the extent to which labor is underutilized relative to the e¢ cient
allocation. Several authors have constructed measures of the labor wedge
and provided evidence of a strong countercyclical behavior of that variable,
con...rming the traditional view of recessions as periods in which the utiliza-
tion of labor is ine¢ ciently low relative to booms.23 Analyses of the labor
wedges implied by alternative theoretical models and their comparison with
their empirical counterpart may help guide modelling e¤orts and shed some
light on the channels through which alternative policies a¤ect the aggregate
e¢ ciency of allocations and welfare. This is the main motivation behind the
present section.24
    The labor wedge can be viewed as the sum of two variables that are central
to the New Keynesian framework: the price markup p         t   mpnt ! t and
                    w
the wage markup t        ! t mrst . Those variables measure the contribution
of the goods and labor markets, respectively, to the aggregate labor wedge.
Empirical analyses of the labor wedge and its two components in advanced
economies, including the euro area, point to   uctuations in the wage markup
  w
  t as the main source of the high volatility and countercyclical behavior
of the labor wedge, with the price markup p    t displaying instead much less
                                           25
volatility and a largely acyclical pattern.
    Note that in the New Keynesian model developed above, the e¢ cient
allocation corresponds to t = 0 for all t and is associated with a constant
level of employment ne = log(1 1+'
                                   )
                                     . Fluctuations in the labor wedge, on the
other hand, satisfy the simple relation

                                  t   = mpnt mrst
                                      =         bt
                                         (1 + ')n

where n bt nt ne . Thus, if we take (log) employment as a reference variable,
it follows that the model implies, by construction, a strongly countercyclical
  23
     See, e.g., Hall (1997), Chari, Kehoe and McGrattan (2007), Galí, Gertler and López-
Salido (2007), Shimer (2009), Galí (2011), and Karabarbounis (2014), among others.
  24
     See, e.g., Shimer (2009) and Chugh et al. (2018) for an illustration of such a use of
the labor wedge.
  25
     See Galí et al. (2007) for US evidence, Galí (2011) for euro area evidence and
Karabourbonis (2014) for 15 OECD countries evidence.


                                           28
pattern for the labor wedge, in accordance with the empirical evidence. Note
also that the ...rst term in the welfare loss function (30) is proportional to
the volatility of the labor wedge, thus motivating the interest of an analysis
of the factors underlying that volatility. In particular, in the context of the
present paper, one may want to study the relation between hysteresis and
labor wedge volatility, how that relation is a¤ected by the monetary policy
rule in place, and the role played by each of the components of the labor
wedge in shaping that relation.
    Table 3 reports some statistics that shed some light on the previous
questions. For each shock and policy rule, the Table reports the model-
implied standard deviation of the labor wedge, the wage markup and the
price markup for three di¤erent calibrations of (0, 0:9 and 0:99). For each
shock, the standard deviation of the labor wedge under the simple rule with
no hysteresis ( = 0) is normalized to unity. The remaining parameters are
set at their baseline values.
    Several results are worth pointing out. Firstly, under the simple rule
and for all shocks, there is a strong positive relation between the degree of
hysteresis and the volatility of the labor wedge. Secondly, under the simple
rule (meant to approximate actual historical policy),    uctuations in the wage
markup account for the bulk of the volatility in the labor wedge, in a way
consistent with the evidence mentioned above. Thirdly, the adoption of the
optimal policy or either of the targeting rules considered leads to a consider-
able reduction in the volatility of both the labor wedge and its wage markup
component, with those volatilities becoming largely independent of the de-
gree of hysteresis. By construction, in the case of the n-targeting rule the
volatility of the labor wedge is zero, whereas under u-targeting the volatility
of the wage markup is zero. Note also that, conditional on demand shocks,
the volatility of the three wedges is zero under the optimal policy and the
two targeting rules, for all real variables (other than the real interest rate)
are fully isolated from the shock. Fourthly, the volatility of the price markup
is generally small, and largely unrelated to the degree of hysteresis. It is,
neverthless, slightly lower under the optimal policy and/or either targeting
rule, relative to the simple rule.
    The previous ...ndings shed some light on the channels through which hys-
teresis ends up a¤ecting an important component of welfare losses ­namely,
ine¢ cient employment     uctuations, as re  ected in the labor wedge, largely
associated with wage markup       uctuations. The switch from the simple rule
to the optimal policy (or the targeting policies that approximate it) reduces

                                      29
the volatility of the labor wedge and the wage markup considerably, espe-
cially when in the presence of strong hysteresis. The previous ...ndings partly
explain why a policy that succeeds in stabilizing employment (like the n-
targeting rule) performs so well from a welfare viewpoint. The following
section is motivated by that observation Given the central role played by
wage markup     uctuations in the overall  uctuations of the labor wedge, the
...ndings above also explain why a policy that seeks to stabilizes the unem-
ployment rate (and, hence, the wage markup) like the u-targeting rule does
almost as well as the optimal policy..


7    Concluding Remarks
The high persistence of European unemployment constitutes a challenge for
conventional macro models, including the standard New Keynesian model. In
the present paper I have proposed a modi...ed version of that model that can
generate highly persistent unemployment. The main modi...cation consists
of combining insider-outsider labor markets and hysteresis, as in Blanchard
and Summers (1986), with the Calvo-type price and wage setting structure
characteristic of the New Keynesian model. In the modi...ed model the degree
of hysteresis needs to be substantial in order to generate European levels of
persistence. Under full hysteresis, unemployment and other real variables
may experience permanent deviations from their e¢ cient levels, even in re-
sponse to shocks that are transitory. Such deviations, even if large, do not
necessarily generate in  ationary pressures (of either sign) and hence may not
elicit a suitable response from an in  ation-focused central bank.
    The presence of hysteresis e¤ects has important implications for the con-
duct of monetary policy. Speci...cally, I have shown that the optimal mon-
etary policy calls for a more aggressive stabilization of employment and/or
unemployment than implied by a conventional interest rate rule. The welfare
gains from shifting to the optimal policy are considerable, and increasing in
the degree of hysteresis. Furthermore, the analysis above suggests that the
outcome of the optimal policy can be approximated well by a simple target-
ing rule that seeks to stabilize employment or unemployment. Finally, an
exploration of the connection between hysteresis and the labor wedge, points
to a strong degree of hysteresis, combined with a (realistic) simple interest
rate rule, as a potential source of a highly volatile labor wedge (through its
wage markup component). the adoption of an optimal policy (or the tar-


                                      30
geting rules that approximate it) makes it possible, however, to nearly shut
down that e¤ect of hysteresis.
    The ...ndings in the paper, while based on a highly stylized model, should
raise a warning    ag on monetary policy strategies that put too much weight
on in  ation stabilization, for in environments where in  ation is unresponsive
to ine¢ cient levels of employment, those strategies run the risk of chronifying
those ine¢ ciencies.




                                      31
   References
    Álvarez Luis J., Emmanuel Dhyne, Marco M. Hoeberichts, Claudia Kwapil,
Hervé Le Bihan, Patrick Lünnemann, Fernando Martins, Roberto Sabbatini,
Harald Stahl, Philip Vermeulen and Jouko Vilmunen (2006): "Sticky Prices
in the Euro Area: A Summary of New Micro Evidence", Journal of the
European Economic Association 4(2-3), 575-584.
    Ball, Laurence (2009): "Hysteresis in Unemployment," in J. Fuhrer et
al. (eds.) Understanding Ination and the Implications for Monetary Policy,
MIT Press (Cambridge, MA).
    Ball, Laurence (2014): "Long-term Damage from the Great Recession in
OECD Countries," European Journal of Economics and Economic Policies:
Intevention 11(2), 149-160.
    Barnichon, Régis (2010): "Productivity and Unemployment over the
Business Cycle," Journal of Monetary Economics 57 (8), 1013-1025
    Blanchard, Olivier and Lawrence Summers (1986): "Hysteresis and the
European Unemployment Problem," NBER Macroeconomics Annual, MIT
Press.
    Blanchard, Olivier (2018): "Should we Reject the Natural Rate Hypoth-
esis," Journal of Economic Perspectives 32(1), 97-120.
    Chari, Varadarajan, Patrick Kehoe, and Ellen McGrattan (2007): "Busi-
ness Cycle Accounting," Econometrica 75(3), 781-836.
    Chugh, Sanjay K., Wolfgang Lechthaler, and Christian Merkl (2018):
"Optimal Fiscal Policy with Labor Selection," Journal of Economic Dynam-
ics & Control 94, 142-189.
    Christo¤el, Kai, Gunter Coenen and Anders Warner (2008): "The New
Area-Wide Model of the Euro Area: A Micro-Founded Open Economy Model
for Forecating and Policy Analysis," ECB Working Paper no. 944.
    Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Mauricio Ulate (2018): "The
Cyclical Sensitivity in Measures of Potential Output," Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, 343-411.
    Erceg, Christopher J., Dale W. Henderson, and Andrew T. Levin (2000):
"Optimal Monetary Policy with Staggered Wage and Price Contracts,"Jour-
nal of Monetary Economics vol. 46, no. 2, 281-314.
    European Central Bank (2009): "Wage Dynamics in Europe: Final Re-
port of the Wage Dynamics Network (WDN)"
    Fagan, Gabriel, Jerome Henry and Ricardo Mestre (2001): "An Area-
Wide Model (AWM) for the Euro Area," ECB Working Paper series no.


                                   32
42.
    Hall, Robert (1997): "Macroeconomic Fluctuations and the Allocation of
Time," Journal of Labor Economics 15(1), 223-250.
    Galí, Jordi (2011): Unemployment Fluctuations and Stabilization Poli-
cies: A New Keynesian Perspective, MIT Press (Cambridge, MA).
    Galí, Jordi (2015a): Monetary Policy, Ination and the Business Cycle.
An Introduction to the New Keynesian Framework, Second Edition, Prince-
ton University Press.
    Galí, Jordi (2015b): "Hysteresis and the European Unemployment Prob-
lem Revisited," in Ination and Unemployment in Europe, Proceedings of
the ECB Forum on Central Banking, European Central Bank, Frankfurt am
Main, 2015, 53-79.
    Galí, Jordi, Mark Gertler, David López-Salido (2007): "Markups, Gaps
and the Welfare Costs of Business Fluctuations," Review of Economics and
Statistics 89(1), 44-59.
    Galí, Jordi, Frank Smets and Raf Wouters (2012): "Unemployment in
an Estimated New Keynesian Model," NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2011,
329-360.
    Gottfries, Nils and Henrik Horn (1987): "Wage Formation and the Per-
sistence of Unemployment," Economic Journal 97(388), 877-884.
    Karabarbounis, Loukas (2014): "The Labor Wedge: MRS vs. MPN,"
Review of Economic Dynamics 17, 206-223.
    Lindbeck, Assar and Dennis J. Snower (1988): The Insider-Outsider The-
ory of Employment and Unemployment, MIT Press (Cambridge, MA).
    Orphanides, Athanasios (2006): "Review of the ECB'  s Strategy and Al-
ternative Approaches," contribution to The ECB and its Watchers, Center
for Financial Studies, Frankfurt.
    Shimer, Robert (2009): "Convergence in Macroeconomics: the Labor
Wedge," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 1(1), 267-297.
    Smets, Frank (2010): "Comment on chapters 6 and 7," in M. Buti et al.
(eds.) The Euro: The First Decade, Cambridge University Press.
    Woodford, Michael (2003): Interest and Prices. Foundations of a Theory
of Monetary Policy, Princeton University Press (Princeton, NJ).




                                   33
                  Table 1. ADF Unit Root Tests
                 Sample period   1 lag    4 lags

                1970Q1-2019Q4              2:42          2:28
                                         ( 2:87)       ( 2:87)


                1999Q1-2019Q4              2:36          1:70
                                         ( 2:89)       ( 2:89)




    Note: t -statistics of Augmented Dickey-Fuller tests (with intercept) for
the null of a unit root in the unemployment rate. Shown in brackets are
the critical values for the null of a unit root, with a 5 percent signi...cance
(adjusted for sample size).
                  Table 2. Calibration
'   Curvature of labor disutility                  3:4
    Discount factor                               0:99
    Decreasing returns to labor                   0:25
w   Elasticity of substitution (labor)             4:3
p   Elasticity of substitution (goods)             3:8
p   Calvo index of price rigidities               0:75
w   Calvo index of wage rigidities                0:75
i   Lagged interest rate coe¢ cient                0:9
    In ation coe¢ cient                            1:5
y   Output growth coe¢ cient                       0:5
a   Technology shock: Autoregressive coe¢ cient   0:89
x   Markup shock: Autoregressive coe¢ cient       0:39
z   Demand shocks: Autoregreesive coe¢ cient      0:91
                                             Table 3
                            Hysteresis and Labor Wedge Volatility
                          Labor Wedge                Wage Markup                             Price Markup
                       =0    = 0:9    = 0:99    =0     = 0:9    = 0:99               =0          = 0:9    = 0:99

Technology
         Simple       1:0      1:81       6:42       0:69     1:59       6:35       0:31        0:30      0:31
        Optimal       0:09     0:09       0:07       0:31     0:26       0:23       0:24        0:24      0:25
     N-Targeting      0:0       0:0        0:0       0:24     0:24       0:24       0:24        0:24      0:24
     U-Targeting      0:27     0:26       0:26        0:0      0:0        0:0       0:27        0:26      0:26

Markup
         Simple       1:0      1:42       3:11       0:74     1:18       2:98       0:28        0:26      0:26
        Optimal       0:18     0:13       0:10       0:09     0:12       0:16       0:23        0:22      0:21
     N-Targeting      0:0       0:0        0:0       0:21     0:21       0:21       0:21        0:21      0:21
     U-Targeting      0:23     0:22       0:22        0:0      0:0        0:0       0:23        0:22      0:22

Demand
         Simple       1:0      2:72       10:43      0:92     2:67       10:41      0:07        0:07      0:09
        Optimal       0:0       0:0        0:0        0:0      0:0        0:0        0:0         0:0       0:0
     N-Targeting      0:0       0:0        0:0        0:0      0:0        0:0        0:0         0:0      00:0
     U-Targeting      0:0       0:0        0:0        0:0      0:0        0:0        0:0         0:0       0:0


                       Note: For each shock and policy rule, the Table reports the model-
                   implied standard deviation of the labor wedge, the wage markup and the
                   price markup for three di¤erent calibrations of , and with the standard
                   deviation of the labor wedge under the simple rule with no hysteresis
                   normalized to unity for each shock.
                                                     

 

    Figure 1. Unemployment Rate in the Euro Area 

                           

 

 

             
                                       
               Figure 2.a  

     Euro Area Unemployment Rate:  

    Autocorrelogram (1970Q12019Q4) 

                     

        
                     




                                       
               Figure 2.b   

     Euro Area Unemployment Rate:  

    Autocorrelogram (1999Q12019Q4) 

                     

        
                              




                                                          
                        Figure 3.a   

    Unemployment Persistence: Standard Model vs. Data 

                   Baseline Calibration 

                              

                
                                                          
                          Figure 3.b   

    Unemployment Persistence: Standard Model vs. Data 

                   Extreme Shock Persistence 

                                

                                

                                

                
                                            


     1


    0.5


     0        95% band
              median
              empirical
          1          2         3       4           5     6   7   8
                                     technology shocks
     1


    0.5


     0


          1          2         3       4           5     6   7   8
                                      markup shocks
     1


    0.5


     0


          1          2         3       4           5     6   7   8
                                      demand shocks

                                                                      
                                     Figure 3.c   

          Unemployment Persistence: Standard Model vs. Data 

                              Extreme Wage Stickiness 

                                            

                           
                                       


     1
                                                            95% band
                                                            median
    0.5                                                     empirical



     0


          1   2        3          4           5     6   7               8
                                technology shocks
     1


    0.5


     0


          1   2        3          4           5     6   7               8
                                 markup shocks
     1


    0.5


     0


          1   2        3          4           5     6   7               8
                                 demand shocks

                                                                             
                                 Figure 4   

    Unemployment Persistence: InsiderOutsider Model vs. Data 

                           Baseline Calibration 

                                       

                    
                         




                                                
                    Figure 5 

    Hysteresis and Unemployment Persistence 

           
                                                   
                    Figure 6.a    

    The Dynamic Effects of Technology Shocks:  

          Optimal Policy vs. Simple Rule  

            
 




                                               
                  Figure 6.b    

    The Dynamics Effects of Markup Shocks: 

        Optimal Policy vs. Simple Rule 

                        

          
                        




                                              
                  Figure 6.c    

    The Dynamic Effects of Demand Shocks: 

        Optimal Policy vs. Simple Rule 

                        

          
 




                                         
               Figure 7   

    Hysteresis and Welfare Losses:  

    Optimal Policy vs. Simple Rule   

                    

      
                                                  
                   Figure 8.a    

    The Dynamic Effects of Technology Shocks: 

    Optimal Policy vs. Simple Targeting Rules 

                         

            
                                                  
                   Figure 8.b    

    The Dynamic Effects of Markup Shocks: 

    Optimal Policy vs. Simple Targeting Rules 

                         

           
                                                
                 Figure 9   

     Hysteresis and Welfare Losses: 

Optimal Policy vs. Simple Targeting Rules   

                      
