                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                RECONSIDERING RETURNS

                                     Samuel M. Hartzmark
                                      David H. Solomon

                                      Working Paper 27380
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27380


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2020




We are grateful to Brian Boyer, Kent Daniel, Doug Diamond, Pete Hecht, David Hirshleifer,
Matti Keloharju, Yueran Ma, Fabio Moneta, Matthew Ringgenberg, David Schumacher, Tyler
Shumway, Clemens Sialm, Andrei Simonov, Paul Tetlock, Rob Vishny, and seminar participants
at Dartmouth, Hong Kong University, City University of Hong Kong, the Australian National
University, Brigham Young University, the University of Miami, Imperial College, Cal Tech,
Boston College, National University Singapore, Nanyang Technological University, Chinese
University of Hong Kong, the University of Sydney, the University of Technology, Sydney, UC
Irvine, Ivey 7th Symposium on Intelligent Investing, CEPR European Workshop on Household
Finance, FTSE-Russell World Investment Forum, HEC-McGill Winter Finance Workshop,
European Finance Association Conference, Financial Intermediation Research Society, Adam
Smith Workshop in Asset Pricing, Utah Winter Finance Conference for helpful suggestions. The
authors thank the Fama-Miller Center for Research in Finance at the University of Chicago Booth
School of Business for research support and William Cassidy and Ammon Lam for research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Samuel M. Hartzmark and David H. Solomon. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Reconsidering Returns
Samuel M. Hartzmark and David H. Solomon
NBER Working Paper No. 27380
June 2020
JEL No. G02,G11,G12,G14,N2,N21,N22

                                        ABSTRACT

Investors' perception of performance is biased because the relevant measure, returns, is rarely
displayed. Major indices ignore dividends thereby underreporting market performance.
Newspapers are more pessimistic on ex-dividend days, consistent with mistaking the index for
returns. Market betas should track returns, but track prices more than dividends, creating
predictable returns. Mutual funds receive inflows for "beating the S&P 500," price index based
on net asset value (also not a return). Investors extrapolate market indices, not returns, when
forming annual performance expectations. Displaying returns by default would ameliorate these
issues, which arise despite high attention and agreement on the appropriate measure.


Samuel M. Hartzmark
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
samuel.hartzmark@chicagobooth.edu

David H. Solomon
Boston College
140 Commonwealth Ave
Fulton Hall Room 330
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
david.solomon@bc.edu
   There is increasing evidence that the choice of how information is displayed, and other seemingly


minor nudges, can signicantly impact people's perception of that information and their resulting


behavior (Thaler and Sunstein 2003; Sunstein and Thaler 2003). However, it is typically assumed


that such factors do not inuence the stock market as a whole. Market selection (Friedman 1953)


generally leads investors with correct beliefs to prot and drive out biased investors, leading to


prices that reect more accurate beliefs. When market prices exhibit biases, academics typically


ascribe this to causes that do not suggest a strong role for nudges, such as marketwide inattention to


the problem, or complexity of the underlying concept. We study the eects of information display


in a context that lacks any of these characteristics: the performance of an investor's securities.


   Investment performance receives perhaps the most attention of anything in the market. It has


an almost universally agreed upon, easily quantiable denition, namely a return:


                                                        pt -pt-1 +dt
                                      return[t-1,t] =       pt-1


At the risk of belaboring the obvious, an investor's prots come from two sources - the capital


gain, or change in price of the asset, and the cash ows, such as dividends or coupons. Outside of


complicating factors such as liquidity or tax considerations, these two sources of prot are considered


so obviously equivalent that nance academics typically combine them into a single returns variable


almost without thought. Implicit in nearly every asset pricing model is the assumption that agents


understand and observe performance as returns, a necessary condition to subsequent steps, such as


calculating covariances, to value an asset. Of course, asset prices do not reect the performance


measure that investors   should use, but the one they actually use.
   We nd that the performance information typically displayed diers considerably from economic


metrics that best capture an investment's proceeds. Information on returns is rarely displayed by


default, and often takes signicant eort to nd. The discrepancies between how performance should


be tracked and what is actually displayed create considerable confusion and practical consequences.


They inuence how journalists report market performance and how a variety of investors, including


CFOs, form expectations of market performance.          They aect outcomes as varied as the market




                                                  1
betas of portfolios, mutual funds ows and the predictability of market price movements.


    We begin with a simple observation - data on returns are not easy to obtain, and are rarely


displayed by default. A striking example of this is that most widely reported measures of market


performance do not adjust for dividend payments, and display only price changes. This holds for


major US stock market indices like the Dow Jones Industrial Average and the S&P 500 index, as well


as most commonly reported indices of international markets. The failure of these indices to reinvest


dividends causes them to predictably underperform the equivalent return index (which reinvests


dividends) when dividends are issued. This underperformance does not contain information (the


dividend is announced a number of days prior to the ex-day), but represents a pre-specied ad hoc


split of a return into two components, only one of which is displayed to investors. Further, market


indices oer a clean test of the impact of information display, because the dividend-induced drop in


the index does not correspond to the dividends that most index investors receive, either in amount


or timing.
             1 While all information necessary to understand returns is publicly available, it seems


plausible that most investors do not think or trade in terms of returns if they               never see returns.
    To provide evidence that a signicant group of market participants respond to price indices, not


total returns, we document confusion as to the nature of market performance in the language of


newspaper journalists. We examine the tone of New York Times articles written about the previous


day's market performance (used in Garcia 2013), and compare how it varies with past price changes


and dividends. While long-term variation in the dividend yield may be related to macroeconomic


fundamentals, day-to-day variation in the dividend yield is essentially noise, being largely driven by


idiosyncratic variation in rms' ex-dividend dates. If reporters take the market to be indices that


ignore dividends, they will be more pessimistic on days when dividends cause a mechanical price


drop, even though is no economic reason for this behavior. Consistent with this, we nd that, for a


given level of returns, newspaper coverage is more negative when dividends are higher. Indeed, we



   1
       Many investors do not hold the exact market index, and those that do typically hold an ETF or index fund.
Investors in passive products do not receive daily dividends, but periodically receive a payout of aggregated dividends
(and for index funds, realized capital gains), after subtracting expenses. For individual positions, the inuence of
display is confounded with psychological factors, such as dividend demand due to the free dividends fallacy (Hartzmark
and Solomon 2019).



                                                          2
fail to reject a null that journalists ignore dividends altogether, as would be expected if they only


paid attention to the S&P 500 price index.


   Next, we consider how erroneous perceptions of annual performance driven by the display of


incorrect benchmarks impact the allocation of capital to mutual funds. While some websites, such


as Morningstar, compare a fund's returns with returns indices, many, like Yahoo! Finance, compare


price changes of funds and indices. We nd that ows are discontinuously allocated to funds that


beat the S&P 500 (the price change version), based on their percentage change in Net Asset Value


(NAV), rather than the fund's return.     Change in NAV is the fund equivalent of a price change,


but it fails to correct not only for dividends but also other distributions like realized capital gains


and returns of capital. After controlling for many measures of fund performance, funds whose NAV


change exceeds the S&P 500 receive additional fund ows of 0.54% per month over the subsequent


year. Investors react discontinuously to fund outperformance based on metrics that are popularly


disclosed but economically uninformative, consistent with information display aecting ows.


   Misperceptions of performance also impact prices. A stock's beta captures how much the stock


moves as a function of changes in the overall market.      If market performance is perceived to be


market price indices, stocks will not have a single covariance with market returns, as they should


under standard theories.    Rather, stocks will covary more with market-wide price changes than


market-wide dividend yields, even though both contribute equally to returns. Empirically, this is


the case. All Fama French 25 portfolios sorted on size and book-to-market have a positive beta on


the S&P 500 price index after including both the dividend yield and price change. However, for 16


out of 25 Fama French Portfolios, we cannot rule out a beta of zero on the S&P 500 dividend yield.


Even when the dividend beta is positive, it is considerably lower than the price change beta - on


average the beta on the S&P 500 index is double that of the S&P 500 dividend yield. The lower


beta on market dividends implies that the portfolios have time-varying betas on market returns


that shift with the uninformative split between dividends and price changes. This is consistent with


a neglect of the dividend component of returns, but puzzling under most other theories.


   These results are unlikely to be mechanically driven by the distribution of price changes and




                                                  3
dividend yields. A simulated placebo dividend yield with the same distribution as market data gives


a   p -value of 0.0012 of nding such a dierence in betas.    Further, if the dierence in betas for US


stocks is due to price indices as measures of market performance, we would not expect the same


dierence where a price index is not the strong default. We do not nd signicantly dierent betas


on price changes and dividends when repeating the analysis in the German market, which is unique


among developed markets because performance is displayed using a return index.


     The market response following index dividends is consistent with investors making a similar


mistake to journalists, which suggests that information in prior returns is not being fully incorpo-


rated into prices. If the beta on the dividend yield component is too low, higher dividend yields


lead to an underreaction to the market returns information that should have been incorporated into


prices. This underreaction should lead to positive returns in the future as prices properly reect


fundamentals. Consistent with this, we show that when the dividend yield the previous day was


high, the market return is systematically higher. A one standard deviation increased in the dividend


yield the prior day is associated with a market return roughly 65% higher than average. No such


predictability exists in German market returns. We also expect a cross-sectional eect where high


beta stocks underreact to the dividend component of performance more than low beta stocks. We


nd that, following days with high dividends, high beta stocks perform relatively better compared


to low beta stocks, subsuming the betting against beta anomaly.


     If daily perceptions of market performance are biased, it is plausible that longer term perceptions


are similarly eected, because market performance at any horizon is typically displayed as a price in-


dex. To provide evidence consistent with this, we re-examine the nding in Greenwood and Shleifer


(2014) that investors extrapolate past market performance, but examine whether investors extrap-


olate returns, or price indices.   Examining a behavioral bias helps to overcome the identication


challenge where long term expectations are correlated with macroeconomic variables. Extrapolation


is inconsistent with both economic theory and empirical evidence on return predictability, meaning


that it likely represents investor biases rather than economic processes. We show that, for a variety


of investors including CFOs, extrapolation is driven by past market price changes, with dividends




                                                    4
having either zero or negative eects on subjective investor expectations.


    This is consistent with market expectations, which are central to many nance questions, be-


ing based on the past performance of price indices rather than returns. Price indices historically


understate market returns by about 30% per year. The equity premium puzzle, whereby equities


outperform bonds by a high margin given their risk, has been the source of much debate in nance.


While by no means a full solution, it is less of a puzzle if investors have lower expectations of future


market performance because they form them based on price indices rather than on market returns.


    To understand the odd choice of information display and construction of market indices, we


review the academic literature in nance and economics from the early 20th century when many


major market indices were constructed. The consensus that returns are the fundamental measure of


performance is actually quite modern. Academic articles from this period generally studied either


stock    prices   or dividends.   Even when something approximating returns was calculated, authors


made various non-standard assumptions, and did not have an agreed term for what they were


calculating. The market indices used today were constructed at a time when prices and dividends


were considered separate ways to prot from an investment, with the indices designed to capture


only the price component. Even though the consensus in favor of returns is more than half a century


old, the obsolete and broken index construction persists.


    The paper contributes to the literature examining how the display of information can aect


investor perceptions and market prices.          Related papers include Benartzi and Thaler (1999) and


Shaton (2017) who show that the duration of returns displayed leads to dierent investment choices


and impacts marketwide ows.
                                    2 Our results contribute to the literature examining what benchmark


investors use to allocate money to mutual funds (e.g. Berk and Van Binsbergen (2016) and Barber


et al. (2016)) by demonstrating that a wrongly specied yet commonly displayed benchmark of


beating the S&P 500 is an important component of fund ows. We also contribute to the literature


examining the impact of biased expectations on market outcomes (e.g.                   Greenwood and Shleifer

   2
       Other examples include Levi (2016) showing that priming people to view their net worth in terms of potential
consumption rather than potential investment value reduces consumption and increases savings. Bazley et al. (2017)
shows that color display of past performance impacts decisions. Hartzmark and Sussman (2017) show that the display
of sustainability information aects mutual fund ows.



                                                         5
2014, Hartzmark and Shue 2018, Barberis et al. 2015, Barberis et al. 2018). Our paper shows that


the performance displayed often diers from the proper benchmark, which impacts perceptions of


performance and induces a market-wide impact.


    This paper also contributes to the literature on how investors psychologically frame dividends and


price changes separately (e.g. Shefrin and Statman 1984). Baker et al. (2007) show that investors


treat dividends separately and consume out of them, Di Maggio et al. (2018) show dierent marginal


propensities to consume out of capital gains and dividends, and Baker and Wurgler (2004b) and


Baker and Wurgler (2004a) nd evidence of time-varying demand for dividends.                         Hartzmark and


Solomon (2019) argue that much of this literature can be explained by investors wrongly viewing


dividends as free income disconnected from prices, which they term the free dividends fallacy. While


the fallacy seems linked to stable psychological factors, the incorrect display of index information


arises for institutional and historical reasons, and likely exacerbates these behavioral issues.


    Our results illustrate an extraordinary stickiness in institutional norms.                 Modern displays of


nancial performance bear the hallmarks of a confused understanding of nance from a century


ago. Indeed, we defy readers to come up with an economic application for which the S&P 500 price


index or the Dow Jones        is the correct metric.3    The continued popular discussion about movements


in the Dow and the S&P 500, when better alternatives are available, is a remarkable example of


hysteresis.
              4 The behavior we document suggests that inecient and broken institutions may persist


because inattentive agents do not understand how broken they are. Changing to a default display


of returns indices is a simple, low-cost policy to ameliorate the distortions we document.




   3
       This applies even more so to the Dow Jones, which weights rms by their share price, which is entirely arbitrary.
From the perspective of modern nance, this is utterly insane. See Shoven and Sialm (2000) for a discussion.
   4
       It does not clearly t the explanations oered for the persistence of inecient institutions, which involve indi-
vidually rational behavior aggregating to suboptimal outcomes. These include local interactions (Young 2001), costs
(Coate and Morris 1999), network eects (Arthur 1989), or political power (Acemoglu and Robinson 2006).



                                                           6
1        Data


1.1 Return Denitions

In the paper, we reserve the term return for the holding period return that includes both price


change and dividends, i.e.

                                                               pt - pt-1 + dt
                                          Return[t-1,t] =                                                 (1)
                                                                    pt-1

This can be decomposed into two terms - the (percentage) price change and the dividend yield:




                                                pt - pt-1                                   dt
                       P riceChange[t-1,t] =              ;      DividendY ield[t-1,t] =                  (2)
                                                   pt-1                                    pt-1


Unless otherwise noted, we consider dividend timing based on when the stock goes ex-dividend. For


price changes, we adjust for corporate events like stock splits, but do not reinvest dividends. This


corresponds to the returns excluding dividends variable used by CRSP.


    The term performance is meant to capture the subjective sense that an investor has about


how their trades are doing. This may include returns, price changes (with or without any number


of dividend reinvestment strategies), dividends themselves, or some combination of the above. Col-


loquially, many measures of performance are often referred to as a return, notwithstanding that


they do not correspond to the denition above.                  When it is necessary to discuss such usages by


others which may not conform to our denitions, we use the term return in quotation marks.




1.2 Summary Statistics

From 1926 through 2015, Table 1 shows that the average monthly price change on the value weighted


market is 0.6% while the average monthly dividend yield is 0.3%, leading to an average monthly


return of 0.9%.
                    5 Figure 1 Panel A graphs the cumulative return to an investment in price changes


versus dividend yields, both with monthly reinvestment. Through the 1990s the two were roughly


equal, though price changes became a larger component of returns subsequently.



    5
        Information about prices, returns, dividends and market-wide indices are all from CRSP.



                                                           7
    Panel B illustrates the importance of considering both components of returns together, as well


as the importance of reinvesting dividends. The blue line represents the cumulative value of a $1


investment in the CRSP value weighted return index and the red line represents the value of price


changes alone. Examining returns, $1 from 1926 was worth roughly $5,000 in 2015, while with price


changes alone the $1 grew to roughly $150. The Dow Jones Industrial was about 158 in 1926 and


in mid 2016 was about 17,500, but would be closer to 672,000 if it included dividend reinvestment.


    The green line represents the value of the investment taking into account the amount of dividends


received, but not reinvesting them. All prior dividend values are summed and added to the value


of the price change investment. While the green line is above the red line (by construction), it is


far closer to the value of the price change investment than to the market investment. In 2015 the


cumulative value of this investment was about $200, far below the roughly $5,000 under dividend


reinvestment.   These gures illustrate why it is important to examine returns rather than price


indices.   When a dividend is higher, the price level will drop, so examining only the price level


mechanically leads to a biased perception of performance. Ignoring reinvestment misses a substantial


portion of cumulative market returns.




2    Market Impact of Performance Display


2.1 The Display of Performance Information

One reason to doubt that investors use returns as the measure of performance is that returns are


rarely displayed. If investors generally consider performance as returns, it would be puzzling if they


preferred to view a dierent metric as their default display of performance.


    Arguably the most discussed number in nancial markets is market performance. While aca-


demics tend to measure market returns using value-weighted portfolios of the universe of publicly


traded stocks, these are not the most commonly quoted measures. Rather, media accounts tend to


emphasize indices, such as the S&P 500 and the Dow Jones Industrial Average. Neither of these




                                                  8
reinvests dividends, but simply aggregate the price changes of the individual companies.
                                                                                                              6 These


indices remain the most commonly reported measure of performance at any horizon, and totally


ignore the dividend component of performance. While total returns versions of these indices are


currently available, they are rarely discussed in media accounts.


    Because stock prices predictably drop on ex-dividend days, these price indices are predictably


lower on days when their constituent stocks pay dividends.
                                                                          7 It is unlikely that this is driven by


information eects because the index dividend yield is calculated using a stock's ex-day, not a


dividend announcement. As a result, any information from any aspect of the dividend was released


earlier, and should already be incorporated into prices in an ecient market. The ex-day dividend


amount does not have an obvious eect on the information content of the day's returns.


    For most of the history of the stock market, total return versions of these indices did not even


exist. The Dow Jones industrial average total return index was created in 2012, while the S&P 500


total return index was created in 1988. The equity premium puzzle (Mehra and Prescott (1985))


was written using data through 1978. Over this period, investors forming expectations based on


the S&P 500 or the Dow Jones could not have examined a total return version of the index if they


wanted to, as such an index did not exist.


    The same is true for most major indices for international markets.                     Table 2 lists 17 country


specic indices that are reported daily in the Financial Times, and the type of index that it is.


With the exception of Germany and Brazil, the most commonly displayed version of all the market


indices are price indices rather than total return indices.
                                                                     8 Market performance, both in the US and


abroad, is typically reported as price changes excluding dividends, not total returns.


    In the Appendix, we document that actual returns information is extraordinarily dicult to


   6
       See http://us.spindices.com/documents/methodologies/methodology-sp-us-indices.pdf for the S&P 500 index,
https://www.djindexes.com/mdsidx/downloads/meth_info/Dow_Jones_Industrial_Average_Methodology.pdf                     for
the Dow Jones Industrial Average. The indices adjust for splits and other corporate events, but not dividends in either
case. This conclusion is reinforced by the presence of alternative index products for both companies (introduced at
much later dates) that do reinvest dividends.
   7
       See, for instance, Elton and Gruber (1970). The stock price usually drops by slightly less than the full amount
of the dividend, which is often interpreted as meaning that the marginal investor pays taxes on dividends.
   8
       We are not claiming that it is impossible to nd total returns, but rather that the main index that investors focus
on is typically a price index. For example, the DAX is a return index, but the DAXX price index is also reported.
The S&P 500 is a price index, but S&P also reports a total return index, the SP500TR.



                                                            9
nd outside of academic databases for individual stock positions.      It is not available in any of


the brokerage statements we examined (except for Interactive Brokers), not reported on nancial


websites we examined, and not printed in newspapers.       In other words, the diculty of nding


actual returns is widespread across assets, and not limited to market indices (which are the main


focus of this paper). The default is overwhelmingly price changes.


   As with any information display, sophisticated participants may understand the limitations of


the data, and make corrections. We examine whether this occurs, or whether investors treat non-


return performance measures as if they were returns.       We consider this in how performance is


discussed, how capital is allocated, and how securities are priced.


   Market indices oer an ideal test of the impact of performance display. The reaction of investors


to the performance of individual holdings is inuenced by performance display, but also by the


psychological framing of dierent sources of value (Hartzmark and Solomon 2019). This is not the


case for market performance, where day-to-day movements in the index do not generally map to


dividends the investor receives at that time.   It typically takes eort to ascertain precisely what


metric is shown, suggesting that investors use the default display of market performance without


considering the specics of the displayed measure. While the psychological framing of dividends may


help to explain why some of the default measures are what they are (see Section 3), the responses


we document seem best explained by the default display of information.       The broken design of


major market indices seems to arise primarily for institutional and historical reasons, rather than


investors' psychological framing of current performance.




2.2 Framework

Our basic prediction is that investors typically form their conception of performance using the de-


fault measure that they see displayed.   We predict that they will do so without focusing on the


shortcomings of such a measure, and thus will not correct for the idiosyncrasies of the performance


measure when they use it. As documented above, in most markets the default display of market


performance is a price index that ignores the inuence of dividends on performance. Thus, an in-




                                                 10
vestor that naively focuses on a price index will predictably underreact to the dividend component


of performance when evaluating past performance and when using such information to form expec-


tations of future performance. For example, if there are two days with identical market returns but


one of the days is an ex-date for a large dividend and the other is not, such an investor will perceive


market performance as worse on the day with the large dividend.         This bias occurs because the


performance metric they observe displays a lower number on the day with the large dividend than


on the day with the same return, but no dividend.


   Performance is commonly displayed over various horizons, so to test this idea we need to formalize


the question of what horizon of performance measure investors respond to.         For example, in its


default display of prior market performance, the Wall Street Journal print edition currently reports


performance for the past day, past week, past 52 weeks and past 3-year period. Google searches for


S&P 500 currently yields clickable default options of 1 day, 5 days, 1 month, 6 months, YTD, 1


year, 5 year and MAX. Importantly, at every horizon, the number displayed is a price index that


ignores dividends. This means that regardless of the horizon an investor views, they are likely to


treat the price index as their measure of performance and make the mistake that we are describing.


   The fact that the Wall Street Journal and Google display measures of dierent horizons by


default suggests that investors want to use these signals to understand dierent lengths of past


performance. For our paper, we match the horizon of the performance with index movements over


that same horizon. So when we conduct tests based on perception of daily performance, we utilize


prior daily index movements, and for longer horizon tests we utilize longer horizon benchmarks.


   The biased response to index movements at various horizons suggests these may overlap in their


inuence on the market.     The bias in signal due to daily dividends is largely independent across


days, as day-to-day variation in dividend amounts does not have much persistence (after controlling


for longer term trends).   Indeed, the identication oered by this independent variation in daily


dividends is why much of the paper's analysis is conducted at the daily horizon. Longer horizon


signals are slow moving, as any given day's dividend is a small component of the total dividend over


the long horizon being measured. Thus the inuence of bias in a long term measure is persistent and




                                                  11
represents a slow moving trend. The misreaction to daily dividends likely represents uctuations


around this longer term trend that are largely independent of the long term bias.


   Some of the tests in the paper are based on measuring when corrections of this bias are evident in


returns. The main prediction that our framework yields is that misreaction to daily dividends should


correct over a shorter horizon compared to the misreaction to long term signals. This short term


correction need not be to the ecient, fundamental price, but merely to the longer-term trend,


whether or not it accurately represents fundamentals.       With that said, our framework does not


generate specic predictions as to exactly what this timing is, so we leave it as a largely empirical


question to be answered.


   Our primary concern is identifying a range of evidence consistent with the existence of the base


mistake itself. There are a number of other interesting and important questions related to this bias


that we leave for future research. We do not explicitly document the mechanism that drives the


correction of the bias. If there is a biased signal that garners attention, eventually it is likely that


attention is paid to other sources of information revealing the true state, though it is dicult to


say specically what these will be and when they will be paid attention to. We have more specic


predictions over what kind of metrics will show more or less evidence of such a mistake.           Our


intuitive prediction is that mistakes are more likely to be corrected in prices, where prots can be


made from trading against mistaken investors, rather than in trades (e.g. fund ows) or individual


opinions (e.g. newspaper articles). We also do not identify specically how erroneous perceptions


of performance should be interpreted, such as decompositions into biased perceptions of cash ows


versus discount rates. There are a number of ways that the bias could inuence investors, and it is


likely that there are other ways that this bias inuences the market.




2.3 Performance Display and Newspaper Tone

One of the more salient and inuential discussions of performance is in the writings of nancial


journalists. Casual observation suggests that indices like the S&P 500 and the DJIA are quoted


in the media, while measures like CRSP value-weighted returns are not. As a result, the market's




                                                  12
daily price change is frequently displayed, whereas the daily market total return is considerably


less prominent. As shown in Tetlock (2007), Garcia (2013), and Garcia (2014), the tone of articles


summarizing nancial market news tends to reect immediate past market performance and predict


future market returns. Media coverage matters not just as a proxy for existing events and sentiment,


but it also directly aects future stock returns (Solomon 2012) and investor actions (Engelberg and


Parsons 2011, Solomon et al. 2014). If journalists are aware of what these indices represent, they


should easily undo the eects of dividends not being included. On the other hand, if journalists


take indices like the S&P 500 at face value and treat them as measures of performance, the tone of


their articles will reect only market price changes and miss the performance from dividends.


    To test this, we take as the dependent variable the measure of New York Times article tone


used in Garcia (2013).
                            9 This takes the New York Times Financial Markets columns from 1905


to 2005, and measures tone as the number of positive words minus the number of negative words


(as dened by Loughran and McDonald 2011), divided by the total number of words. If journalists


only pay attention to price changes, such as the S&P 500, then after controlling for market returns,


article tone describing the previous day's events should be more negative following days when the


aggregate market dividend yield was higher. We include as independent variables the return on the


S&P 500 from the previous day (the total return, not the percentage change in the price index),


and the dividend yield on the S&P 500 from the previous day.
                                                                       10 We also include year xed eects


to control for economic conditions and slow moving trends in the tone of nancial markets coverage.


    The results are presented Table 3. In column 1, the positive and signicant coecient on the


S&P 500 return shows that the better the market performed the previous day, the more positive


the news coverage (consistent with prior research).             For the dividend yield on the S&P 500, we


see a negative and signicant coecient. This indicates that, conditional on the return the prior


day, higher dividend yields are associated with more pessimistic tone. The coecient on dividend



   9
       Available on Diego Garcia's website.
  10
       The S&P 500 total return index was created in 1988, so to examine the full sample period we use the CRSP
value weighted S&P 500 return series and calculate the dividend yield as the dierence between this and the CRSP
S&P 500 value weighted price index. The correlation between the two total return indices post 1988 is 0.9992 and
the correlation between the two price indices is 0.9997.



                                                           13
yield is larger than (and of opposite sign to) the coecient on the S&P 500 return, and we cannot


reject a null hypothesis that the dividend yield coecient is -0.386 (the opposite of the coecient


on returns), which would correspond to complete neglect of the dividend component. By contrast,


we can reject the null that journalists are simply responding to market returns equally regardless


of their source, which corresponds to a coecient of zero on the dividend yield. Column 2 includes


dummy variables for each quintile of dividend yield and we see a monotonic relation, with each


quintile being larger and more negative than the prior. Columns 1 and 2 include year xed eects,


which will control for dierent overall levels of dividend yield relating to price levels. However, in


order to ensure that our results are not coming from the price component of the dividend yield,


in columns 3-6 we replace the variables in question by dividend growth, measured as the day's


dividends divided by the average daily dividend amount from 20 days ago to 270 days ago. In other


words, we normalize each day's dividends by the average previous dividends, but in a manner that


does not require share prices. In columns 5 and 6, we also add year xed eects. The results are


similar to those in columns 1 and 2, indicating that the results are driven by changes in dividends,


and not by changes in price levels.


   Finally, in Table 3 Panel B, we split the eects based on whether the previous day had positive


or negative returns. Garcia (2014) nds that journalists respond in article tone signicantly more


to past negative returns than positive returns. We replicate this nding in the top row and nd


that journalists tone responds more strongly to negative news (in Column 3 and 4) than positive


news (columns 1 and 2).    If this dierence is based on an asymmetric response to price indices,


this would lead to a greater reaction the dividend component of performance on days with negative


news after controlling for returns. Consistent with this, we nd that journalists respond more to the


previous day's dividends when the previous day had negative returns. This reinforces the idea that


the reaction to dividends represents journalists misunderstanding the day's returns, rather than the


economic content of dividends, as they also react to dividend-induced price changes in the same


asymmetric manner.


   These results are consistent with journalists neglecting the dividend component of market re-




                                                 14
turns, and reporting on movements in market price indices. Further, frictions related to dividends


such as taxes or trading costs are unlikely to explain the result. Financial journalists are not per-


sonally incurring taxes or trading costs with each market movement and are meant to report on


the economic content of the day's news, for which the return is the best metric. Even if a reporter


wanted to report the after-tax returns to a marginal investor, they would be unlikely to use an index


that applies a 100% discount to regular dividends, a 0% discount to special dividends, and a 0%


discount to capital gains (realized or unrealized). In other words, the S&P 500 price index does not


represent the after-tax or after trading costs position of any realistic group of market participants.


Rather, the nancial press seems to focus on the most widely reported measures, rather than the


most economically sensible ones, when forming their perception of how the market performed on a


given day.




2.4 Performance Display and Mutual Fund Flows

We next turn to the question of how the display of performance measures aects investors' allocation


of capital.   In particular, we examine how investors direct ows to mutual funds based on their


performance relative to the market, broadly dened. This covers both the question of what metric


is being used to evaluate the market benchmark, and also what metric is being used to measure


the performance of the fund itself.     The S&P 500 is the most common index that mutual funds


benchmark themselves against, with 44% of funds and 61% of fund assets being benchmarked


against the S&P 500 between 1994 and 2004 (Sensoy 2009).


   Investors viewing a fund's performance benchmarked to the S&P 500, are displayed dierent


versions of the S&P 500 in dierent sources. For example, while Morningstar graphs performance


relative to return benchmarks (including the S&P 500 return index), Yahoo! includes only price


index benchmarks (including the S&P 500 price index). Dierent metrics of performance are also


used for the fund. While Morningstar displays returns, Yahoo! displays changes in NAV. This fails


to correct for   any distributions, including dividends, realized capital gains, and returns of capital.
Figure 2 shows an example from Yahoo!, where the light blue line of the S&P 500 price index is




                                                    15
graphed against the dark blue line of the fund's NAV, with the severe drops on the dividend and


realized capital gains payment days clearly visible. In other words, the fund's change in NAV is an


especially uninformative measure of performance, but is prominently displayed. It is ultimately an


empirical question as to what information investors actually use.


   To test the impact of such comparisons, we examine whether mutual fund ows respond to a fund


outperforming the relatively uninformative S&P 500 price index which does not include dividend


reinvestment. We try to isolate the response due to the index itself with the regression:




                 F lowi,t = a + b1  N AV BeatS &pP rci,t + b2  RetBeatS &pP rci,t

                         + b3  RetBeatS &pReti,t + b3  Controlsi,t + ei,t                         (3)




The dependent variable is the monthly ows to the mutual fund, dened as




                                         T N Ai,t - T N Ai,t-1  (1 + Ri,t )
                            F lowi,t =                                                            (4)
                                                     T N Ai,t-1


where TNA is the fund's total net assets. The three main variables of interest are   NAVBeatS&pPrc,
RetBeatS&pPrc and RetBeatS&pRet.         These are all dummy variables for whether the fund perfor-


mance in the previous calendar year exceeds the S&P 500 index over the same period.    NAVBeatS&pPrc
uses the fund's NAV change over the previous calendar year as the metric of performance and com-


pares it to the S&P 500 price index.   RetBeatS&pPrc compares fund returns to the S&P 500 price
index.   RetBeatS&pRet compares fund returns to the S&P 500 total return index.       These allow for


dierent possible benchmarks by which investors may be deciding whether a fund beat the mar-


ket. We choose to examine annual changes (e.g. the variable from December 31, 2006 to December


31, 2007 is matched to all monthly observations of fund ows in 2008), as this is how marketing


materials are usually quoted and it rules out that more sophisticated investors (e.g. those in Berk


and Green 2004) undo such eects in subsequent months.            In a univariate setting, each dummy


variable captures the dierence in ows according to whether the fund beat each S&P 500 bench-




                                                   16
mark. More importantly, we test whether this dierence survives adding many alternative measures


of fund performance, captured in         Controls.     These include 72 lags of monthly fund returns, 72 lags


of monthly fund returns minus the S&P 500 total return index, 72 lags of squared monthly fund


returns, 72 lags of the square of monthly fund returns minus the S&P 500 total return index, 72 lags


of the percentile of monthly fund returns, and versions of date xed eects, date by fund objective


xed eects, and fund xed eects.
                                          11 If the addition of these permutations of past performance is


unable to drive out the eect of the dummy for beating the S&P 500, this suggests that investors


are specically paying attention to whether the fund's returns exceeded the S&P 500 index, not just


a general measure of better performance.
                                                  12


    These results are represented in Table 4 Panel A. In column 1, beating the S&P 500 price index


in terms of NAV shows a strong positive eect on ows, of 1.26% per month with a                       t-statistic of
13.26 clustered by fund and date.             Column 2 controls for the various permutations of 72 lags of


monthly returns.       These account for roughly half of the Column 1 coecient, but after they are


added, the eect of beating the S&P 500 is equal to 54 b.p. per month in ows, with                       t-statistic
of 10.48. In column 3, beating the S&P 500 price index in terms of returns shows a positive and


signicant eect on future ows, equal to 25 basis points per month with a                    t-statistic of 4.61.    In


column 4, beating the S&P 500 total return index in terms of returns (arguably the most informative


specication) has a positive and signicant eect on fund ows of 30 b.p., with a                  t-statistic of 5.84.
    However, when we include all three dummy variables (column 5), the eect of outperformance


using the least informative measure, NAV over the price index, gets slightly stronger, while the


other measures of outperformance become smaller and insignicant. These eects are similar with


date xed eects (column 6) and date by fund objective xed eects (column 7). Adding both fund


and date by objective xed eects (column 8) reduces the main eect somewhat to 32 b.p.                              per



  11
       We take the metric of market-adjusted performance to be the S&P 500 total return index, so as to ensure that
the dummy variables are capturing level dierences for outperformance relative to the same set of stocks, rather than
dierences in the composition of the index itself (e.g. if the S&P 500 were simply a more informative benchmark than
the alternative market index). Results are essentially unchanged if we use the CRSP VW index as the equivalent
market adjustment for return controls. All returns variables and fund ows are winsorized at the 1% level.
  12
       Data run from April 1994 to December 2016.       Due to the start of the S&P 500 total return index, and the
requirement of six years of lagged returns.



                                                           17
month, with a     t-statistic of 5.03. Even with all these additional controls, beating the S&P 500 price
index in NAV terms still has a large eect on future fund ows.


   To ensure that the results are not due to the particular way we controlled for returns, we


consider two non-parametric versions of the above question. In Table 4 Panel B, we use a regression


discontinuity design to examine the ows around zero of the fund's NAV minus the S&P 500


price index.      This ensures our regressions are not erroneously capturing a non-linearity in the


performance/ow relationship.           We rst regress monthly fund ows on the return controls, plus


date xed eects or date by objective xed eects and conduct a regression discontinuity test on


the residuals. In column 1, with only the return controls orthogonalized, the discontinuity at zero is


0.133% per month, signicant at the 1% level. In column 2 and 3 we add date and date by objective


xed eects respectively. The coecient of 0.132 is similar with date xed eects, and is slightly


larger, 0.175, with date by objective xed eects, both signicant at the 1% level.


   As a nal check, we take the residuals from the regression that controls for past returns, and


average them in bins based on the amount the fund's NAV change exceed the S&P 500.                        This


captures how the eect of beating the S&P 500 varies around zero, discretized into bins. The result,


in Figure 3, shows that fund ows jump considerably at just above zero, and the 95% condence


intervals (using standard errors clustered by fund and date) for just below zero and just above zero


do not intersect. All 10 of the bins for funds that fell short of the S&P 500 have negative point


estimates for ows, and 8 of 10 of these are signicant at the 95% level. All 10 of the bins for funds


that beat the S&P have positive point estimates of ows, and all 10 are signicant.


   While taxes and trading costs inuence some mutual fund investors, it seems dicult for them


to generate the patterns we document.
                                               13 Fund NAVs and the S&P 500 price index do not rep-


resent a consistent comparison for tax purposes (or any other purpose for that matter), due to


diering treatment of realized capital gains.
                                                   14 Discontinuous responses around zero relative to this


benchmark are also dicult to explain with rational estimates of skill, trading costs or taxes.



  13
       For example Bergstresser and Poterba (2002) nds ows respond to after-tax performance and Sialm and Zhang
(2015) nds that taxes aect fund performance more generally.
  14
       Implicitly taxing realized capital gains at 100% when using NAV, and 0% in the S&P 500.



                                                        18
    These results are consistent with investors responding discontinuously to the idea of beating


the index, even when the index is problematic, and even when the measure of beating does not


map clearly to either the total return of the fund or the units of index. Discontinuously beating a


problematic index is not an important economic metric, but measuring outperformance in terms of


NAVs is even less informative. Nonetheless, if returns are not the primary object of observation,


then investors may discontinuously care about whether the fund's NAV exceeded the S&P 500 price


index. In untabluated results, we nd stronger eects for direct sold mutual funds than for broker


sold funds, consistent with the mistake being larger at the individual investor level. This reinforces


the impact of performance display on investor behavior.
                                                                  15




2.5 Performance Display and Stock Betas

If investors' perception of the market is driven by price indices, then this may be evident in stock


prices. One place where these dierences may be visible is in the market betas of stocks. In a general


sense, beta measures how a given stock's return should vary as a function of market performance.


As before, this suggests the importance of what investors perceive to be the market. If the wrong


benchmark is used, this may lead to biased reactions for individual stocks.


    In particular, consider the standard regression used to measure the CAPM beta:




                                    Ri,t - RF = i + i [RM,t - RF ] + i,t                                         (5)




Since the return is simply the combination of the percentage price change and dividend yield,

                               PM,t -PM,t-1         DM,t
RM,t = P CM,t + DYM,t =          PM,t-1        +   PM,t-1 , the regression can be re-written as:




                     Ri,t - RF = i + i,P C [P CM,t ] + i,DY [DYM,t ] - i,RF [RF ] + i,t                          (6)


  15
       Seemingly small changes to the nature of the performance measure of fund and index can signicantly alter
the perception of overall mutual fund skill.   Popular discussion tends to focus on what fraction of funds beat the
S&P 500.     In our sample 37.6% of fund/year observations beat the S&P 500 price index based on NAV changes,
42.1% beat the S&P 500 total return index based on fund returns and 53.3% beat the S&P 500 price index based on
fund returns. If beating the index is an economically important benchmark, the metric investors mostly use assigns
62.4% of fund/years as underperforming, thereby incorrectly classifying 3.5% of fund years (or 5.6% of the notionally
underperforming sample) when compared to the more informative returns vs returns specication.



                                                          19
In other words, the overall beta on market returns can be split into a beta on price change, a beta


on the dividend yield and a beta on the risk-free rate.


    We take Equation 5 with a single market beta on returns as our null hypothesis. In principle, it


is possible to devise a model where investors nd a split of price changes and dividends informative,


but standard models do not imply this and have not been tested in this manner (e.g. Sharpe 1964,


Fama and French 1993, Campbell and Cochrane 1999, Bansal and Yaron 2004). The reason is simple


- money is fungible, and investors in a frictionless world have no reason to care about its source.


Dividends are announced weeks beforehand, so the split into price changes and dividends is ad hoc,


and without information on the ex-day.
                                                 16 If a rational investor found such a split informative, then


the CAPM and the models that followed should be tested with such a split rather than based on total


returns. This is not how these models are tested, because a rational investor should simply examine


the total return. The revealed preferences of the profession suggest that Equation 5, arguably the


most estimated equation in nance, is the reasonable null, as we are unaware of research allowing


for dierent betas on price changes and dividends.


    Under this null, investors care only about the total excess market return as the economic infor-


mation that day, which means the multivariate betas on the price change and dividend components


will be the same (i.e.        P C = DY = RF ).            Another way of stating the null hypothesis is that


the market beta (at the daily frequency) is not time-varying with respect to the daily dividend


yield. The intuition of why the beta coecients on price changes and dividends should be the same


under the null hypothesis is that, conditional on knowing the return, the dividend yield contains


no information, but conditional on only knowing the price change, the dividend yield is necessary


to understand the return. Thus, a univariate regression of portfolio returns on market dividends


can yield a coecient of zero, but in a multivariate regression including both price changes and the


dividend yield, under the null the coecient on the dividend yield will equal the market beta.
                                                                                                                   17



  16
       Models of the eect of dividend taxes on returns focus on stock-level dividend yields as drivers of cross-sectional
returns, along with market betas (e.g. Brennan 1970, Litzenberger and Ramaswamy 1980). These papers measure
market betas with respect to market returns, rather than splitting the return into a dividend yield and a price change.
  17
       Further, the beta from the univariate regression of portfolio returns on the market dividends can yield a positive
or a negative beta, and under the null hypothesis the coecient on the dividend yield will equal the market beta.



                                                            20
    For example, assume Equation 5 is the true model and that portfolio                         i   has a market beta of


1.2. If there are three observations with a 5% excess market return, the expected excess return on


portfolio     i   on each of the days is 6% (1.2*0.05).            Further assume that on these days the market


dividend yield was 1%, 1.5% and 0.5%, meaning the percentage excess price change was 4%, 3.5%


and 4.5% respectively. Estimating the model using only the excess price change, would yield a beta


on the excess price change of 1.5 (0.06          =  (0.04))        in this sample. This gives an unbiased estimate


of the portfolio excess returns, 6%, but it has errors that are correlated with the omitted dividend


yield. When the dividend yield is 1.5%, the model predicts an excess return of 5.2%                         (0.035  1.5),

below the 6% expected excess return from the true total returns model. When the dividend yield


is 0.5%, the model predicts an excess return of 6.8%                  (0.045  1.5),      above the 6% expected excess


return.


    The correlation between the error term from the model using only price changes with the omit-


ted dividend variable means that the model would be improved by including the dividend yield.


This is because conditional on knowing price changes, the dividend yield contains information for


understanding returns. Thus, in a regression including both price changes and dividends, there will


be a positive coecient on both terms. If the true model is for a market beta on returns, the only


model that will yield an equivalent error term in an OLS regression is where the beta coecients


on both terms are equal to the market coecient.
                                                               18


    More formally, assume that the true model is given by                  Ri =  + RM .      Under the null hypothesis,


this model yields the best unbiased linear estimator. Further, on two days the same level of returns


are observed,       RM = R.     On each day random number             z1   and   z2   are drawn, these are uncorrelated


with any error term in the model under the null hypothesis.
                                                                              19 Moving back to the setting of the


paper, the price change on day 1 would be given by                    P C1 = R - z1        and the dividend would be


DY1 = z1 ,        with the analogous version for day 2. The key assumption is that the                   z 's do not help
   18
        If price changes and dividends are linearly dependent, perfectly collinear, there could be other models yielding
the best linear unbiased forecast.     The model with identical betas equal to the market beta still yields the best
linear forecast with collinear regressors, but it need not be unique. Empirically, price changes and dividends are not
collinear, so such a case is not relevant for the analysis.
   19
        If they were correlated with the error term this would mean they could be included in the regression and improve
the forecast. This would violate the null hypothesis as it would mean there was a better linear unbiased estimator.



                                                              21
predict   Ri   conditional on knowing          RM , E Ri |R = E Ri |R, zt = R.          Another way of stating this


assumption is that the          coecient on returns is not time varying as a function of the z terms.


    Under these assumptions it must be that               = P C = DY .20         To show this, note that   RM =

R =  [P C1 + DY1 ] =  [P C2 + DY2 ].                Allowing for separate coecients on the price change and


the dividend yield, we can re-write the last two terms as              P C P C1 + DY DY1 = P C P C2 + DY DY2 .
                                                   P C1 -P C2 )
Solving for the    DY   term yields      DY = P C (
                                                  (DY2 -DY1 ) .      We know that   R = P C1 +DY1 = P C2 +DY2 ,
                        (P C1 -P C2 )
which implies that
                        (DY2 -DY1 )     = 1.   Substituting into the prior equation yields    DY = P C .   Finally,


we know that       [P Ct + DYt ] = P C P Ct + DY DYt               so it must be that    = P C = DY .

    It is possible for assets to have dierent betas on price changes and dividends, but this implies


that an asset has a market beta that is time-varying according to the dividends accruing to the


market that day.        This is, not the amount of dividends              announced     that day, which may have


information content, but the amount of dividends with an ex-day that day, which was announced


a good deal beforehand. Under standard asset pricing theory there is no reason that such a split


should be informative. On the other hand, if investors are inattentive to the dividend component,


then there may be a lower beta on the dividend yield than on the price change.


    To test this hypothesis, we examine whether commonly used portfolios have dierent betas on


market price changes and dividend yields. Because the S&P 500 is one of the most largely followed


measure of market performance, we take as independent variables the daily percentage change in


the S&P 500 price index, and the value-weighted dividend yield for S&P 500 stocks. As dependent


variables, we use daily returns to the Fama French 25 portfolios sorted on size and book-to-market


from Ken French's website. For each portfolio             i   we estimate the regression:




                      Ri,t - RF = i + i,P C [P CM,t ] + i,DY [DYM,t ] - i,F [RF ] + i,t                         (7)




    The results are reported in Table 5 in Panel A. For the Fama French 25 portfolios, the average




  20
       For the reader inclined to simulation, here is STATA code simulating a market beta of 1.2 and a univariate
dividend yield beta of 0:   set obs 100000; g MKTret=rnormal(0,1); g FFret=1.2*MKTret+rnormal(0,.1); g MK-
Tdy=rnormal(0,.1); g MKTprc=MKTret-MKTdy; reg FFret MKTdy; reg FFret MKTprc MKTdy;



                                                              22
beta on price changes is 0.882, compared with an average beta of 0.370 for dividend yields. The


average portfolio-by-portfolio dierence between the two betas is 0.512 with a         t -statistic of 8.17,
indicating a highly signicant dierence.        All 25 portfolios have positive and signicant betas on


price changes, compared with only 9 portfolios that have positive and signicant betas on dividend


yields. For 16 out of the 25 portfolios, we cannot reject the null hypothesis that investors ignore


the dividend yield completely and only focus on the price change


   If the true model were based on returns, asymptotically the betas on price change and dividend


yield would be the same, but the nite sample properties of our regression might make the relation


dicult to measure. For example, our regressions might lack power because there is not enough


variation in the dividend yield. The distribution of price changes and dividend yields is dierent, so


we wish to make sure that the dierence in betas is not mechanically due to the dierent moments of


the variables. To this end, we conduct placebo regressions and nd that the nite sample properties


of our data are unlikely to drive the results. This is done by preserving the distributional properties


of the dividend yield, but constructing a setting where the variable for the dividend amount is


dierent from the actual day's dividends. We take the returns and dividend yields for the S&P 500,


but randomly assign the dividend to a dierent day's return. We compute a pseudo-price change by


subtracting the randomly assigned dividend yield from the actual S&P 500 return. In the context of


our example, we are drawing   z 's   from a distribution identical to the distribution of dividend yields


in our data. The result of this is to produce two variables, both of which add up to the actual day's


returns, and which retain the same distribution of dividend yield.


   Having obtained the pseudo-price-change and pseudo-dividend for each day in question, we then


regress the portfolios on the two components as before, and repeat the process 10,000 times.             If


our prior results are capturing a statistical artifact of the distributions of the data, the placebo


regressions should yield similar results. However, if the prior results are due to investors not fully


accounting for the impact of   that day's     dividends on index levels, we would not expect to nd


dierent betas on the pseudo price changes and pseudo dividends.


   Table 5 Panel B shows that the results are not driven by a mechanical eect from the dierence




                                                    23
in distributions.   The mean dierence between the pseudo-price changes and pseudo-dividends is


close to zero with a   t -statistic of -0.03.    In other words, the pseudo dividend yield is equally as


informative for portfolio returns as the pseudo price change.         This reects the intuition above -


returns are the economic measure of the day's news, and if the return is arbitrarily split into two


components, both parts retain the same predicted eect.             This reinforces that the dierence in


betas is not a mechanical artifact of the dividend yield having a dierent distribution. Instead, the


lower dividend betas only apply for    that particular day's dividends, consistent with dividend neglect.
Indeed, when we compare the placebo dierences in betas, the value observed in the actual data of


0.512 is higher than all but 12 of the 10,000 simulations and more than twice the value of the 90th


percentile of our simulations of 0.217. In other words, the observed data shows a highly unusual


dierence between the beta on price changes and the beta on dividends. This is consistent with


investors focusing on market price indices and thereby paying less attention to market dividends.


   One potential concern is that our null hypothesis is incorrect - price dividend ratios predict future


market performance, so market betas could vary with dividend yields. Long-term price dividend


ratios (typically measured annually) do indeed forecast future market performance over a three to


ve year horizon (e.g. Cochrane 2011). While daily market dividend yields are a noisy proxy of


annual market dividend yields, perhaps the results are capturing such an eect.


   While theoretically possible, we empirically show in Panel C this is not the case.            The rst


row re-runs the regressions adding a year by month xed eect, eectively removing the long-term


component of price to dividend ratio.           This leaves only within month variation, such as a large


company having an ex-dividend day on a Tuesday rather than a Wednesday, which is unlikely to


contain economically meaningful content. After including the xed eects the dierence between


the price change and dividend beta is 0.692 with a t-statistic of 8.073. Next we add a control for


the lagged annual dividend yield and show similar results. Finally, we run the analysis using rolling


ve year periods which allows for time-variation in market betas. We take the average of the betas


for each portfolio and run the    t -test on these averages.    The third row shows a similar dierence


with a slightly larger point estimate than the baseline of 0.628 with a     t -statistic of 6.89. Thus, the

                                                       24
results are not capturing the long-term predictability of returns from price-to-dividend ratios.


   Our base analysis examines the full sample period of the S&P 500 and the 25 Fama French


portfolios based on size and book-to-market. In Panel C we re-run the analysis on three separate


time periods. We nd a pairwise dierence of 0.532 from 1962-1979, 0.374 from 1980-1998 and 0.811


                   t -statistics of 7.69, 4.64 and 5.75 respectively. In each sub-period the pairwise
from 1999-2016, with


dierence in coecients is above 0.38 with t -statistics above 4.6, suggesting the relation has been


fairly stable over time.   Prior to 1962 the S&P 500 was not the dominant form of performance


display (it was created in 1957). To explore this period, we use the Dow Jones Industrial average to


measure performance, as to the extent investors during this period focused on market performance


(see Section 3), this seems the most likely tool that they used. Examining this period, we nd a


similar pattern, but a smaller dierence in betas of 0.1 with a      t -statistic of 1.64.   The Dow has


signicantly fewer stocks (30 rms) so only about 20% of days involve a dividend payout from the


index.   Empirically, this means the right hand side variable is largely comprised of zeros in our


standard analysis. To focus on days with meaningful variation, the next row repeats the analysis


on the days where the index paid a dividend. On these days the dierence between coecients is


0.575 with a   t -statistic on the dierence of 4.08. Thus, even during this early period when there was
signicant uncertainty as to the concept of performance, market betas respond much more strongly


to commonly displayed price indices rather than total returns.


   We use the 25 Fama French portfolios based on size and book-to-market as they are arguably


the most studied set of portfolios in nance, but in Panel C we explore a number of alternative


portfolios and nd similar results. We examine portfolios sorts into 6 portfolios and 100 portfolios


based on size and book-to-market. Both yield similar point estimates to what we nd examining


the 25 portfolios. Below we examine ve further ve by ve portfolio sorts including sorts based on


protability and investment. We also examine portfolios sorted on 17, 30 and 48 industries. While


there is some variation across all of these dierent portfolios sorts, in each instance the beta on


dividends is signicantly below that on the price change.


   The main analysis focuses on misreaction to daily dividend yields, as this information is largely




                                                   25
random and known ahead of time. With that said, there is no reason why investors responding to


longer term measures would not also be prone to such a bias. To examine whether there is empirical


support for such a prediction, we re-run the analysis using monthly returns. These results should


be interpreted cautiously.       Moving from daily to monthly levels means that dividend yields may


be more likely to capture longer term economic trends, so we include year xed eects. Further,


the dividend is not known with certainty at the beginning of the month, so the identication is


not as clean.      At longer horizons it is also less clear what signal an investor is using.              At daily


horizons investors examining common sources (e.g. the Wall Street Journal), have only the prior


day's returns to examine, but a longer horizon oers more options. To the extent we mis-measure


the signal used by investors, our results will be biased towards nding the same betas on price


changes and dividend yields (as demonstrated by the simulation in Table 5 Panel B). With these


caveats in mind, we still nd a dierence in betas of 0.326. We interpret these results as suggestive


that longer term signals also induce a bias, and that this bias is separate from the one induced by


daily signals.


   Germany oers another interesting placebo test as to whether the dierent betas that we observe


on price changes and dividend yields are due to viewing market performance as a price change index.


While most major indices for developed markets are price indices, Germany is an exception as the


DAX measures market performance as a total return with dividends reinvested. To the extent that


our prior results are capturing investors viewing major market performance based on price indices,


we would not expect such an eect for German markets.


   We repeat the analysis for the German market in Table 5 Panel D, and nd that investors


respond to total returns. We examine 16 portfolios formed on size and book to market from 1999-


2015.
        21 We measure price changes and dividend yields using the CRSP world index for Germany


and the risk free rate is measured using the European risk free rate from Ken French's website. For


16 portfolios of German stocks, the average beta on dividend yield (0.603) is actually higher than


the average beta on price change (0.54). The pairwise dierence is a slightly negative -0.063, though


  21
       The data is described in Brückner et al. (2015) and was downloaded from Richard Stehle's website.



                                                         26
insignicant with a       t -statistic of -0.852. The dierence between the US and Germany is not due to
the dierent time period, as Table 5 Panel C shows a signicant dierence in the US in this period.


The results suggest investors in Germany are responding to total returns, as the betas on the price


change component and the dividend yield component are not signicantly dierent.
                                                                                                    22




2.6 Performance Display and Market Predictability

A low beta on the dividend yield is consistent with markets underreacting to the component of


returns made up by the dividend yield. In other words, all else equal, if more of the market return


comes through dividends there will tend to be underreaction to that component of returns. This


suggests that there will be excess returns in the future as the market incorporates this information.


    Table 6 Panel A shows results consistent with this - a high dividend yield on the market today


predicts higher market returns the next trading day. Column 1 regresses the CRSP value weighted


market return today (trading day           t)   on the dividend yield on the CRSP value weighted market


on day     t -1.   The coecient is 1.081 with a      t -statistic of 3.81.    When the dividend yield was high


yesterday, the market is predictably higher today.              This implies that a one standard deviation


increase in the dividend yield (0.00024) is associated with an increase in returns of roughly 2.6 basis


points. The unconditional expectation of market returns is 4 basis points, so the market return is


65% higher in expectation after a one standard deviation increase in the dividend yield.


    One concern is that the regression is picking up an aspect of market performance the prior


day, rather than the dividend yield. Column 2 controls for the prior day's market return and the


coecient on the dividend yield is roughly unchanged at 1.039 with a                   t -statistic of 3.67.   Finally,


the regression could be picking up broad periods of time when the market performs well or poorly.


To control for this, column 3 includes a year by month xed eect.                     If anything, the results are


stronger, with a coecient of 1.406 and a            t -statistic of 4.56.    Next, we split the sample into days



  22
       An additional hypothesis suggested by our analysis is that Germany should have dierent price and dividend
betas (similar to the US) before the DAX was launched in 1987, as the dominant index was the FAZ Aktien price
index. Unfortunately we are unaware of a consistent, comprehensive daily data series prior to the DAX to test this
hypothesis. See Brückner et al. (2014) and Brückner et al. (2015) for a discussion of the sparseness and unreliability
of German daily return data before 1990.



                                                         27
with a negative market return the previous day (column 4) and a positive market return the previous


day (column 5). Like in Table 2.3, we nd a larger reaction following days with negative returns


(coecient of 2.018, with a     t -statistic of 3.84) than following days with a positive return (coecient
of 0.934, with a   t -statistic of 2.45).   This is consistent with market participants broadly having a


similar asymmetric reaction to news as journalists with a stronger reaction to negative news. Next,


we examine what speed the market corrects itself, which we consider an empirical question (as


discussed in Section 2.2). We explore this in Column 6 by including lagged dividend yield for the


prior ve trading days. We nd that the eect is largest and most signicant for the prior day's


dividend yield. With that said, there is some evidence of further correction as the dividend yield


on day   t -3 is also positive and signicant, though roughly half of the magnitude.     The coecients


on the other lags are largely insignicant. The results suggest that while there may be additional


correction at further lags, a signicant amount of the correction occurs the day after the ex-date.


Thus we focus the majority of our analysis on this day.


   As in the tests for journalists, in Panel B we repeat the analysis using dividend growth. If the


results were driven not by variation in the dividend yield, but based on discount rate variation


through prices leading to predictability, this measure should not capture our eect.          Examining


Panel B, we nd that the results are similar, again suggesting that the eect is coming from the


dividend variation itself, and not the price change in the denominator.


   To visualize the magnitude, Figure 4 graphs the cumulative return to investing in the market


when the prior day's dividend yield was high or low.          In Panel A we split the sample based on


whether the prior day's dividend yield was above 0.5 basis points. This is slightly above the median


value so there are more days in the low dividend category rather than the high dividend category.


We cumulate the daily returns when the strategy is in the market with zero returns on other days.


From 1962 through 2015, the return to a $1 investment after high dividend days was $19.85. For


days where the prior day was below that cuto it was $9.43, roughly half the high day amount.


One concern with a xed cuto is that it is capturing slow-moving variation in market returns


rather than daily dividend variation. Panel B repeats the analysis splitting within a month based




                                                      28
on the median dividend yield that month. The downside to this split is it is not ex-ante tradable


as monthly dividend yields are not known until the end of the month.                       The benet is that each


calendar month has the same number of days in each strategy (with more in the low dividend group


if the month has an odd number of days). Thus the graph does not capture slow moving trends.


Panel B shows a similar pattern, the high dividend yield line has a nal value of $20.52 and the low


line has a nal value of $9.11.


     Germany again oers an interesting alternative arena to examine our hypothesis. If the display


of information is responsible for the market predictability in the US, then we would not expect such


a pattern in Germany where the major market index displays performance in terms of total returns.


Table 6 Panel B repeats the analysis using German market data and nds no eect of yesterday's


dividend yield predicting the current day's market return. The coecients range from roughly 0.11


to 0.23 with       t -statistics below 0.50.   Thus, in Germany, where market performance is displayed as


returns, the prior day's dividend yield does not predict market performance.




2.7 Performance Display and Cross-Sectional Predictability

An underreaction to the dividend component of performance should lead to a dierential underre-


action within the cross-section of stock returns based on dierent market betas. A stock,                     i,   with a


market beta,        i ,   has an expected excess return based on market performance of              i  retmkt .    This


can be written as          i  P Cmkt + i  DYmkt .        If market performance is perceived as a price index,


the stock will underperform by           -i  DYmkt .       When looking for the subsequent correction, a high


i   stock will have a larger correction compared to a low             i   stock. To test whether this is the case,


we examine the daily portfolios that are long the top decile of stocks based on their beta and short


the bottom decile.
                          23 We regress this portfolio on measures of the dividend the prior day.


     Table 7 Panel A shows equal-weighted results. Column 1 regresses the beta dierence portfolio


on yesterday's dividend yield and a constant, alpha. The alpha in the regression is -0.0248 with


a   t -statistic of -3.53.    This shows that high beta stocks on average underperform low beta stocks

    23
         We use annual portfolio sorts and characteristics provided by CRSP for both beta and market cap. Both variables
are estimated as of the end of the calendar year and used to sort portfolios and value weight for the subsequent year.



                                                            29
by 2.5 basis points per day, consistent with the prior literature on the slope of the security market


line and betting against beta (e.g. Jensen et al. 1972; Frazzini and Pedersen 2014). The coecient


on dividend yield is 1.286 with a         t -statistic of 5.09.   This indicates that high beta stocks perform


relatively better when the dividend yield was higher the prior day. The average dierence in betas


for stocks in the high relative to the low portfolio is 1.259. This would be the expected coecient


on a subsequent reversal, which is close to the estimate of 1.286.


   Column 2, 3 and 4 move from the continuous measure of dividend yield to a discrete measure


based on whether the prior day's dividend yield was above 0.5 basis points. Column 2 shows alphas


from a CAPM regression, column 3 shows alphas from a four factor regression and column 4 adds


interactions of each factor with the dummy variable for a dividend yield above 0.5 basis points


the prior day. The interaction term allows for the dierence portfolio to have dierent loadings on


factors on days following high dividends. The coecients on the dummy variable ranges from 2.8


basis points to 3.4 basis points each with a          t -statistic greater than 2.74. It is also notable that the
point estimate on the high dividend dummy is roughly the same as the negative constant.
                                                                                                             24 This


means that the CAPM security market line has a negative slope only following days with small


dividend yields, and following high dividend yield days the slope is approximately at.


   One possible concern is that this xed cuto of 0.5 basis points overweights certain time periods


relative to others, thereby conating a time-series pattern with a cross-sectional one. To address


this, in the next three columns the analysis is repeated sorting on whether the day's dividend yield


is above the median in that calendar month. Thus every calendar month will have a nearly identical


number of observations included and excluded from the dummy variable.                         With this cuto, the


alphas range from 3.7 to 4.7 basis points with           t -statistics above 3.58.
   Panel B of Table 7 repeats the analysis value weighted. The point estimates decrease slightly


and the     t -statistics are smaller, though each is signicant at the 10% level and ve of the seven
are signicant at the 5% level. While high beta stocks underperform low beta stocks, our results


indicate that this is not the case following days with high market dividends.                      High beta stocks


  24
       We fail to reject that they are the same in absolute value with a p -value on the dierence of 0.67.



                                                           30
underreact more to the dividend component of returns, consistent with market participants viewing


market performance to be commonly reported price indices, rather than total returns.


   While there are aspects of dividend distributions that incur taxes or trading costs, we are not


aware of any model of dividend taxes or frictions that generates the time series and cross sectional


patterns we observe.
                         25 For instance, Brennan 1970 and Litzenberger and Ramaswamy 1980 consider


the eects of dividend taxes when investors price the after-tax returns for dividend-paying rms,


and explore how they relate to the pre-tax returns on the market, which they take as the measure


of economic news.        By contrast, we examine pre-tax returns of rms, most of whom do not pay


dividends on the day in question, on the disaggregated returns of the market. The fact that asset


pricing tests are not run in this manner suggests that the division between market price changes


and market dividends is not considered a natural or obvious eect of taxes.                Nonetheless, it is


parsimoniously predicted by the idea that investors are treating the S&P 500 index as the market.


   The results suggest that the default display of performance inuences marketwide dynamics,


including return predictability, the market betas of portfolios and cross-sectional predictability of


stocks based on their market betas. While this section has focused on predictions for the market


as a whole, Hartzmark and Solomon (2019) explore the implications for individual positions and


demonstrate the time-varying impact of viewing price changes and dividends as separate attributes


also leads to predictability for individual positions.          All of these patterns would be mitigated by


viewing performance as total returns, instead of viewing price changes and dividends separately.




2.8 Performance Display and Longer Term Investor Expectations

Up to this point, most of the evidence of market index design mattering has involved short term


market movements. The reason is that these tend to be the best-identied, in terms of being unlikely


to be explained by longer term macroeconomic shifts, for which there are plausible alternative


explanations. But given the ubiquity of the mistaken focus on market price changes, there is no


reason to suspect that the impact of bad index design is limited to short term returns. Investors'


  25
       Though this does not mean it is impossible to write such a model, of course.



                                                          31
expectations of the equity premium are at the heart of a huge number of asset pricing questions,


and the results up to this point raise serious questions as to what numbers investors are actually


looking at when considering such questions.


    To examine how investors form longer term expectations, we turn to the nding in Greenwood


and Shleifer (2014) that investors extrapolate recent market returns when forming expectations of


future market returns, even though statistical models and economic theory (e.g.                   Shiller (1981))


predict that high past returns should negatively predict expected returns. This extrapolative fore-


casting is not well explained by economic theory, so it presents a good way to test what measure of


past market performance investors are using.


    Table 8 examines whether investors extrapolate past market returns, or the price indices they


actually see reported.      We use expectations from the ve publicly available surveys examined in


Greenwood and Shleifer (2014), namely Gallup, the Graham and Harvey CFO survey, the American


Association of Individual Investors, Robert Shiller's survey of individual investors and the Michigan


Survey of Consumers. Where possible we update the data through the end of 2018.
                                                                                                 26 Each survey


contains expectations of future market performance over the subsequent year.                    We regress these


expectations on the price change in the S&P 500, and the dividend yield for the S&P 500, over


various past horizons. Panel A takes as dependent variables the price change and dividend yield


over the previous quarter, while Panel B examines the same variables over the previous six months.
                                                                                                               27


    The results strongly suggest that investors form expectations based on market price indices which


exclude dividends, not the correct measure of returns. Over both intervals, for all investor types the


prior S&P 500 price change is positively and signicantly related to subjective predictions of the


chances of the market rising over the next 12 months. By contrast, dividend yields over the same


period generally predict negatively in the odd-numbered columns without controls. While this may


appear surprising, it is worth noting that the dividend price ratio is negatively related to longer-term



  26
       We do so for all surveys other than Gallup, which we take directly from the data appendix of Greenwood and
Shleifer (2014). All variables are constructed as described in Greenwood and Shleifer (2014).
  27
       As in Greenwood and Shleifer (2014), we are examining monthly data.     Returns are matched as of the prior
month. For example, for an observation in October 2015, lagged quarterly performance is measured from July 2015
though September 2015 and lagged 6 month performance is measured from April 2015 through September 2015.



                                                        32
market performance, so the negative coecient likely captures extrapolation of longer-term market


trends. To control for such trends, the even-numbered columns include a year xed eect. In this


setup, the variation is coming from within a year after removing the long-term component. After


including year xed eects, the positive coecient on the market index remains, but the coecient


on the dividend yield moves to roughly zero in most specications, with 8 of the 10       t -statistics
being below 1. The results suggest that the negative explanatory power of dividend yields is mostly


capturing general economic conditions, whereas the coecients on price changes represent investor


extrapolation.


   Overall, these results are consistent with the idea that investors indeed extrapolate past market


performance when forming estimates of future performance, but that past performance is largely


viewed as being past price changes. We note that this is true across investor types, including the


CFOs in the Graham and Harvey survey.        Investors appear to form expectations of the equity


premium based on market price indices, not market returns.


   At the heart of nearly every asset pricing problem lies expectations of future market risk pre-


mium. While well-identied measures of longer-term expectations of market performance for the


marginal investor would be ideal, data limitations constrain the ability to provide such estimates.


With that said, our paper provides well identied evidence that over short horizons, perceptions of


the equity premium are driven by commonly displayed price indices, not market returns. For per-


ceptions of the equity premium for the marginal investor to accurately reect actual market returns


without being inuenced by the display of price indices, the following would have to be true:




  1. The marginal investor forms expectations of the equity premium based on total returns, even
     though total return indices for the most commonly reported measures of market performance
     did not exist for most of the history of the stock market (the S&P total return index was
     created in 1988, while the Dow Jones total return index was created in 2012).


  2. The marginal investor obtains information on recent market returns from data sources other
     than popular nancial websites, newspapers and brokerages, all of whom by default report
     price indices.   Alternatively, such investors face zero incremental costs to seeking out this
     information on their own, and so are unconcerned that all major data sources generally fail
     to report this information, even though it would be virtually costless for them to do so.




                                                 33
    3. Some explanation other than focusing on price indices explains why there are dierences betas
          on market returns and dividends, and predictability in daily market returns and beta sorted
          portfolios. Said explanation would also describe why such predictability is absent in Germany,
          which displays return indices by default.


    4. The marginal investor in mutual funds and the marginal investor setting market prices have a
          dierent susceptibility to the display of information at the annual horizon. The mutual fund
          investor compares annual fund performance to the commonly reported price index, but the
          marginal investor in the equity market views performance in terms of total returns.


    5. When extrapolating from past market performance, investors (including CFOs) extrapolate
          based on the performance of price indices, not on total returns. These investors must not be
          relevant when considering the perceptions of the marginal investor in the stock market, even
          though these surveys cover a variety of investor types that each display a consistent pattern.



It is impossible to empirically reject that the marginal investor forms expectations consistent with


these conditions, but we feel that the hypothesis that the marginal investor forms expectations at


least in part based on the information that they are actually shown (rather than the information


they should be shown, but do not see) oers a more parsimonious explanation.




3        A brief history of returns


To many an academic reader who has been taught that returns should be the primary measure of


performance for an investor, using or displaying some other crude approximation or disaggregated


measure may seem to be an exceedingly naive mistake. To understand its source, we briey discuss


the history of thought on the general concept of performance.
                                                                             28   Until fairly recently, academic


nance was similarly confused with how an investor should view performance. This demonstrates


that it is plausible that many investors do not realize that they should be focusing on returns. It


also helps one understand the historical legacy of various nancial metrics, many of which were


standardized prior to the formalized concept of returns, and persist to this day in a similar format.


     The modern concept of returns is a surprisingly recent one.                  In the early 20th century, the


quantity under investigation was either stock prices or dividends, but not stock returns. The


    28
         This section summarizes a literature review conducted on early papers on investment performance in the Quar-
terly Journal of Economics, Journal of Political Economy, American Economic Review, Journal of Business and
Journal of Finance between 1892 and 1960. The papers cited are not meant to be exhaustive, but rather represen-
tative of the views we encountered.



                                                           34
terminology and focus very much resembles the argument in Hartzmark and Solomon (2019) that


dividends and prices are largely considered as alternative ways to prot from a position.      Rarely


were the two combined into a single overall prot measure. For example, Hardy (1923) classies


dierent ways of securing a return on one's capital, and lists as distinct categories:


   -Purchase of securities with a view to obtaining income from interest or dividends


   -Purchase or sale of securities ... with a view to prot from price changes


   -Gambling transactions


These are notably discussed as      alternative   ways to prot, rather than components of a combined


prot measure.    The category of gambling transactions, while unusual in a modern taxonomy,


was not atypical at the time.    Morrison (1949) reviews the history of investment thought up to


1949, and describes how before 1924 it was a serious question whether common stocks were even an


investment at all, or whether they were just gambling and speculation. This changed with Smith


(1924), who, in the words of Morrison (1949), revolutionized investment thought by showing that


stocks earned more in total than bonds - in other words, he roughly discovered the equity premium.


Smith notes that this fact came as a surprise, and faced strong opposition. For example, Harold


(1934) conducted a follow-on study to show that the crash of 1929 did not overturn the nding


(which, he claims, was the common conception at the time).


   Finding that the price of stocks generally increased over each of the periods studied was su-


ciently surprising to Smith that he formulated his fundamental principle of sound investment



     In the selection of securities for investment, we must consider more than the expected
     income yield upon the amount invested, and may quite properly weight the probability of
     principal enhancement over a term of years without departing from the most conservative
     viewpoint.
While it may seem incredible to a modern reader that it needs to be stated that one should consider


both expected capital gains   and   expected income, there did not seem to be a consensus that stock


prices warranted consideration as a potentially reliable source of prot.


   Smith's analysis, similar to other treatments of the subject at the time (e.g. Fisher 1912), was


quite piecemeal. He discussed the superiority of stocks by considering income and capital appre-



                                                      35
ciation as separate tests, and the nominal amounts (without reinvestment) were added together.


The term return is generally paired as income return to refer only to dividends and interest,


while the returns-analogue he computes is described as the total advantage of stocks over bonds.


The closest to an actual holding period return involves reinvesting only the excess of dividends over


bond income in tests labeled as supplementary to the main analysis.


    Notably, risk features very little as an explanation of his ndings. In ascribing stocks in the long


run as having a denite increase in principal, Smith (1924) argues that common stocks provided


more safety than bonds, rather than the modern conception of having higher returns due to having
higher risk. In the case of Harold (1934), the word risk does not even appear in the article.


    There were some authors who did compute quantities closer to the modern idea of returns.


In our review, Jackson (1928) stands out as the closest approximation to the modern concept of


returns, even though the example was not followed in subsequent papers for almost 30 years.
                                                                                                                 29 He


compares the performance of common and preferred stock by computing numbers that are close to


the annual holding period returns of each type of stock with annual dividend reinvestment. This


exercise was undertaken, he notes, in response other academic positions at the time such as Dewing


(1922) that advocated that  [p]referred stocks of all descriptions should be avoided.


    Notably, even in articles around this time, the word return gets used loosely, and can refer to


a wide variety of dierent concepts related to dierent ways to prot from an investment.
                                                                                                                30 For


instance, a number of early papers use return to mean something akin to a dividend yield or an


income yield (e.g.        Scott 1910 and Robinson 1930).          Even more oddly to a modern reader, these


dividend-yield style returns were often quoted as a percentage of the stock's par value, rather


than its market value, (as in Mitchell 1910b and Matherly 1923). Sometimes, return refers to any


method of proting from a trade, such as in Hardy (1923). And other times, it seems to refer to


something similar to a modern holding period return, as in Jackson (1928).



   29
        The google scholar citation count for the paper as of February 2018 was 9, of which only 3 date from before 1950
   30
        Another prominent example is Markowitz (1952), where performance is described as returns, but the term is
not dened. A footnote points readers to 20 pages of Williams (1938) for an example, which focuses on valuing stocks
for their dividends, with a separate section (not included in the footnote's page range) discussing speculators valuing
stocks for their price changes.



                                                            36
   To depict this quantitatively, in Figure 5 we compare the number of articles referring to stock


                                                               Quarterly Journal of Economics,
prices versus stock returns by decade. We examine articles in the


Journal of Political Economy, American Economic Review, Journal of Business and Journal of
Finance, for each decade beginning in 1900. For each of the pairs ({stock and price } versus
{stock and return }) we consider four variants: if the two words appeared in the title, in the


abstract (with data starting in the 1960s), within 10 words of each other in the full text, or as an


exact phrase in the full text. We plot the number of price entries versus the sum of price and


return entries in each case. No matter which metric is used, the graphs show that the terminology


of stock returns only become widespread in the 1970s. Indeed, the rst article to use the words


stock and return in its title is Dirks (1958).         By comparison, there had been 31 articles with


stock and price in their title up to this point. Since the concept of returns was historically used


loosely, the full text graphs likely   understate the extent of the change - many of the modern articles
referring to stock prices in fact exclusively study stock returns, and many of the old references to


returns on stocks were not about modern returns at all.


   Until the late 1950s, authors continued to use dierent concepts and measures of performance.


Academic writing began to converge around the modern idea of returns beginning in the 1960s.


Perhaps the most famous formulation which includes both the commonly known formula for returns,


and describes it as a return, is in Miller and Modigliani (1961). Foundational to their proof was the


concept that an investor could not increase his total return around dividend ex-dates. This forced


them to contemplate the two terms together, and the centrality of the paper to future academic


nance almost certainly helped popularize the modern returns concept. Meanwhile, the mechanics


of how exactly dividends and other distributions were to be treated was examined in considerable


detail in Fisher and Lorie (1964) with the development of the CRSP stock returns dataset.


   To take one example that illustrates the progression of thought, consider some of the various


event study analyses of the eects of stock splits. Dolley (1933) rst studies the issue, and examines


only price changes, with dividends being ignored altogether. Barker (1956) reconsiders the question,


splitting the sample into stocks with and without dividend increases, to focus on how dividend




                                                     37
increases may contaminate the news content of stock splits. But even so, the measure of performance


is still the percentage price change, ignoring dividends. It is only with Fama et al. (1969) that actual


returns are analyzed, using data from the CRSP tapes.


   This brief history of investment thought helps to explain the odd way that many stock indices are


constructed. Early academic papers which constructed such indices, and companies which did the


same, did not think they were constructing indices of           returns. They thought they were constructing
indices of   prices. Adjustments that seem obvious to a modern nance academic, such as reinvesting
dividends, were not nearly so obvious when the subject specically was prices. This tendency was


almost surely exacerbated by the fact that when computations were being done by hand, there


was considerable extra work involved to calculate periodic reinvestment values compared with just


taking the ratio of starting and ending prices, and dividend information was often dicult to obtain.


   These issues can be seen in early academic papers that attempted to construct stock indices.


For instance, Mitchell (1910a) not only fails to include dividends, but makes even more odd choices.


Stock-level price changes are not even considered in percentage terms. Rather, the rst step is to


average the price of the stocks in question, and then compute the percentage change in this average.


There seems to be no sense that the price level itself is arbitrary, or whether it makes sense to


overweight high priced stocks.         Incidentally, this seems to be the only semi-plausible explanation


for the Dow Jones's price weighting scheme - average the price and then compute changes. The


continued popular discussion of movements in the Dow, which is utterly unjustiable as a measure


of any economically signicant quantity, should be taken as                  a fortiori   evidence for the eects


we document.        Another early attempt at index construction is Cover et al. (1930).               The authors


adjust for extra dividends, but not regular dividends.
                                                                  31 More strikingly, they make a number of


other unusual adjustments - subtracting o stock-specic trends in price changes, for instance, and


stripping out seasonal variation in prices. While these seem odd if one is computing stock returns,


when the object is prices, it is less clear what adjustments should be made. If the mental model is


akin to the price of wheat, stripping out a seasonal component is less peculiar.


  31
       They acknowledge that they ought to adjust for regular dividends too if they were being careful.



                                                          38
   The point of this long discussion is twofold. First, it is important to understand what the state of


nancial thought was when these indices were constructed. The problem of the curse of knowledge


(Camerer et al. 1989) means that modern readers are apt to think that knowledge that we take for


granted must have always been obvious. This is simply not so. The Dow Jones Industrial Average


was constructed in 1896. The Composite Index, the precursor to the S&P 500, was constructed


in 1923. Both of these occurred before nance had a clear concept of returns.


   The fact that these early, naive concepts are still visible and widely quoted a century later shows


how sticky institutional norms are. Further, this hysteresis is not easily explained by the theories


constructed in other economic arenas.     The S&P 500 does not seem to propagate due to local


interactions and learning (Young 2001). While some institutions may have made specic investments


in the S&P 500 that would be lost under a switch (Coate and Morris 1999), like Standard and Poors


themselves or S&P 500 ETFs, this does not easily explain the actions of journalists, individual


investors, or data providers who already have access to both price and return indices.        There is


no political process to capture by investment in political power, as in Acemoglu and Robinson


(2006). The closest explanation may be network eects (Arthur 1989), but it is hard to nd a co-


ordination advantage to some (but not all) data providers displaying fund performance as an NAV, or


investors calculating a beta incorrectly, or ignoring dividends leading to predictable market returns.


Each of the standard hysteresis explanations is based on individually rational agents interacting to


achieve suboptimal aggregate outcomes. The behavior we document is dicult to understand in


this manner. Instead, the behavior we observe appears more consistent with investors responding


to observed performance without realizing the shortcomings of the measure they are viewing. This


suggests that an additional cause of hysteresis may be due to inattention, and simply not realizing


that a given measure is not what it claims to be.


   The second point of the discussion is to demonstrate the idea of a holding period return is


generally less obvious than it may seem to modern academics. Given how long it took academia


to coalesce around the idea, it seems likely that many people still think in ill-dened terms about


performance, and do not think about how this diers from the appropriate benchmark of returns.




                                                 39
4    Discussion


This paper documents that the most common displays of information related to performance do not


reect the appropriate economic metric of that performance. The fact that it is often dicult to


unearth precisely what a performance metric is actually displaying suggests that many investors are


not considering the details of the measure they are shown. Given that the cost of changing to the


appropriate metric is minimal for both the providers (who have already created better total returns


indices) and the investors responding to it (who, with the appropriate measure, would simply need


to continue failing to delve into what they were looking at), this is an ideal scenario for a nudge.


    The change that would have the greatest impact on shifting investor's perception of performance


towards returns is to change the default display of marketwide performance to the already existing


total return indices.   The transition could be made smoother by normalizing the indices at the


same level on a certain date so that investors could retain the same intuition. Further, there likely


are some less than scrupulous agents in the market that understand the dierence between price


changes and returns and use this to frame performance in certain ways that confuse investors who


do not understand this dierence. Changing the default measure to returns should ameliorate such


behavior. The experience in Germany of switching from price indices to the DAX is informative


that such a shift is straightforward and not particularly disruptive.


    The display of performance of individual positions is a more complex problem. If only returns


were displayed, but most investors do not actually reinvest dividends (which is indeed the case - see


Baker et al. 2007 and Hartzmark and Solomon 2019, among others) the performance displayed would


dier from the total prots the investor actually received. An investor who does not understand


what returns represent may become confused that the amount of money in their account does not


match the return performance of their investment.


    For individual positions in brokerage statements, web portals or newspapers returns could be


included in addition to other relevant metrics to avoid confusion. It also would be helpful to investors


for brokerages to provide basic information to investors as to what this measure is, how to think




                                                  40
about it and what would make it dierent from the performance of their holdings. In addition to


actually understanding the performance of their positions, this may also help investors understand


that they are suering from the free dividends fallacy (Hartzmark and Solomon 2019) and get them


to frame performance as total returns instead of price changes and dividends separately. The display


of nancial performance is an ideal place for a better-chosen default to improve decision-making.


Switching to the appropriate benchmark with a little education would likely lead to better decisions,


less opportunities for unscrupulous nancial advice and a more ecient market at minimal cost.




5    Conclusion


In this paper, we explore the broad impact of a basic stylized fact not widely considered - that the


presentation of performance information typically deviates from the economic concept it claims to


measure. Across a wide range of sources, we document that investors almost never see returns as


the default display of performance. Perhaps the most striking example of this is the fact that most


major indices of market performance do not reinvest dividends, and investors seem to be confused


about the implications of this.   Financial journalists write more negative articles when dividend


ex-days cause prices to drop, and important stock portfolios respond strongly in terms of betas to


market price changes, but often do not respond to market dividends at all.


    The display of performance in terms of price changes, rather than returns with dividend reinvest-


ment, may have a signicant impact on investor behavior more generally. For example, if investors


view the performance of their investments relative to a price index, rather than a return index,


they will not receive feedback that failing to reinvest dividends could lead them to underperform a


return benchmark. This could help to explain why investors do not tend to reinvest dividends and


view dividends as a free source of income, separate from the price level of the security. If investors


view the performance of equities in terms of price indices, they will erroneously perceive less out-


performance of stocks relative to bonds. This could partially drive the equity premium puzzle, by


increasing the ow of capital to bonds relative to stocks.




                                                 41
   Our results show a surprising inattention both by academics and market participants. Either


through lack of awareness of the problem, the hassle of collecting data on distributions, or concern for


potential confusion by naive investors, many data providers in nance display dierent performance


metrics. Market participants are commonly shown these faulty metrics, and appear to take them


at face value, leading to various predictable mistakes. Meanwhile, academics tend to consider the


concept of a return so obvious that it is typically taken for granted that everybody else must be


tracking the right metrics too. Instead, dierent groups appear to use the same terminology, but


without checking the details of whether others are using the same metrics and denitions.


   All of this suggests the market could use a nudge towards the correct display of returns. The


results highlight the importance of hysteresis, yet also point to an explanation of the phenomenon


that has not been widely considered within economics. In our setting the most likely mechanism


does not seem to be individual rationality, but rather inattention to the general phenomenon. It


is dicult to think of an application where a price index       is the appropriate benchmark, so shifting
the default display of performance to return indices may lead investors to more accurately perceive


performance and make better investor decisions.



References

Acemoglu, Daron, and James A Robinson, 2006, De facto political power and institutional persistence,
  American Economic Review       96, 325330.


Arthur, W Brian, 1989, Competing technologies, increasing returns, and lock-in by historical events,    The
  Economic Journal     99, 116131.


Baker, Malcolm, Stefan Nagel, and Jerey Wurgler, 2007, The eect of dividends on consumption,       Brookings
  Papers on Economic Activity     231292.


Baker, Malcolm, and Jerey Wurgler, 2004a, Appearing and disappearing dividends: The link to catering
  incentives,   Journal of Financial Economics   73, 271288.


Baker, Malcolm, and Jerey Wurgler, 2004b, A catering theory of dividends,     Journal of Finance   59, 1125
  1165.


Bansal, Ravi, and Amir Yaron, 2004, Risks for the long run: A potential resolution of asset pricing puzzles,
  The journal of Finance    59, 14811509.


Barber, Brad M, Xing Huang, and Terrance Odean, 2016, Which factors matter to investors? evidence from
  mutual fund ows,     The Review of Financial Studies   29, 26002642.


Barberis, Nicholas, Robin Greenwood, Lawrence Jin, and Andrei Shleifer, 2015, X-capm: An extrapolative
  capital asset pricing model,   Journal of Financial Economics   115, 124.
Barberis, Nicholas, Robin Greenwood, Lawrence Jin, and Andrei Shleifer, 2018, Extrapolation and bubbles,
  Journal of Financial Economics     .


Barker, C Austin, 1956, Eective stock splits,      Harvard Business Review     34, 101106.


Bazley, William J, Henrik Cronqvist, and Milica Milosavljevic Mormann, 2017, In the red: The eects of
  color on investment behavior .


Benartzi, Shlomo, and Richard H Thaler, 1999, Risk aversion or myopia? choices in repeated gambles and
  retirement investments,   Management science      45, 364381.


Bergstresser, Daniel, and James Poterba, 2002, Do after-tax returns aect mutual fund inows?,           Journal of
  Financial Economics     63, 381414.


Berk, Jonathan B, and Richard C Green, 2004, Mutual fund ows and performance in rational markets,
  Journal of political economy    112, 12691295.


Berk, Jonathan B, and Jules H Van Binsbergen, 2016, Assessing asset pricing models using revealed prefer-
  ence,   Journal of Financial Economics     119, 123.


Brennan, Michael J, 1970, Taxes, market valuation and corporate nancial policy,           National tax journal   23,
  417427.


Brückner, Roman, Patrick Lehmann, Martin H Schmidt, and Richard Stehle, 2014, Fama/french factors for
  germany: Which set is best, Technical report, Working paper.


Brückner, Roman, Patrick Lehmann, Martin H Schmidt, and Richard Stehle, 2015, Another german
  fama/french factor data set .


Camerer, Colin, George Loewenstein, and Martin Weber, 1989, The curse of knowledge in economic settings:
  An experimental analysis,    The Journal of Political Economy      12321254.


Campbell, John Y, and John H Cochrane, 1999, By force of habit: A consumption-based explanation of
  aggregate stock market behavior,       Journal of political Economy   107, 205251.


Coate, Stephen, and Stephen Morris, 1999, Policy persistence,       American Economic Review      89, 13271336.


Cochrane, John H, 2011, Presidential address: Discount rates,       The Journal of nance      66, 10471108.


Cover, John H, David A Revzan, Wilfrid M Helms, and Vincent J Cohenour, 1930, A barometer of chicago
  stock prices,   The Journal of Business of the University of Chicago       3, 171191.


Dewing, Arthur Stone, 1922,    Problems to Accompany" The Financial Policy of Corporations,"        (Ronald Press
  Company).


Di Maggio, Marco, Amir Kermani, and Kaveh Majlesi, 2018, Stock market returns and consumption .


Dirks, Frederick C, 1958, Recent investment return on industrial stocks,      The Journal of Finance 13, 370385.
Dolley, James C, 1933, Characteristics and procedure of common stock split-ups,           Harvard Business Review
  11, 316326.


Elton, Edwin J, and Martin J Gruber, 1970, Marginal stockholder tax rates and the clientele eect,                The
  Review of Economics and Statistics       6874.


Engelberg, Joseph E, and Christopher A Parsons, 2011, The causal impact of media in nancial markets,
  The Journal of Finance     66, 6797.


Fama, Eugene F, Lawrence Fisher, Michael C Jensen, and Richard Roll, 1969, The adjustment of stock
  prices to new information,   International economic review      10, 121.
Fama, Eugene F, and Kenneth R French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds,
  Journal of nancial economics         33, 356.


Fisher, Irving, 1912, How to invest when prices are rising .


Fisher, Lawrence, and James Hirsch Lorie, 1964, Rates of return on investments in common stocks,               The
  Journal of Business       37, 121.


Frazzini, Andrea, and Lasse Heje Pedersen, 2014, Betting against beta,      Journal of Financial Economics     111,
  125.


Friedman, Milton, 1953,      Essays in positive economics   (University of Chicago Press).


Garcia, Diego, 2013, Sentiment during recessions,      The Journal of Finance   68, 12671300.


Garcia, Diego, 2014, The kinks of nancial journalism,        Working Paper, University of Colorado    .


Greenwood, Robin, and Andrei Shleifer, 2014, Expectations of returns and expected returns,                Review of
  Financial Studies    27, 714746.


Hardy, CO, 1923, Risk and the management of capital,         University Journal of Business   205220.


Harold, Gilbert, 1934, A reconsideration of the common-stock theory,        The Journal of Business of the Uni-
  versity of Chicago   7, 4259.


Hartzmark, Samuel M, and Kelly Shue, 2018, A tough act to follow: Contrast eects in nancial markets,
  The Journal of Finance       73, 15671613.


Hartzmark, Samuel M., and David H. Solomon, 2019, The dividend disconnect,            Journal of Finance     Forth-
  coming.


Hartzmark, Samuel M, and Abigail B Sussman, 2017, Do investors value sustainability? a natural experiment
  examining ranking and fund ows .


Jackson, James Roy, 1928, Common and preferred stocks as investments,            The Journal of Business of the
  University of Chicago      1, 294323.


Jensen, Michael C, Fischer Black, and Myron S Scholes, 1972, The capital asset pricing model:                 Some
  empirical tests .


Levi, Yaron, 2016, The eect of information design on consumption and saving: A eld experiment,             Working
  Paper   .


Litzenberger, Robert H, and Krishna Ramaswamy, 1980, Dividends, short selling restrictions, tax-induced
  investor clienteles and market equilibrium,      The Journal of Finance   35, 469482.


Loughran, Tim, and Bill McDonald, 2011, When is a liability not a liability? textual analysis, dictionaries,
  and 10-ks,    The Journal of Finance    66, 3565.


Markowitz, Harry, 1952, Portfolio selection,      The journal of nance   7, 7791.


Matherly, Walter J, 1923, The why of stock dividends,       University Journal of Business    7280.


Mehra, Rajnish, and Edward C Prescott, 1985, The equity premium: A puzzle,             Journal of monetary Eco-
  nomics      15, 145161.


Miller, Merton H, and Franco Modigliani, 1961, Dividend policy, growth, and the valuation of shares,            the
  Journal of Business       34, 411433.
Mitchell, Wesley C, 1910a, The prices of american stocks: 1890-1909,    Journal of political economy     18, 345
  380.


Mitchell, Wesley C, 1910b, The prices of preferred and common stocks:         1890-1909,    Journal of Political
  Economy     18, 513524.


Morrison, Paul L, 1949, Trends in investment policies of individuals,   The Journal of Finance    4, 156176.


Robinson, Leland Rex, 1930, Investment trusts,     The Journal of Business of the University of Chicago        3,
  279316.


Scott, DR, 1910, The capitalization process,   Journal of Political Economy   18, 217219.


Sensoy, Berk A, 2009, Performance evaluation and self-designated benchmark indexes in the mutual fund
  industry,   Journal of Financial Economics   92, 2539.


Sharpe, William F, 1964, Capital asset prices: A theory of market equilibrium under conditions of risk,     The
  journal of nance    19, 425442.


Shaton, Maya, 2017, The display of information and household investment behavior .


Shefrin, Hersh M, and Meir Statman, 1984, Explaining investor preference for cash dividends,         Journal of
  nancial economics     13, 253282.


Shiller, Robert, 1981, Do stock prices move too much to be justied by subsequent changes in dividends?,
  American Economic Review       71, 421736.


Shoven, John B, and Clemens Sialm, 2000, The dow jones industrial average: the impact of xing its aws,
  Journal of Wealth Management      3, 918.


Sialm, Clemens, and Hanjiang Zhang, 2015, Tax-ecient asset management: Evidence from equity mutual
  funds, Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.


Smith, Edgar Lawrence, 1924,     Common stocks as long term investments       (The MacMillan Company, New
  York).


Solomon, David H, 2012, Selective publicity and stock prices,   The Journal of Finance     67, 599638.


Solomon, David H, Eugene Soltes, and Denis Sosyura, 2014, Winners in the spotlight: Media coverage of
  fund holdings as a driver of ows,   Journal of Financial Economics    113, 5372.


Sunstein, Cass R, and Richard H Thaler, 2003, Libertarian paternalism is not an oxymoron,       The University
  of Chicago Law Review     11591202.


Tetlock, Paul C, 2007, Giving content to investor sentiment: The role of media in the stock market,         The
  Journal of Finance   62, 11391168.


Thaler, Richard H, and Cass R Sunstein, 2003, Libertarian paternalism,         American economic review      93,
  175179.


Williams, John Burr, 1938,   The theory of investment value , volume 36 (Harvard university press Cambridge,
  MA).


Young, H Peyton, 2001,      Individual strategy and social structure: An evolutionary theory of institutions
  (Princeton University Press).
                                                                    Figure 1
           Cumulative Returns to CRSP Value Weighted Index and Dividend Yields
This graph shows the cumulative performance of a $1 investment into various strategies based on the the
market return (the CRSP value weighted index,   vwretd ), the market price change (the CRSP value weighted
index without dividends,  vwretx ) and the market dividend yield (the dividend yield of the CRSP value
weighted index, vwretd -vwretx ). Panel A shows the cumulative value of $1 invested in only the market price
change or only the market dividend yield reinvesting at month end. In Panel B, the navy line shows the
cumulative value of $1 invested in market return and the maroon line shows the value based on price changes,
both with month-end investment. The green line represents the cumulative value of holding a stock without
reinvesting the dividend. The monthly dividend amount is calculated as the prior month-end value of the
price change investment times the dividend yield in the subsequent month. Thus the line is the price change
value (maroon line) plus the cumulative dividend amount of dividend received from the initial investment at
the end of every month, without investing it back into the market.

                              Panel A: Market Price Change and Market Dividend Yield
                            100
                            50
                 Cumulative Value of $1
                        5   1




                                          1930   1940    1950     1960    1970     1980    1990    2000     2010

                                                   Cumulative Dividend Yield              Cumulative Price Change



                                          Panel B: Market Return and Market Price Change
                          5000
                          1000
                 Cumulative Value of $1
                   10     1   100




                                          1930   1940    1950     1960    1970     1980    1990    2000     2010

                                                 Return                                                 Price Change
                                                 Price Change + Dividend With No Reinvestment
                                                 Figure 2
                Example Mutual Fund Performance Graph from Yahoo! Finance
This gure displays a screenshot from Yahoo! Finance displaying the prior year's performance of the Fidelity
Magellan fund. The dark blue line is the fund's NAV and the light blue line (added by clicking the comparison
tab) is the S&P 500 price index.
                                                Figure 3
          Non-Parametric Tests of the Eect of Beating the S&P 500 on Fund Flows
This graph shows the monthly residual fund ows that a mutual fund receives according to how close its
annual percentage NAV change was relative to the S&P 500 Price index. We begin by regressing monthly
fund ows on 72 lags of monthly fund returns, squared returns, and percentile returns. We then take the
residuals of this ow regression, and average them into bins of 1% according to the amount by which the
fund's NAV change exceeded or fell short of the S&P 500 Price Index over the previous calendar year. To
compute standard errors, we regress the fund-month residuals from the initial regression on dummy variables
corresponding to these 1% bins, and cluster the standard errors by fund and date. Red bars correspond to
residual fund ows when the fund's NAV change was less than the S&P 500, and blue bars are when the
fund's NAV change was more than the S&P 500. Grey bars indicate the 95% condence interval on each of
the estimates using the clustered standard errors.
                                                                               Figure 4
        Cumulative Returns to S&P Return Index based on Prior Day Dividend Yield
This graph shows the cumulative performance from holding the S&P 500 value-weighted return index split
into two samples of days based on the prior trading day's dividend yield. In Panel A the red line represents
the cumulative return to the index on days when the prior day's dividend yield was above 0.5 basis points
and the blue line represents the cumulative return to the index on days the prior day's dividend yield was
less than or equal to 0.5 basis points. On days when a line is not invested in the market the return is assumed
to be 0. Panel B repeats the analysis using the cuto of being above the median dividend yield in a given
calendar month (red line) or less than or equal to the median dividend yield (blue line).

                                                      Panel A: High div yield(t-1) is above 0.5 basis points
                                 25
                 Cummulative Value of $1 Investment
                  5        10    0    15        20




                                                             1960       1970               1980    1990                2000

                                                                     High div yield(t-1)          Low div yield(t-1)


                                                      Panel B: High div yield(t-1) is above monthly median
                                 25
                 Cummulative Value of $1 Investment
                  5        10    0    15        20




                                                             1960       1970               1980    1990                2000

                                                                     High div yield(t-1)          Low div yield(t-1)
                                                 Figure 5
       Relative Frequency of Journal Articles on Stock Prices versus Stock Returns
This graph shows the relative frequency over time of academic journal articles in nance and economics
which include terms related to the phrase stock prices versus stock returns.         For price, we compute
four dierent totals - whether stock and price appear in the title, whether stock and price appear in
the abstract (with abstract information only being widespread starting in the 1960s), whether the full text
contains the words stock and price within ten words of each other, and whether the full text contains the
exact phrase stock price or stock prices. We compute analogous measures replacing price with return.
For each of the categories, each decade we compute the fraction:

                                               #Stock P rice
                                        #Stock P rice+#Stock Return .
                                         American Economic Review, The Journal of Political Economy,
We use a search on JSTOR for publications in
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, The Journal of Business, and The Journal of Finance. Counts are
generated for each decade ending in the year noted (so 1910 means articles between 1901 and 1910 inclusive,
1920 is 1911 through 1920, etc, with the nal incomplete decade being 2011-2017).
               1
               .8
               .6
               .4
               .2
               0




                    1900 1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010
                                               Decade End

                                  Title                                 Abstract
                                  Full Text (within 10 words)           Full Text (exact)
                                                Table 1
                   Summary Statistics of Price Changes and Dividend Yields

This table displays summary statistics for market price changes and dividend yields. Measures are based on
the monthly performance of the CRSP value weighted index. Values are presented as percentages and data
cover 1925 through 2015.


                      Mean       Std. Dev.       25th Pctile      50th Pctile     75th Pctile       Obs

 Price Change         0.604         5.384          -2.136           0.969            3.670         1,080
 Dividend Yield       0.313         0.214           0.152           0.231            0.440         1,080
 Return               0.917         5.382          -1.835           1.276            3.961         1,080

 Corr(PC, DY)         -0.029
                                                 Table 2
                    Display of Market Performance in Major Country Indices

This table explores the incorporation of dividends in the most common default version of major market-
specic equity indices.   Indices listed are those that the Financial Times highlights in their market data
section as of September 2017. Return Index indicates that the measure of market performance reinvests
dividends, while Price Index indicates that the index does not reinvest dividends.


                                                    Index                                      Type


 Brazil                                            Bovespa                                 Return Index
 Canada                                        SP-TSX Comp                                  Price Index
 China                                       Shanghai Composite                             Price Index
 France                                            CAC 40                                   Price Index
 Germany                                          Xetra Dax                                Return Index
 Hong Kong                                       Hang Seng                                  Price Index
 India                                           BSE Sensex                                 Price Index
 Italy                                           FTSE MIB                                   Price Index
 Japan                                            Nikkei 225                                Price Index
 Korea                                              Kospi                                   Price Index
 Mexico                                              IPC                                    Price Index
 Singapore                                   FTSE Straits Times                             Price Index
 Spain                                            IBEX 35                                   Price Index
 United Kingdom                                   FTSE 100                                  Price Index
 USA                                               SP 500                                   Price Index
 USA                                          Nasdaq Composite                              Price Index
 USA                                        Dow Jones Industrial                            Price Index
                                                      Table 3
                    Newspaper Tone Based on S&P 500 Returns and Dividends

This table examines how the tone of the New York Times nancial markets column varies with the returns
and dividends of the S&P 500. The dependent variable is taken from Garcia (2013), and computes the number
of positive words minus the number of negative words, divided by the total number of words. Positive and
negative word classications are taken from Loughran and McDonald (2011). The independent variables are
the value-weighted return on stocks in the S&P 500 from the previous day, and the dividend measure (yield
or ratio to past dividend amounts) on S&P 500 stocks on the previous day in columns 1, 3 and 5 of Panel
A and in Panel B. In columns 2, 4 and 6 of Panel A dummy variables for each quartile of the S&P 500
dividends (yields or ratios) are included instead (with zero dividend yield omitted). In Panel A Columns 1-2
measure dividends as the value weighted dividend yield. In Panel A Columns 3-6 dividends are measured as
the dividend amount divided by the average dividend amount over the prior year (trading days t-20 through
t-270).   Panel B conducts the analysis separately based on whether the market return the prior day was
positive (in Columns 1-2) or negative (Columns 3-4). Fixed eects for each year are indicated in the bottom
of Panel A and are included in Panel B.      t -statistics   are in parenthesis. *, **, and *** indicate signicance
at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                        Panel A: Including All Days
                                    Dividend Yield                                   Dividend Growth

                                   (1)               (2)                (3)          (4)              (5)          (6)

                                                                                                                        
 SP 500 VW Return                0.386            0.386            0.390          0.389             0.386        0.385
                                 (43.88)           (43.84)           (42.29)       (42.25)          (43.87)      (43.79)
                                                                                                            
 SP 500 Dividend                -1.137                             -1.223                           -1.304
                                 (-2.92)                               (-2.27)                      (-2.53)
                                                                                                                            
 First Quartile of Dividend                      -0.000474                       -0.000395                     -0.000521
                                                   (-1.56)                         (-1.24)                       (-1.71)
                                                                                                                            
 Second Quartile of Dividend                     -0.000593                       -0.000433                     -0.000580
                                                   (-1.92)                         (-1.34)                       (-1.87)
                                                                                                                           
 Third Quartile of Dividend                     -0.000752                        -0.000599                     -0.000841
                                                   (-2.41)                         (-1.82)                       (-2.68)
                                                                                                                          
 Fourth Quartile of Dividend                    -0.00130                         -0.00107                      -0.00101
                                                   (-3.88)                         (-3.17)                       (-3.14)

 Year FE                           Yes               Yes                No           No               Yes          Yes
   2
 R                                0.223             0.224              0.141       0.141             0.223        0.223
 Observations                     10945            10945               10945       10945             10945        10945



                Panel B: Splitting Based on Sign of Market Return the Prior Day
                                     Positive Market(t-1)                                    Negative Market(t-1)

                                   (1)                           (2)                       (3)                     (4)
                               Div Yield                   Div Growth                Div Yield                 Div Growth

                                                                                                                      
 SP 500 VW Return               0.158                        0.158                    0.342                     0.343
                                 (8.81)                       (8.78)                   (18.65)                   (18.68)
                                                                                                                         
 SP 500 Dividend                 -0.891                       -1.046                  -1.341                     -1.620
                                 (-1.76)                      (-1.59)                  (-2.32)                   (-2.06)

   2
 R                               0.112                         0.112                      0.163                   0.163
 Observations                     5856                           5856                      5089                   5089
                                                               Table 4
                              Fund Flows and Beating the S&P 500 in Returns and Net Asset Values
This table examines whether mutual fund ows respond to beating various forms of the S&P 500 Index, both in terms of the fund's
returns and the fund's percentage change in net asset values (NAV), which do not correct for distributions the fund made. In Panel A,
the dependent variable is monthly fund ows, the percentage increase in Total Net Assets in excess of the fund's returns over the month.
The main independent variables are i) a dummy variable for whether the fund's percentage NAV change exceeded the S&P 500 Price
Index in the past calendar year, ii) a dummy variable for whether the fund's percentage NAV change exceeded the S&P 500 Total Return
Index in the past calendar year, and iii) a dummy variable for whether the fund's return exceeded the S&P 500 Total Return Index in
the past calendar year. 'Ret' controls include 72 lags of monthly fund returns. 'Adj Ret' includes 72 lags of monthly fund returns minus
the S&P500 Total Return Index (that is, the level of the dierence, not the dummy), 72 lags of squared monthly fund returns, 72 lags
of the square of monthly fund returns minus the S&P500 Total Return Index, and 72 lags of the percentile of monthly fund returns.
Additional controls include date xed eects, date by fund objective xed eects, and fund xed eects. All returns variables and fund
ows are winsorized at the 1% level in each tail. Standard errors are clustered by fund and date. In Panel B, the dependent variable is
the residual of fund ows regressed on the controls specied. These residuals are then used for a return discontinuity test around zero,
tting a exible polynomial function to the level of the fund percentage NAV change minus the S&P 500 Price Index. Data are from
April 1994 to December 2016. The top entry in each row is the coecient, the    t -statistic is below in parentheses. *, ** and *** indicate
statistical signicance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level respectively.


                                         Panel A: Parametric Tests of Beating the S&P 500
                                        (1)          (2)            (3)       (4)           (5)          (6)          (7)           (8)

                                                                                                                                      
 Fund NAV Chg Beat SP 500 (Prc)       1.261        0.540                                 0.576         0.542        0.524        0.317
                                      (13.26)      (10.48)                                (9.50)        (7.90)       (8.42)       (5.03)
                                                                       
 Fund Ret Beat SP 500 (Prc)                                    0.254                      -0.0926      -0.0797      -0.0971       -0.0984
                                                                   (4.61)                 (-1.39)      (-1.02)       (-1.36)      (-1.51)
                                                                                 
 Fund Ret Beat SP 500 (Ret)                                                 0.300         0.0300       0.0598        0.0192       0.0423
                                                                             (5.84)       (0.49)        (0.90)       (0.28)       (0.64)

 Ret [m-1, m-72]                        No           Yes            Yes       Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
 Adj Ret [m-1, m-72]                    No           Yes            Yes       Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
 Date FE                                No           No             No        No            No           Yes          Yes           No
 Fund FE                                No           No             No        No            No           No           Yes           No
 Date by Objective FE                   No           No             No        No            No           No           No            Yes
  2
 R                                    0.00296      0.0195          0.0191    0.0191       0.0195       0.0234        0.0486        0.108
 Observations                         2273139      1218824     1218824      1218824      1218824       1218824      1218611      1218501
                                          Table 4
   (Continued) Fund Flows and Beating the S&P 500 in Returns and Net Asset Values

               Panel B: Regression Discontinuity Tests of Beating the S&P 500
                                               (1)                (2)             (3)

                                                                                     
RD for Fund NAV Chg - SP500 (Prc)            0.133              0.132           0.175
                                              (2.59)             (2.81)          (4.53)

Ret [m-1, m-72]                                Yes                Yes             Yes
Adj Ret [m-1, m-72]                            Yes                Yes             Yes
Date FE                                        No                 Yes             No
Date by Objective FE                           No                 No              Yes
Observations                                 1218824            1218824         1218824
                                              Table 5
                      Portfolio Betas on S&P Price Change and Dividend Yield

This table examines the betas of stock portfolios on the S&P 500 average percentage price change
and the S&P 500 average dividend yield. The stock portfolios are the Fama French 25 portfolios
sorted on size and book-to-market. Daily portfolio returns are regressed on both the daily S&P 500
value-weighted average price change and the daily S&P 500 value-average dividend yield (based on
ex-dividend days). In Panel A, the Mean row gives the average beta for the 25 price change and
dividend yield betas, and the dierence column shows the average pairwise dierence between the
           t
two. The  -stat is for the test that the pairwise dierence is zero. Num. Positive and Signicant
and Num. Insignicant refer to the number of betas (out of 25) for the variable in question that
are signicantly positive, insignicantly dierent from zero, and signicantly negative, respectively.
Panel B shows a placebo version of the same regression using a placebo price change and dividend.
This takes an actual S&P 500 return and subtracts o an actual S&P 500 dividend yield from a
randomly chosen day to create a placebo price change and placebo dividend yield. We then run
the same regressions and compute the mean dierence and     t -statistic, and repeat the simulation
10,000 times.      The Placebo Dierence column shows statistics from the mean dierence of the
10,000 simulations while the Placebo t -stat column shows the distribution of t -statistics that the
dierences are zero for each of the 10,000 simulations. The row marked Num Greater than Data
lists the count of the number of observations out of 10,000 where the simulated value was above
what was observed in the data. The remaining rows list the summary statistics indicated in the
left hand column. Panel C uses a variety of alternative portfolios and time periods and reports the
               t
Mean and  -stat on dierence results for the indicated portfolios. The Year by Month FE row
includes monthly xed eects and the Control for Annual P/D row includes the lagged prior year
dividend yield. The Rolling Window row estimates betas for each portfolio each day using the
prior 5 years of data. The estimates in this row are averaged for each portfolio and the   t -test reports
the dierences of these averages. The 1926-1961 row uses the Dow Jones Industrial Average and
the Monthly with Year FE examines monthly data including a year xed eect. Panel D repeats
the analysis from Panel A examining the German market where the major index is the DAX, a
return index. The German market price change and dividend are used along with 16 portfolios from
the German market sorted by size and book-to-market.


                            Panel A: Beta Estimates for Fama French 25
                                        Price Change Beta           Div Yld Beta              Dierence

 Mean                                          .882                      .37                        .512
 t-stat on dierence                                                                                 8.17
 Num. Positive and Signicant                    25                        9
 Num. Insignicant                               0                        16


                      Panel B: Placebo Estimates Based on 10,000 Simulations
                                             Placebo Dierence                      Placebo T-Statistic

 Mean                                                 -.001                                 -.029
 Num Greater Than Data                                 12                                   119
 Min                                                  -.685                                -10.837
 10th Percentile                                      -.218                                -5.683
 25th Percentile                                      -.114                                -3.335
 50th Percentile                                      -.003                                 -.095
 75th Percentile                                      .112                                 3.271
 90th Percentile                                      .217                                 5.703
 Max                                                  .624                                 11.257
                                               Table 5
                           Continued: Betas on S&P and Dividend Yield

                            Panel C: US Portfolios using Various Sorts
                                                         Price Change Beta    Div Yld Beta   Dierence

Year by Month FE: 5x5 Size and Book-to-Market                  .875               .183          .692
                                                                 .                 .           8.073
Control for Annual P/D: 5x5 Size and Book-to-Market            .882               .310          .572
                                                                 .                 .           7.901
Rolling Window: 5x5 Size and Book-to-Market                    .862               .234          .628
                                                                 .                 .           6.886
1962-1979: 5x5 Size and Book-to-Market                         .917               .384          .532
                                                                 .                 .           7.685
1980-1998: 5x5 Size and Book-to-Market                         .701               .327          .374
                                                                 .                 .           4.644
1999-2016: 5x5 Size and Book-to-Market                         .992               .181          .811
                                                                 .                 .           5.746
1926-1961: 5x5 Size and Book-to-Market                         .881               .730          .092
                                                                 .                 .            1.64
1926-1961 Non-Zero Div: 5x5 Size and Book-to-Market            .939               .363          .575
                                                                 .                 .            4.08
2x3 Size and Book-to-Market                                    .914               .476          .439
                                                                 .                 .            3.54
10x10 Size and Book-to-Market                                  .887               .346          .541
                                                                 .                 .           14.191
5x5 Size and Protability                                       .895               .349          .546
                                                                 .                 .            7.59
5x5 Size and Investment                                        .887               .352          .535
                                                                 .                 .           6.966
5x5 Book-to-Market and Protability                             .971               .647          .324
                                                                 .                 .           5.633
5x5 Book-to-Market and Investment                              .942               .655          .287
                                                                 .                 .           6.595
5x5 Protability and Investment                                  .96               .732          .228
                                                                 .                 .           4.239
5x5 Size and Momentum                                          .909               .453          .456
                                                                 .                 .           6.581
5x5 Size and Short-Term Reversal                                .91               .414          .496
                                                                 .                 .            6.66
5x5 Size and Long-Term Reversal                                .885               .442          .443
                                                                 .                 .           6.739
17 Industries                                                  .936               .692          .244
                                                                 .                 .           3.144
30 Industries                                                  .933               .556          .376
                                                                 .                 .           5.295
48 Industries                                                  .922               .569          .353
                                                                 .                 .           5.519
Monthly with Year FE: 5x5 Size and Book-to-Market              1.078              .753          .326
                                                                 .                 .            1.93


                          Panel D: Betas on German DAX Return Index
                                 Price Change Beta              Div Yld Beta                 Dierence

Mean                                     .54                           .603                    -.063
t-stat on dierence                        .                             .                      -.852
                                                               Table 6
                             Market Returns Based on Past Day's Dividend Yield
This table examines how the market return varies based on the dividend yield the previous trading day.
The market is measured as the CRSP value weighted returns in Panels A and B. Panel A and B examine
the USA with Panel A using dividend yield and Panel B examining dividend growth. Panel C repeats the
analysis for Germany using dividend yields. Year-by-month xed eects are indicated at the bottom of the
table  . t -statistics   are in parenthese.    *, **, and *** indicate signicance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels,
respectively.


                                           Panel A: USA using Dividend Yield
                                                 All                        Mkt [t-1]<=0         Mkt [t-1]>0      All

                                  (1)            (2)               (3)          (4)                  (5)          (6)

                                                                                                                       
 Dividend Yield [t-1]          1.081           1.039            1.406         2.018                0.934       1.533
                                (3.81)          (3.67)           (4.56)        (3.84)              (2.45)       (4.92)
                                                                                                                        
 Mkt [t-1]                                    0.0681            0.0227                                         0.0231
                                               (10.55)           (3.44)                                         (3.50)
 Dividend Yield [t-2]                                                                                           -0.484
                                                                                                                (-1.55)
                                                                                                                       
 Dividend Yield [t-3]                                                                                          0.808
                                                                                                                (2.58)
 Dividend Yield [t-4]                                                                                           0.0816
                                                                                                                (0.26)
 Dividend Yield [t-5]                                                                                           -0.399
                                                                                                                (-1.29)

 Year Month FE                    No             No               Yes           Yes                 Yes          Yes
   2
 R                             0.000607        0.00524           0.0500        0.0975               0.100       0.0505
 Observations                   23910           23910            23910         10803               13106        23906

                                        Panel B: USA using Dividend Growth
                                                 All                        Mkt [t-1]<=0         Mkt [t-1]>0      All

                                  (1)            (2)               (3)          (4)                  (5)          (6)

                                                                                                                       
 Dividend Yield [t-1]           0.697          0.682            0.884         1.367                 0.524      0.936
                                (2.06)          (2.02)           (2.46)        (2.21)              (1.19)       (2.58)
                                                                                                                        
 Mkt [t-1]                                    0.0686            0.0232                                         0.0232
                                               (10.54)           (3.48)                                         (3.48)
 Dividend Yield [t-2]                                                                                           -0.0905
                                                                                                                (-0.25)
 Dividend Yield [t-3]                                                                                           0.449
                                                                                                                (1.24)
 Dividend Yield [t-4]                                                                                           -0.0182
                                                                                                                (-0.05)
 Dividend Yield [t-5]                                                                                           -0.359
                                                                                                                (-1.01)

 Year Month FE                    No             No               Yes           Yes                 Yes          Yes
   2
 R                             0.000181        0.00488           0.0496        0.0967              0.0995       0.0497
 Observations                   23515           23515            23515         10628               12887        23511

                                                   Panel C: Germany
                                                        (1)                             (2)                        (3)

 Dividend Yield [t-1]                                  0.226                          0.206                       0.109
                                                   (0.50)                             (0.46)                     (0.22)
                                                                                              
 Mkt [t-1]                                                                        0.0274                         -0.0152
                                                                                      (1.77)                     (-0.96)

 Year Month FE                                          No                              No                        Yes
   2
 R                                               0.0000606                        0.000812                       0.0449
 Observations                                          4171                           4171                        4171
                                                     Table 7
             Cross-Sectional Returns by Beta Based on Prior Day's Dividend Yield

This table examines how a portfolio long the highest decile of market beta and short the lowest decile varies
based on the dividend yield the previous trading day.        Column 1 regresses this value on the prior day's
dividend yield and the market return. Column 2, 3 and 4 include a dummy variable equal to one if the prior
day's dividend yield was above 0.5 basis points and columns 5, 6 and 7 include a dummy variable equal to
one if the prior day was above the median in a month. The coecients on the dummy variables and alphas
are reported in basis points. Columns 1, 2 and 5 include market minus the risk free rate while columns 3
and 6 also include SMB, HML and UMD. Columns 4 and 7 include these variables and also an interaction
of them with the dummy variable.     t -statistics are in parentheses.   *, **, and *** indicate signicance at the
10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.


                                         Panel A: Equal Weighted
                             (1)            (2)           (3)             (4)         (5)          (6)          (7)

                               
 Dividend Yield[t-1]      1.286
                           (5.09)
                                                                                
 Div Yld[t-1]>0.5 bp                    0.0338        0.0283        0.0282
                                          (2.80)        (2.76)           (2.74)
                                                                                                                      
 Div Yld[t-1]>Median                                                               0.0466       0.0366       0.0370
                                                                                     (3.88)       (3.58)       (3.61)
                                                                                                                      
 Alpha                   -0.0248        -0.0244       -0.0254       -0.0255        -0.0289      -0.0279      -0.0281
                           (-3.53)        (-2.75)       (-3.37)          (-3.39)     (-3.44)     (-3.91)      (-3.94)

 CAPM                        Yes           Yes            No              No          Yes          No           No
 4-Factor                    No             No            Yes             Yes         No           Yes          Yes
 Factor Interaction          No             No            No              Yes         No           No           Yes
 Observations              24140          24140         24039            24039       24140        24039        24039


                                         Panel B: Value Weighted
                             (1)            (2)           (3)             (4)         (5)          (6)          (7)

                               
 Dividend Yield[t-1]      0.869
                           (3.07)
                                                                                
 Div Yld[t-1]>0.5 bp                     0.0301        0.0250        0.0256
                                          (2.23)        (1.96)           (2.01)
                                                                                                                       
 Div Yld[t-1]>Median                                                                0.0324       0.0241       0.0246
                                                                                     (2.41)       (1.90)       (1.93)
                                                                                                                      
 Alpha                   -0.0264        -0.0300       -0.0286       -0.0291        -0.0296      -0.0269      -0.0270
                           (-3.34)        (-3.03)       (-3.05)          (-3.11)     (-3.14)     (-3.03)      (-3.04)

 CAPM                        Yes           Yes            No              No          Yes          No           No
 4-Factor                    No             No            Yes             Yes         No           Yes          Yes
 Factor Interaction          No             No            No              Yes         No           No           Yes
 Observations              24140          24140         24039            24039       24140        24039        24039
                                                                           Table 8
                                          Extrapolation of Market Price Change and Dividend Yield
This table examines extrapolation of future market performance based on recent market performance. Regressions include the S&P 500
price index and the dividend yield on the S&P 500 for the prior 3 months in Panel A and prior 6 months in Panel B. The dependent variable
is expectations of future market performance from the following surveys: Columns 1 and 2 include data from Gallup from 1996-2011,
Columns 3 and 4 include data from the Graham-Harvey CFO survey from 2000-2018, Columns 5 and 6 include data from the American
Association of Individual Investors from 1987-2018, Columns 7 and 8 include data from the Shiller survey of Individual investors from
1989-2018, and Columns 9 and 10 include data from the Michigan Survey of Consumers from 2002-2018. Odd columns include calendar
year xed eects. The top entry in each row is the coecient, the                t -statistic is below in parentheses.       *, ** and *** indicate statistical
signicance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level respectively.


                                                             Panel A: Prior Quarter Return
                                 Gallup               Graham-Harvey                        AA                        Shiller                     Michigan

                          (1)              (2)         (3)          (4)           (5)              (6)        (7)               (8)        (9)              (10)

                                                                                                                                                               
 Lag Price Change      182.3          110.0         12.00         8.994        0.830            0.606       14.35              7.165    39.65          23.83
                        (11.33)           (7.70)     (6.10)        (4.68)        (9.03)          (5.89)     (1.85)             (2.59)     (7.62)        (8.74)
                                                                                                                                                                   
 Lag Dividend Yield   -7596.7             -193.7    -888.1        -456.3       -22.18            0.200    -3604.0              1.187    -2292.6         -576.3
                        (-7.02)           (-0.12)    (-6.16)       (-2.21)      (-6.33)          (0.02)     (-6.55)            (0.00)    (-4.71)        (-1.65)

 Year FE                  No               Yes         No           Yes           No              Yes         No                Yes        No               Yes
  2
 R                       0.524            0.769       0.441        0.719         0.214           0.435       0.169             0.927      0.224         0.880
 Observations            135               135         70            70           378             378        217                217        199              199


                                                            Panel B: Prior 6 Month Return
                                Gallup                Graham-Harvey                       AA                        Shiller                      Michigan

                          (1)              (2)         (3)          (4)           (5)             (6)        (7)                (8)        (9)              (10)

                                                                                                                                                               
 Lag Price Change      148.0          72.74         10.74         5.690        0.567            0.319     18.31            7.013         36.64         17.55
                        (14.57)           (4.86)     (6.87)        (3.42)       (8.47)           (3.04)     (3.24)             (2.71)    (10.64)        (6.65)
                                                                                                                                                  
 Lag Dividend Yield   -3641.2             947.1     -449.9         80.99       -10.72            1.127    -2131.5              200.3    -1236.0         -65.22
                        (-6.95)           (0.77)     (-5.61)       (0.60)       (-6.04)          (0.15)    (-7.45)             (0.93)    (-6.15)        (-0.34)

 Year FE                  No               Yes         No           Yes           No              Yes        No                 Yes        No               Yes
  2
 R                      0.617             0.777      0.427         0.759        0.184            0.399      0.211              0.933      0.282         0.891
 Observations            135               135         70           70           378              378        217                217        199              199
Appendix - Evidence of How Performance is Displayed


In this section we document that in many common data sources returns are generally not displayed


by default for individual equities.
                                          32


    We rst examine various brokerage statements and display the results in Table 9. These state-


ments oer a consistent benchmark as every brokerage routinely provides investors with a statement.


We viewed statements from Charles Schwab, Fidelity, Interactive Brokers, Merrill Lynch, TD Amer-


itrade and Vanguard. With the exception of Interactive Brokers, none of the statements displayed


returns. Column 2 shows that all of the statements displayed some version of a price change - either


the price change itself, a percentage price change or a change in total value (price multiplied by


shares). The next column shows that each statement displayed some dividend information, though,


with the exception of Interactive Brokers, this was a short term measure, typically the dividend


earned since the last statement, but in a few instances an annual dividend yield. Note that this


is not the information necessary to compute the total return, which would be the disaggregated


dividends received from a position, as well as the timing of each dividend for reinvestment purposes.


The last column indicates that, besides Interactive Brokers, none of these portfolios had this infor-


mation. Interactive Brokers is the exception, and it is a sucient rarity that it touts in marketing


materials its display of returns as a dierentiating feature relative to other brokerages.
                                                                                                          33


    As an example, Figure 6 displays portions of Charles Schwab's sample statement.                            Panel A


shows the overall portfolio position section, and Panel B shows the subsequent detail on individual


stocks. For both sections there is no returns variable, nor is there enough information to calculate a


return. In the overall portfolio section, dividends are combined with interest, but are separate from a


change in value of investments. Dividend information is given for the past year and combined with


other quantities. There is no information about reinvestment timing or historical dividends. In the


individual stock section, the gain/loss is based only on price changes. There is little detail on the


historical dividends received, only an ambiguous estimate of                future   dividend income. An investor


hoping to calculate a measure of overall returns on their stock would only be able to make a crude


approximation requiring manual calculations. While other brokerages dier in the exact manner of

   32
        The description is true as of the time of writing, and we have documentation supporting these claims. Given the
uid nature of website design, it is hard to say how long these patterns have been true for, or will be in the future.
   33
        Its website claims: Unlike other systems, we give you the tools and reports you need to focus on your investments
and then lists returns in the list of tools.
what is presented, excepting Interactive Brokers, the pattern is similar, and the conclusion about


the diculty of nding or calculating a return holds for them all.


    We also examine a number of sources that display the performance of individual securities.


Perhaps the longest consistent time series available is the display of information in newspapers. To


examine how this evolved over time, we sampled the Wall Street Journal's reporting of performance


of NYSE stocks from 1890 through 2016.               Prior to 1928, prices were reported, but there was no


dividend information.        After 1928 dividends were reported (as the annualized version of the last


dividend payment), but separately from price information.
                                                                      34 While some measures, such as the 52


week high price, are clearly meant to capture past performance, as of today, the Wall Street Journal


has never reported a textbook return measure for individual stocks.


    Next we examine standard sources of information available online. To keep a consistent bench-


mark, we examine the landing page from a ticker search for GE, an established, dividend-paying,


large cap stock that every site covers.          We searched nine nancial websites listed in Panel B. In


Column 1 we show that none of the websites displayed a total return (with Yahoo! discussed be-


low).    All of the websites displayed some information about recent price based performance, and


most separately displayed some recent dividend information.


    We wish to emphasize that we are not claiming that it is impossible to ascertain a total return,


but rather the value is rarely displayed by default.            Bloomberg is an interesting example of this,


as it likely has a portion of its user base that is more sophisticated than some of the other data


providers that we are exploring. When doing a ticker search, the base menu contains various options


for research, the most relevant for this paper being the Graph Price function (GP) which yields a


line graph of the recent price changes of GE. A more sophisticated investor may be aware of the


total returns analysis function (TRA) which displays both the percentage price change and the total


return with dividend reinvestment, but this is not one of the default options that appears after a


ticker search. Even in Bloomberg, the default from a ticker search is the price change graph, and


investors need to actively search out a return measure.


    Among the various nancial portals that we have examined, even those that do incorporate some


sort of return measure often do so in ways that are dierent from the academic measures, and it



  34
       E.g., if a rm last paid a quarterly dividend of $1.00, a value of $4.00 was reported, while if a rm last paid a
semi-annual dividend of $1.00 a value of $2.00 was reported.
can be dicult to uncover what the measure actually is. For instance, Yahoo! Finance reports a


percentage change on their stock summary page without identifying what percentage change this


is.    Bizarrely, this measure is not the same for all stocks.           For NYSE stocks with an ex-dividend


day, the measure approximately reinvests dividends, but peculiarly subtracts the dividend from the


denominator.
                     35 For NASDAQ stocks, dividends are not accounted for, and the percentage change


number is a price change without any dividend adjustment. This fact is not noted on the website,


and took considerable investigation to uncover. Given the lack of clarity of what these measures


contain, it seems plausible that investors are absorbing what is being presented to them without


spending the time to ascertain precisely what measure they are actually observing.




      35                                                                               pt -(pt-1 -dt )       (pt +dt )-pt-1
           Yahoo! appears to calculate their performance measure for NYSE stocks as:      pt-1 -dt
                                                                                                         =      pt-1 -dt
                                                                                                                            . Our

best guess as to the reason for this strange choice is that it makes the current price and the current adjusted price
the same number on the current day, though this is purely conjecture.
                                                Figure 6
                   Example Brokerage Statement Fields from Charles Schwab
These gures present sections of the example brokerage statement provided by Charles Schwab on their
website. We have focused on the parts most relevant for an investor trying to calculate the return on stocks
in their portfolio. In Panel A, we show a portion of the summary Change in Account Value section at the
beginning of the statement. In Panel B, we show a portion of the Investment Detail section for individual
securities.

                                Panel A: Overall Portfolio Summary




                                 Panel B: Individual Security Detail
                                                    Table 9
        Display of Dividend and Returns Information on Common Financial Platforms

This table explores the information contained in a brokerage statement as well as that which is displayed
in a web search. Yes means the source documents the indicated information and No means it does not.
Return means that the return is displayed.        The asterisk on Interactive Brokers is due to their return
being calculated assuming reinvestment on the payment date. It's complicated for Yahoo! is because for
NASDAQ stocks price changes are calculated, NYSE stocks include dividends, but also subtract the dividend
from the denominator, and their website does not document these facts. Price/Value change indicates that
the holding period change in price or change in total value (excluding dividends) is displayed. Dividend
[Short Term] indicates there is dividend information in the report over the recent past, either since the last
brokerage statement or in some cases over the prior year. Dividend [Holding Period] indicates that the
total dividend received since purchase is displayed. In Panel A we examine a brokerage statement from the
indicated brokerage. In Panel B we conducted web searches for the ticker GE on the indicated nancial
websites in August 2016.


                                    Panel A: Brokerage Statement
                       Return    Price/Value Change        Dividend[Short Term]   Dividend[Holding Period]


 Charles Schwab            No               Yes                     Yes                       No
 Fidelity                  No               Yes                     Yes                       No
 Interactive Brokers     Yes*               Yes                     Yes                      Yes
 Merril Lynch              No               Yes                     Yes                       No
 TD Ameritrade             No               Yes                     Yes                       No
 Vangaurd                  No               Yes                     Yes                       No


                                         Panel B: Ticker Search
                                     Return                      Price/Value Change                Dividend


 CNN Money                             No                                 Yes                         Yes
 Fidelity                              No                                 Yes                         No
 Google Finance                        No                                 Yes                         Yes
 Marketwatch                           No                                 Yes                         Yes
 Morningstar                           No                                 Yes                         Yes
 NASDAQ                                No                                 Yes                         Yes
 NYSE                                  No                                 Yes                         No
 WSJ                                   No                                 Yes                         Yes
 Yahoo Finance                  It's Complicated                          Yes                         Yes
