                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                  PRINCIPAL PORTFOLIOS

                                         Bryan T. Kelly
                                        Semyon Malamud
                                        Lasse H. Pedersen

                                      Working Paper 27388
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27388


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2020




We have received consulting income from AQR Capital Management exceeding $10,000 over
the past three years. AQR Capital Management is a global investment management firm, which
may or may not apply similar investment techniques or methods of analysis as described
herein. The views expressed here are those of the authors and not necessarily those of AQR or
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27388.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Bryan T. Kelly, Semyon Malamud, and Lasse H. Pedersen. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Principal Portfolios
Bryan T. Kelly, Semyon Malamud, and Lasse H. Pedersen
NBER Working Paper No. 27388
June 2020
JEL No. C1,C3,C58,C61,G11,G12,G14

                                          ABSTRACT

We propose a new asset-pricing framework in which all securities' signals are used to predict
each individual return. While the literature focuses on each security's own-signal predictability,
assuming an equal strength across securities, our framework is flexible and includes cross-
predictability--leading to three main results. First, we derive the optimal strategy in closed form.
It consists of eigenvectors of a "prediction matrix," which we call "principal portfolios." Second,
we decompose the problem into alpha and beta, yielding optimal strategies with, respectively,
zero and positive factor exposure. Third, we provide a new test of asset pricing models.
Empirically, principal portfolios deliver significant out-of-sample alphas to standard factors in
several data sets.

Bryan T. Kelly                                   Lasse H. Pedersen
Yale School of Management                        Copenhagen Business School
165 Whitney Ave.                                 Solbjerg Plads 3, A5
New Haven, CT 06511                              DK-2000 Frederiksberg
and NBER                                         DENMARK
bryan.kelly@yale.edu                             and NYU
                                                 Lhp001@gmail.com
Semyon Malamud
Swiss Finance Institute @ EPFL
Quartier UNIL-Dorigny, Extranef 213
CH - 1015 Lausanne
Switzerland
semyon.malamud@epfl.ch
1    Introduction

The starting point for much of asset pricing is a set of signals, Si,t , that proxy for the
conditional expected return for a security i at time t. In the context of an equilibrium asset
pricing model Si,t may represent a conditional beta on compensated risk factors. Or it may
be a predictor that is agnostic of equilibrium considerations, such as an asset's recent price
momentum. Standard analyses, such as evaluating characteristic-sorted portfolios or asset
pricing tests in the spirit of Gibbons et al. (1989), focus on own-asset predictive signals; that
is, the association between Si,t and the return on only asset i, Ri,t+1 .
    We propose a new approach to analyzing asset prices through the lens of what we call
the "prediction matrix." The prediction matrix, defined as  = E (Rt+1 St ), not only tracks
the own-signal prediction effects (i,i ) but also all cross-predictability phenomena (i,j ) in
which asset j 's signal predicts asset i's return. Cross-predictability exists very generally
in conditional asset pricing models, be they equilibrium in nature or purely statistical.
Knowledge of the entire prediction matrix, as opposed to the typical focus on diagonal
elements alone, is critical to devising optimal portfolios and understanding their risk-return
tradeoff.
    Our main contribution is to develop an extensive theoretical understanding of the pre-
diction matrix and the asset pricing information it carries. The main tools of our analysis
are singular value decompositions, analogous to using principal components analysis (PCA)
to study variance-covariance matrices. The leading components (singular vectors) of  are
defined as those responsible for the lion's share of covariation between signals and future
returns. This is where cross-predictability information becomes valuable. Like the diagonal
elements, off-diagonal elements of  are informative about the joint dynamics in signals and
returns.
    We refer to 's singular vectors as "principal portfolios." They are a set of normalized
portfolios ordered from those most predictable by S to those least predictable. The top

                                               2
principal portfolios are thus the most "timeable" portfolios, and as such they offer the highest
unconditional expected returns for an investor that faces a leverage constraint (one who
cannot hold infinitely large positions).
   A key insight of our approach is that applying a singular value decomposition directly to
 conflates two different and opposing economic phenomena. We propose first splitting 
into a symmetric part (which is equal to its transpose and denoted s ) and an antisymmetric
part (which is equal to minus its transpose and denoted a ), and applying separate matrix
decompositions to s and a . The symmetry separation of ,

        1        1
       = ( +  ) + ( -  ),                                                                   (1)
        2        2
               s            a


is a powerful device. With eigenvalue decompositions of each part, we can take a complicated
collection of predictive associations in the  matrix and decode them into a set of well-
organized facts about expected returns. These facts describe i) the nature of each predictive
pattern represented in  and ii) the strength of these patterns.
   The nature of a predictive pattern is described by its classification as either symmetric or
antisymmetric, which, amazingly, translate into beta and alpha. In particular, we show that
eigenvectors of the symmetric matrix s are optimal ways to achieve factor exposure (beta),
while eigenvectors of the antisymmetric matrix a are optimal factor-neutralized strategies
(alpha). We refer to strategies arising from eigenvectors of the symmetric component as
"principal exposure portfolios" (PEPs) and the strategies arising from the antisymmetric
part as "principal alpha portfolios" (PAPs). Once classified as "exposure" versus "alpha,"
prediction patterns (principal portfolios) are then ordered from strongest to weakest and
based on the size of their associated eigenvalues. In particular, we prove that the uncon-
ditional average returns of PEPs and PAPs are exactly proportional to their respective
eigenvalues.



                                               3
   This decomposition has a close connection to equilibrium asset pricing. When signals are
betas to the pricing kernel and there is no-arbitrage, all PAPs must deliver zero expected
excess returns (because they have zero factor exposure) and all PEPs must deliver non-
negative average returns (because they have positive exposure to the pricing kernel). These
insights are the groundwork for a new asset pricing test based on eigenvalues of the symmetric
and antisymmetric components of the prediction matrix. In rational asset pricing models,
there should not be any alpha relative to the pricing kernel. When we pick signals that are
supposed to be proportional to covariances with the pricing kernel (e.g., market betas), then
the corresponding prediction matrix should have a zero antisymmetric part--meaning that
 should be symmetric and there should be no pure alpha portfolios. Moreover, negative
eigenvalues of the symmetric part of  correspond to strategies with negative factor exposure
and positive expected returns, another form of alpha. Since rational asset pricing also rule
out both forms of alpha, we get the asset pricing test that  should be symmetric and
positive definite. In other words, when signals capture exposure to the pricing kernel, all
PEPs should deliver non-negative returns and all PAPs should deliver zero returns.
   We also develop theoretical underpinnings for practical empirical usage of the prediction
matrix from the perspective of robust statistics and machine learning. Our main theoretical
results characterize the properties of principal portfolios and their role in optimal portfolios
are developed in population, where  is known. With N assets, this requires estimating
N 2 parameters. Such rich parameterization can lead to noisy estimates and overfit that
deteriorate the out-of-sample performance of principal portfolios. In the literature and
financial practice, signals are often analyzed or traded in the form         i   Si,t Ri,t+1 , which
essentially restricts the signal-based analysis to testing a single parameter equal to av-
erage own-predictability,    i   E (Si,t Ri,t+1 ). While this may benefit from some robustness,
restricting the analysis to a one-parameter problem is harsh--it forfeits any and all useful
information about heterogeneity in own-predictability or cross-predictability in the estimated



                                                4
 matrix. Principal portfolios are ideally suited to balance the joint considerations of
exploiting potentially rich information from throughout  while controlling parameterization
to reduce noise and overfit. We show that low-rank approximations of  and its symmetry-
based components s and a offer a means of balancing both considerations in a data-driven
way in order achieve robust out-of-sample portfolio performance.
   We implement the methodology empirically using three samples of U.S. equities, three
samples of international equities, and a sample of futures contracts on equity indices, bonds,
commodities, and currencies. As an example of a trading signal that can be used for all
securities, we analyze momentum (i.e., past returns). We conduct out-of-sample analyses
that, at each time period t, estimates the prediction matrix from past signals and returns (i.e.,
only information that is available through time t). Estimating the prediction matrix is easy:
^t =    1    t-1
       120    =t-120   R +1 S , where we use a backward looking window of 120 time periods.
Having estimated the prediction matrix, the singular value and eigenvalue decompositions
of  as well as its symmetric and antisymmetric parts immediately yield PPs, PEPs, and
PAPs, and we track their out-of-sample performance. We find that the leading principal
portfolios tend to deliver positive returns across all samples and large number of robustness
checks, with highly significant risk-adjusted returns in a number of specifications. In the
base case specification, the combination of leading PEPs and PAPs delivers more than twice
the Sharpe ratio of a standard factor constructed based on the same signal.
   Our paper is related to several literatures. Our asset pricing test complements other such
tests, including Gibbons et al. (1989) and Hansen and Jagannathan (1991) (see Cochrane
(2009) for an overview). Our method to uncover new forms of predictability complements
existing methods based on regressions (see Welch and Goyal (2008) and references therein),
portfolio sorts (a recent example is Fama and French (2015)), and machine learning (Gu
et al. (2018)). We use momentum signals, which have been used extensively in equities
(Jegadeesh and Titman (1993)), global asset markets (Asness et al. (2013), Moskowitz et



                                               5
al. (2012)), and, more recently, on factor returns (Arnott et al. (2019), Gupta and Kelly
(2019)). Finally, we consider linear trading strategies, which have also been studied in the
context of dynamic trading with transaction costs by G^
                                                      arleanu and Pedersen (2013, 2016),
Collin-Dufresne et al. (2015), Collin-Dufresne et al. (2019), and others. While this literature
focuses on linear-quadratic programming, we instead consider eigenvalue methods.
      In summary, we present a new way to uncover return predictability and test asset pricing
models. We illustrate how the method works empirically with a wide range of encouraging
results for out-of-sample principal portfolio performance.


2      Principal Portfolio Analysis

In this section, we lay of our principal portfolio analysis (PPA) framework. We describe the
concept of linear strategies of predictive signals, show how linear strategies are intimately
linked to the prediction matrix, derive optimal strategies, and introduce the notion of
principal portfolios that implement optimal strategies.
      Let us first introduce the setting and notation that we use throughout. The economy
has N securities traded at discrete times. At each time t, each security i delivers a return
in excess of the risk-free rate, Ri,t . All excess returns at time t are collected in a vector,
Rt = (Ri,t )N
            i=1 and their conditional variance-covariance matrix is R,t = Vart (Rt+1 ).

      For each time and security, we have a "signal" or "characteristic" Si,t , and all signals
are collected in a vector, St = (Si,t )N
                                       i=1 . We can think of these predictive characteristics as

market betas, valuation ratios, momentum scores, or other observable signals that proxy for
conditional expected returns.


2.1     Linear Trading Strategies

How can an investor best exploit predictive information in an asset characteristic S ? To
answer this question, we work in the context of general linear trading strategies based on


                                                6
S . Then, we derive an optimal linear strategy subject to leverage constraints and show the
intimate connection between the optimal linear strategy and the prediction matrix .
   A linear strategy based on S has portfolio weights of the form wt = St L. We refer to
L  RN ×N as the position matrix because each column of L translates signals into a portfolio
position in each asset. For example, the first column L1 = (Li,1 )N
                                                                  i=1 of L translates all the

signals into a position in asset 1, St L1 . The return of a linear strategy is naturally the
positions times the returns, that is,


       wt
      Rt +1 = wt Rt+1 =                (St Lj )        Rj,t+1       = St LRt+1 .              (2)
                                j
                                      position in j   return of j


We see that a linear strategy generally allows the position St Lj in any asset j to depend on the
signals of all assets. Interestingly, these strategies can potentially exploit both predictability
using each asset's own signal as well as cross-predictability using other signals.
   The large majority of return prediction patterns in the empirical literature focus on strate-
gies that are agnostic of cross-predictability. The literature's default portfolio construction
based on a characteristic S builds a simple tradable factor of the form:


      Ft+1 =            Sj,t Rj,t+1                                                           (3)
                   j



We refer to Ft+1 as the "simple factor" henceforth. We note that the simple factor is a linear
strategy with identity position matrix (L = Id):


      Ft+1 =           Si,t Ri,t+1 = St Rt+1 = St IdRt+1 .                                    (4)
               i


Hence, our framework nests the standard framework, and allows more general strategies.
   The simplicity of the simple factor-mimicking strategy makes it a helpful reference point
for the strategies we advocate in this paper. It is a portfolio that relies only on own-signal


                                                              7
predictions with no cross-prediction. Moreover, it imposes that own-signal predictions enter
into the portfolio uniformly, with no regard for heterogeneity in predictive effects across
assets. When a researcher reports that this type of simple factor has a positive average
return, E (Ft+1 ) > 0, it is the same as saying that the signal positively predicts own-asset
returns on average.


2.2     The Prediction Matrix

A central part of our analysis makes use of what we call the prediction matrix:


         = E (Rt+1 St ).                                                                      (5)


 encodes predictive information for how the signals predict all returns, based on assets' own
signals as well as cross-predictability. A strategy that literally chooses an asset's position
equal to its own signal Si,t earns a return of Ri,t+1 Si,t , and i,i is the expected value of this
return. Likewise, a strategy that take a position in asset i based on the signal of another
asset j earns average returns of i,j .
      If Sj,t predicts Rj,t+1 on average across securities, then this is the same as saying that
the prediction matrix has a positive trace (tr, the sum of its diagonal elements):


        E        Sj,t Rj,t+1   = tr() > 0 .                                                   (6)
             j


This notion of positive own-predictability on average across securities has emerged as the
standard criterion by which predictive signals are measured in the empirical finance literature
and is typically evaluated based on the sample average of the strategy in (3).
      Average own-predictability not only abstracts from information in off-diagonal elements
of , but also from heterogeneity in own-effects on the main diagonal. In short, strategies
predicated on average own-predictability are highly constrained in the information they


                                                8
consider regarding the predictive content of S . Proposition 1 shows that the entire  matrix
is necessary (and sufficient!) for understanding the returns of more general linear strategies.

Proposition 1 (Return of Linear Strategies) The expected excess return of a linear trad-
ing strategy wt = St L is


           wt
        E Rt +1 = E (St LRt+1 ) = tr(L).                                                    (7)


      An interesting linear strategy in its own right is to take positions in every asset based
on the magnitude of its predictability by the signal S , whether that information comes from
its own signal or from another asset's signal. This amounts to using  itself as the position
matrix (L =  ) or using a positive multiple of :

Proposition 2 (Trading the Prediction Matrix) Let M be an arbitrary positive semi-
definite matrix. Then, the linear strategy with position matrix L = M  has positive expected
excess return:


        E (St LRt+1 ) = tr(M  ) = tr((M 1/2 ) (M 1/2 ))  0 .                                (8)


Moreover, the inequality is strict if and only if M 1/2  is not identically zero.

      We see that the prediction matrix plays two important roles: First,  tells us the return
of any linear strategy as seen in Proposition 1. Second,  is itself a return-generating linear
strategy as seen in Proposition 2.


2.3     Optimal Linear Strategies

We next show that strategies based on  not only deliver positive expected return, they
actually yield optimal linear strategies. Our precise statement of optimality is derived from



                                                9
the following objective function.


          max E (St LRt+1 ) .                                                                                 (9)
         L: L 1



The objective is to maximize the expected return of a linear strategy subject to a portfolio
constraint on the position matrix L.              (We naturally need a portfolio constraint, since
otherwise we can increase the expected return by simply increasing position sizes, e.g., the
strategy 2L doubles the expected return of the strategy L).
                                                                                                      1/2
       To understand the constraint that we use in (9), note first that x                (      i   x2
                                                                                                     i)     is the
standard Euclidean norm of a vector x  RN . Second, we define the standard matrix norm
as L = sup{ Lx : x  Rm with x = 1}. It is possible to show that L = L . In
other words, in (9) we maximize the expected return over the set of all position matrices
with matrix norm of at most one.
       The economic meaning of this constraint is that we consider strategies with a bounded
portfolio size. Specifically, the linear strategy has portfolio weight St L, which has a size
of L St  L             St  St when L  1. So we consider linear strategies where the
position size is always bounded by the position size of the simple strategy. Further, if St is
normalized such that St = 1 for all signals, then the linear strategy has a position size
that is similarly bounded, L St  1.1
       We can also interpret the objective function as a robust mean-variance problem. For
example, when the return variance-covariance matrix is given by R,t =  2 Id for some
  R, the objective function (9) is identical to the following:


         max E (St LRt+1 ) subject to           max            Vart (S LRt+1 )  1 .                          (10)
          L                               S :Vart (S Rt+1 )1

   1
     Here we discuss "position size" in terms of the Euclidian norm, while the notional leverage of a position x
is normally calculated as x 1 = k |xk |. However, the portfolio constraint L  1 also implies a constraint
on notional leverage. Indeed, since x 1  x n1/2 , notional leverage is bounded: L St 1  L St n1/2 
n1/2 .



                                                       10
In words, we maximize expected return subject to a risk constraint. This risk constraint
is robust in the sense that we require that the variance is bounded regardless of the signal
realization S . This robust objective where we maximize risk with respect to S , rather than
considering the risk conditional on S , is natural for a linear strategy -- since the position
matrix L is constant over time and should "work" for all signals. To see the equivalence of
(9) and (10), note that

                                                       Vart (S LRt+1 )           2 LS 2       2
              max            Vart (S LRt+1 ) = max                     = max 2          = L       .   (11)
        S :Vart (S Rt+1 )1                      S :S =0 Vart (S Rt+1 )   S :S =0  S 2



The risk constraint says that the risk of the linear strategy should be at most as high as that
of the simple factor. Another way to get the same result is to require that the risk is limited
when the signals are limited, maxS :           S 1   Vart (S LRt+1 )   2 .
      The assumption R,t =  2 Id is appropriate if volatilities are similar in the cross section
(or has been made similar, as we do our empirical study of futures) and if the correlation
matrix is close to, or has been shrunk to, the identity--and such shrinkage can be useful in
an optimization setting (Pedersen et al. (2020)). In any event, when we are have general
variance-covariance matrix R,t , then our portfolio constraint L  1 still serves to control
both risk, leverage, and the portfolio norm.2 Further, we show how to solve a robust mean-
variance problem for general R,t in Appendix A. The appendix also shows how to solve
the mean-variance problem with a risk penalty driven by risk aversion (instead of the risk
constraint used here).
      Given the objective (9), the solution for the optimal strategy is as follows.

  2
    The portfolio constraint L  1 implies a limit on the portfolio norm by definition, a leverage limit
described in Footnote 1, and the following risk limit:
                                         1/2           1/2       ¯
         max       Vart (S LRt+1 ) =    R,t L     R,t         L  
        S : S 1

                                                     ¯
when the variance-covariance matrix is bounded, R,t  .




                                                         11
Proposition 3 The solution to (9) is given by L = M  with M = ( )-1/2 , and

                                      N
         max E (St LRt+1 ) =                ¯i ,
                                            
        L: L 1
                                      i=1


where ¯1  · · ·  ¯ N are the singular values of , i.e., the eigenvalues of ( )1/2 .

Proposition 3 shows that the full  matrix is integral to optimal linear strategies based
on the signal St .3 Indeed, maximum return depends on the singular values of , which in
general depend on all its elements.


2.4     Principal Portfolios

We next decompose the optimal solution into a collection of linear strategies that we refer to
as principal portfolios (PP) of the signal S . Principal portfolios are the building blocks
that sum to form the optimal linear strategy in Proposition 3.
      The construction of PPs uses the singular value decomposition of . Namely, let


         = U¯V ,                                                                             (12)


where ¯       =    diag(¯1, · · · , ¯ N ) is the diagonal matrix of singular values, and U, V are

orthogonal matrices with column denoted uk and vk , respectively. Now, the optimal L from
Proposition 3 can be rewritten as

                                                              N
        ( )    -1/2
                       = V¯ -1 V V ¯U = VU =                       vk uk .
                                                             k=1


We define the k th principal portfolio as the linear strategy with position matrix Lk = vk (uk ) ,
  3
      In particular, the optimal strategy is of the form described in Proposition 2.




                                                       12
which has a return of


      P Ptk
          +1 = St vk uk Rt+1 = St vk uk Rt+1 .                                             (13)
                     Lk           v     u
                                St k   Rt k



We see that there are two interpretation of a principal portfolio. First, it is a simple linear
strategy with a position matrix L of rank 1. Second, it is a strategy that trades the portfolio
                 uk
uk (with return Rt  ) based on the signal coming from the portfolio v (i.e., with signal Stvk ).
This latter interpretation plays a key role when we discuss the beta components in the next
section.
   The construction of principal portfolios is actually very simple. All you need to do is use
your favorite program to compute the singular value decomposition of  (a standard feature
of most computing programs), take the column vectors of U and V , and you are done.
   Decomposing the optimal strategy into its principal portfolios is similar to decomposing
the variance into the principal components. The difference is that principal component analy-
sis decomposes the variance, but principal portfolio analysis decomposes the expected return.
Just like the variance of each principal component equals its corresponding eigenvalue, the
expected return of each principal portfolio is its singular value:æ


  E (P Ptk                         ¯                 ¯             ¯           ¯ (14)
         +1 ) = tr( vk uk ) = tr(U  V vk uk ) = tr(U  ek uk ) = tr(k uk uk ) = k .



The following proposition summarizes the results of this section.

Proposition 4 The expected return of each principal portfolio is given by its corresponding
singular value,


      E (P Pti+1 ) = ¯i,                                                                   (15)




                                                 13
and the sum of principal portfolios is the optimal linear strategy:

                                 N                   N
      max E (St LRt+1 ) = E           P Pti+1   =         ¯i.
                                                                                            (16)
      L 1
                                i=1                 i=1


   The following example provides some intuition for this result.


Example (Signals are Expected Returns). If signals are equal to conditional expected
returns, Si,t = Et (Ri,t+1 ), one might question the usefulness of principal portfolios. But even
in this simple setting principal portfolios are insightful about the optimal strategy. In this
case, the prediction matrix reduces to the unconditional second moment of St , denoted S ,


       = E (Rt+1 St ) = E (Et (Rt+1 )St ) = E (St St ) = S .                                (17)


Therefore, principal portfolios are given by the principal components of S . The matrix
S describes the joint dynamics in conditional expected returns.           Its leading principal
component describes the portfolio of assets with the most variable expected return. In
other words, the first principal component of S is the most "timeable" portfolio. It is the
most attractive portfolio to trade for an investor facing a position size constraint and delivers
the highest unconditional average profitability. The second principal component is the next
most attractive, and so on. Singular values of  relate to variability of expected returns,
which explains why unconditional expected returns on principal portfolios are pinned down
by the size of singular values in (15). And in this example, all principal portfolios have
positive expected excess returns (assuming that S is non-degenerate), so the optimizing
investor holds them all, as in (16). However, if the prediction matrix is estimated with error,
it may be more robust to focus on the top PPs, as discussed in Section 5.




                                                    14
3       Optimal Alpha and Beta Strategies

We next derive the return of the optimal alpha and beta strategies, and show how these can
be decomposed into principal portfolios, just as in the general solution in Propositions 3­4.


3.1     Alpha-Beta Symmetry Decomposition

To decompose the return into its alpha and beta components, we must first specify the beta-
factor. In other words, how do we characterize the riskiness of linear strategies? To address
this question, Lemma 1 introduces a factor having the special property that Si,t exactly
describes asset i's conditional exposure to the factor.

Lemma 1 (Characteristics as Covariances) Define the factor Ft+1 as

                         1
        Ft+1 =                     (R,t )-1 St   Rt+1 .                                                 (18)
                  St (R,t )-1 St

Ft+1 is the unique tradable factor with the property that

                 Covt (Ri,t+1 , Ft+1 )
        Si,t =                         .                                                                (19)
                    Vart (Ft+1 )

This factor (referred to as the "latent factor" henceforth) is an economically important
reference point.4 It has a natural risk factor interpretation--it is the factor that unifies the
expected return interpretation of Si,t and the risk exposure interpretation of Si,t . No other
factor based on S shares this property (including the literature's standard "simple factor,"
F ).
    4
    Kelly et al. (2020a,b) propose a modeling approach and extensive empirical study of this point. Lemma
1 shows that we can always think of any signals as exposures to a factor, but it does not necessarily imply
that the return predictability embodied by S is "rational" in the sense that the factor F covaries with risks
that investors care about, namely the pricing kernel, and that certain eigenvalue bounds are satisfied, as
discussed later.




                                                     15
   To interpret this result, it is again helpful to consider the example in which St = Et (Rt+1 ).
In this case, Ft+1 is the conditional tangency portfolio, and is thus the tradable representation
of the pricing kernel. As a result, the expected returns and the factor exposures are equal
up to a constant positive scale factor. And, being the tangency portfolio, all assets have
zero alpha versus this factor in the absence of arbitrage. Importantly, while this factor is
useful for interpreting some of our results, none of our results rely on actually observing
F --since we don't observe it. We don't observe F because it depends on the conditional
variance-covariance matrix R,t , which can only be estimated with noise. Instead, we
develop methods that can beat the simple factor F without relying on observing, much less
inverting, R,t .
   The risk factor interpretation of the latent factor F positions it as the key benchmark
for evaluating the performance of principal portfolios. With it, we can characterize the risk
and return of signal-based linear strategies.
   To state the next result, recall that any square matrix B  RN ×N is decomposable into
its symmetric part, B s = 1
                          2
                                                                        1
                            (B + B ), and its antisymmetric part, B a = 2 (B - B ), where
B = B s + B a . The symmetric part equals its own transpose while the antisymmetric part
equals minus its own transpose, and both parts have a number of interesting properties. For
example, with B a = -B a , it has zeros along the main diagonal.
   Hence, any linear strategy can be seen as a sum of a symmetric and antisymmetric part,
L = Ls + La . As we now show, this decomposition has a deep economic interpretation.

Proposition 5 (Alpha-Beta Symmetry Decomposition) The conditional latent factor
                                              wt                    s           a
exposure and expected return of the strategy Rt +1 = St LRt+1 = St L Rt+1 + St L Rt+1 is


             wt
      Covt (Rt +1 , Ft+1 )
                           = St Ls St                                                        (20)
         Vart (Ft+1 )
           factor beta

                       wt           s s       a a
                   E (Rt +1 ) = tr(L  ) + tr(L  ) .                                          (21)


                                                16
This proposition shows that the risk (beta to the latent factor) of a linear strategy St L is
purely determined by its symmetric part; while the expected return is determined by both
the symmetric or anti-symmetric parts via their interaction with the respective components
of the prediction matrix, s and a .
     This proposition has wide-ranging implications. First, an antisymmetric strategy is
always factor neutral. Second, an antisymmetric strategy can nevertheless deliver positive
returns as long as a = 0. In this case, an antisymmetric strategy can deliver positive
expected return with zero factor exposure, that is, pure alpha! The fact that factor exposures
depend only on the symmetric component, Ls , regardless of the symmetry of  is a direct
implication of Lemma 2.

Lemma 2 For any symmetric matrix B  RN ×N and any anti-symmetric matrix A 
RN ×N , we have tr(BA) = tr(AB ) = 0 and x Ax = 0 for all vectors x  RN .

In other words, antisymmetric matrices nullify certain matrix multiplications, which trans-
lates into factor-neutrality of trading strategies.
     Proposition 5 also shows how symmetric strategies can deliver returns via the interaction
with s . Symmetric strategies have a beta to the factor given by St Ls St , which can be
positive or negative. A symmetric strategy has positive factor beta for all possible realizations
of the signal vector St if and only if L is positive definite. So, as we analyze in more detail
in the next section, eigenvalues are key to understanding both risk and return. Finally, a
symmetric strategy that always has negative factor beta corresponds to a negative definite
L.
     As an example application of Proposition 5, consider the riskiness of the simple factor F
in (3), which is a linear strategy with identity position matrix (L = Id) as seen in Equation 4.
Hence, this simple factor has expected return tr(Ls s ) = tr(s ) = tr() and it always has
a positive exposure to the latent factor, Covt (Ft+1 , Ft+1 ) = Vart (Ft+1 )St St > 0.
     The optimal linear strategy in Proposition 3 and the corresponding principal portfolios

                                                17
do not distinguish whether expected returns originate from factor exposure or alpha. In the
remainder of this section, we show that s and a lie at the heart of optimal symmetric
and antisymmetric trading strategies. We derive symmetric and antisymmetric analogues
of principal portfolios, and show that these are the building blocks to optimal symmetry-
decomposed strategies with either pure factor exposure and no alpha, or pure alpha and no
factor exposure.
      Said simply, symmetry is beta, and antisymmetry is alpha. We next derive the optimal
beta and alpha, respectively.


3.2     Symmetric Strategies: Principal Exposure Portfolios

As shown in equation (4), the simple factor is a simple symmetric linear strategy that trades
each asset based on its own signal. The idea that symmetric strategies trade based on
their own signals holds more generally. In particular, any strategy that scales the portfolio
position in proportion to the signal aggregated to the portfolio level--that is, any portfolio
that trades on the portfolio's own signal--is a symmetric strategy.
      To see this, consider a portfolio w  RN . The portfolio w has excess return Rt
                                                                                   w
                                                                                     +1 =

  i   wi Ri,t+1 . Aggregating the underlying signals based on these weights means that the
portfolio-level own signal is Stw =    i   wi Si,t . Trading the portfolio based on its own signal
means using its signal as portfolio weight, which generates a return of


        Stw Rt
             w
               +1 = St ww Rt+1 .                                                             (22)


We see that trading the portfolio based on its own signal is a linear strategy with a symmetric,
positive semi-definite position matrix L = ww . It's expected return is therefore


        E Stw Rt
               w                              s
                 +1 = E w St Rt+1 w = w w = w  w,                                            (23)




                                                 18
which shows, in a different way from (21), that the return depends only on the symmetric
part of the prediction matrix (the last equality uses Lemma 2).
     All symmetric linear strategies can be represented as combinations of portfolios traded
based on their own signals. This is achieved through the eigendecomposition of any sym-
metric position matrix L based on its eigenvalues k and orthonormal eigenvectors wk :

                  K
       L=              k wk (wk ) .                                                         (24)
                 k=1


Furthermore, the position matrix satisfies our portfolio constraint L  1 if |k |  1 for all
k.
     This result provides intuition for why symmetric linear strategies have factor exposure.
They trade portfolios based on the portfolio's own signal. In this sense, they do what the
signal prescribes, which anchors their behavior to that of the factor F . For example, if the
signal Si,t is each security's momentum, then a symmetric linear strategy consists of trading
different portfolios based on their own momentum--in the same spirit as the factor.
     We next consider optimal symmetric linear strategies. We know from (21) that a optimal
symmetric strategy maximizes tr(Ls ), so we can use Proposition 3 with  replaced by s .
The solution can be written simplæy based on the eigenvalue-decomposition

                                  N
         s                s
        = W W =                         s  s   s
                                        k wk (wk ) ,                                        (25)
                                  k=1


            s         s
where W = (w1 , ..., wN ) is the matrix of eigenvectors corresponding to the eigenvalues s
                                                                                         1 

...  s
     N . We see that the optimal symmetric strategy is:


                                                                  N
             s   s -1/2       s       s -1         s        s
       (  )                = W | | W W  W = W sign( )W =              sign(s    s   s
                                                                           k ) wk (wk ) .   (26)
                                                                k=1


We see that the optimal strategy naturally decomposes into N components, which we call


                                                       19
principal exposure portfolios (PEPs). That is, the k th PEP is a linear strategy with
                 s   s
position matrix wk (wk ) and a return of

                       ws   ws
     P EPtk                  s   s
          +1 = St Rt+1 = St wk (wk ) Rt+1 .
                 k  k
                                                                                                      (27)


The next result characterizes the returns of PEPs:

Proposition 6 The expected return of each PEP is equal to its corresponding eigenvalue

                                 ws   ws
     E (P EPtk                         s   s            s
             +1 ) = E St Rt+1 = E (St wk (wk ) Rt+1 ) = k ,
                        k  k
                                                                                                      (28)


Going long PEPs with positive eigenvalues and short those with negative is the optimal
symmetric linear strategy:

                                           N                                    N
           max    E (St LRt+1 ) =                sign(s          k
                                                      k )E (P EPt+1 )       =         |s
                                                                                       k |.           (29)
      L 1, L=L
                                           k=1                                  k=1


The first result shows that returns of PEPs equal their eigenvalues. The second result shows
that the collection of PEPs yield the symmetric linear strategy with the highest unconditional
expected return, subject to leverage constraint L                           1. This optimal performance is
achieved by trading PEPs while accounting for the direction of their predictability. The
optimal strategy takes long positions of size 1 in all PEPs with positive expected returns
(i.e., positive eigenvalues) and short positions of size -1 in PEPs with negative expected
returns.
   We next consider how the PEPs relate to the simple factor F .

Proposition 7 (Beating the Factor) The simple factor, F , can be decomposed as

                 N                          N                     N
                                                  ws wk  s
     Ft+1 =            Si,t Ri,t+1 =             St k Rt+1   =          P EPtk
                                                                             +1 .                     (30)
                 i=1                       k=1                    k=1



                                                             20
If all eigenvalues are non-negative, s
                                     k  0, then F the optimal symmetric strategy. Other-

wise, F has a lower expected return than buying the subset of PEPs with positive eigenvalues,
which is lower than that the optimal strategy from Proposition 6:

                     N                               N
     E Ft+1 =              s
                           k                  s
                                              k            |s
                                                            k| .                              (31)
                     k=1             k:s
                                       k >0          k=1



   Interestingly, the simple factor actually equals the sum of all PEPs as seen in (30). In
fact, F can be viewed as the sum of all possible returns of symmetric strategies, not just the
PEPs. Namely, for any orthonormal basis of portfolios B = {bk }N
                                                               k=1 , we have that BB = Id

and, hence,

      N                                                            N
            Si,t Ri,t+1 = St Rt+1 = St BB Rt+1 =                         Stbk Rt
                                                                               bk
                                                                                 +1 .         (32)
      i=1                                                          k=1


That is, trading the simple factor on stocks is equivalent to trading it on portfolios.
   The fact F equals the sum of PEPs together with Equation (28) imply that the expected
                                                                                           N
excess return of the simple factor equals the sum of the eigenvalues, E (Ft+1 ) =          k=1   s
                                                                                                 k.

Therefore, when a researcher documents that a simple strategy Ft+1 has significantly positive
average returns, we learn that the sum of eigenvalues of s is positive.
   When all eigenvalues are non-negative, the simple factor is in fact optimal among all
symmetric strategies. So, in this case, the simple strategy is not just simple -- our analysis
sheds new light on why it is a natural starting point.
                               N
   When E (Ft+1 ) =            k=1   s
                                     k > 0, the smallest eigenvalues can nevertheless be negative.

Negative eigenvalues correspond to those surprising PEPs that are negatively predicted by
their own signals.
   When there exist PEPs with negative eigenvalues, we can beat the simple factor by
leaving these PEPs out, buying only the PEPs that "work". Trading all the PEPs with



                                                           21
positive eigenvalues is the optimal strategy among all linear strategies that always have
positive factor exposure (i.e., among strategies with positive semi-definite L).
      If we are willing to have a factor exposure that may switch sign, we can achieve an ever
higher return. Indeed, negative eigenvalues also describe useful prediction patterns, just in
the opposite direction. Therefore, an investor can do even better by also shorting the PEPs
with negative eigenvalues, as shown in equation (31).
      The between principal portfolio analysis and principal component analysis is remarkably
close when we focus on the symmetric part of the prediction matrix as highlighted in Table 1.
As seen in the table, PCA and PPA share five key properties. While PCA decomposes the
variance into its components, PPA decomposes the expected excess return. Both have similar
connections to eigenvalues, orthogonality, the trace, and optimality across orthonormal
portfolios.


Example (Diagonal Prediction Matrix). Suppose there is no cross-predictability and
signals are mean zero (E (Sj,t ) = 0). Then ij = E (Ri,t+1 Sj,t ) = 0 for all i = j . Hence,  is
symmetric, so there are no antisymmetric (zero exposure) strategies within . Furthermore,
                                       s
the PEPs are simply the unit vectors, wk = ek .5 The optimal strategy is long assets with
positive own-predictability and short those with negative own-predictability.


3.3      Antisymmetric Strategies: Principal Alpha Portfolios

We now turn to antisymmetric linear trading strategies. Our analysis relies on the eigende-
composition of an antisymmetric matrix, described in the next lemma.

Lemma 3 Any antisymmetric matrix A has an even number 2K of non-zero eigenvalues.
The non-zero eigenvalues are purely imaginary and come in complex-conjugate pairs: ik and
                                                                                    1
-ik . The corresponding orthonormal eigenvectors are zk =                           
                                                                                     2
                                                                                       (xk   + iyk ) and the complex
  5
      Here, ek = (0, . . . , 1, 0, . . . , 0) , where 1 is in the k 'th position.



                                                                22
                        1
conjugate z
          ¯k =          
                         2
                           (xk   - iyk ), where xk , yk  RN with xk = yk = 1, xk yk = 0, and
xk xl = xk yl = yk yl = 0 for all k = l, k, l  K  N/2. The corresponding eigendecomposition
is given by

                 K
         A =          k (xk yk - yk xk ).                                                              (33)
                k=1


In other words, general antisymmetric matrices can be represented as a sum of building
blocks that are each simple antisymmetric matrices with rank equal to two and having the
form xy - yx . We refer to building blocks with form xy - yx as rank-2 antisymmetric
strategies.6
       Each rank-2 building block generates a return of


                                       x    y     y   x
                                          j
         St (xj yj - yj xj )Rt+1 = St j Rt+1          j
                                             - St j Rt+1 .                                             (34)


The first part of this portfolio is the return to trading the portfolio yj based on the signal
coming from the portfolio xj . In other words, a strong signal for xj (St xj ), recommends
                                                                                    x   y
                                                                                j
scaling up the position in yj (yj Rt+1 ), and this generates a return of St j Rt+1 . The second
part is similar but flips the roles xj and yj and shorts the associated strategy (due to the
minus sign). Thus, antisymmetric strategies are understandable as long-short strategies that
trade two portfolios against each other based on the strength of each other's signal. But
why does this result in zero conditional factor exposure, as guaranteed by Proposition 5?
The next example helps develop intuition for the absence of factor risk in antisymmetric
strategies.
   6
    These are analogous to the rank-1 symmetric trading strategies, L = ww , that are the basic building
blocks of all symmetric trading strategies, as described in Section 3.2. An antisymmetric strategy satisfies
the portfolio constraint, A  1 as long as |k |  1 in (33).




                                                      23
Example (Beta-neutral Strategy). Consider an economy of N assets that satisfies the
CAPM, save for asset 1, which has a positive alpha. That is, Et (Ri,t+1 ) = 1i=1 + i,t t ,
where t  0 is the market risk premium, i,t is the conditional CAPM beta of stock i, and
 > 0. Suppose further that signals are defined to be the conditional betas, Si,t = i,t . A
standard beta-neutral strategy to exploit this scenario takes a long position in asset 1 having
size equal to 1 (i.e., the size is set equal to the factor's beta on itself). The conditional beta
from the long position is equal to 1,t , so beta-neutrality is achieved with a position of -1,t =
-S1,t in the factor. This strategy is a rank-2 antisymmetric strategy with L = yx - xy .
The long position in asset 1 corresponds to x = (1, 0, · · · , 0) , and the short position in the
factor corresponds to y = (1, 1, ..., 1) . In other words, the beta-neutral strategy has zero
symmetric component, non-zero antisymmetric component, and positive expected return,
rendering it a pure alpha strategy:

                                                                                          N
E (St LRt+1 ) = E (t (yx -xy )Rt+1 ) = E            i,t R1,t+1 - 1,t       Ri,t+1   = E         i,t   ,
                                                i                      i                  i=2


which is positive as long as betas are positive on average. This is not the only pure alpha
strategy, as a long position in asset 1 can be hedged with any other asset or combination of
assets. Below, we show how to construct optimal pure alpha strategies using the eigende-
composition of a .
   The example illustrates that the fundamental yx - xy structure underlying all anti-
symmetric strategies is closely related to the familiar approach to factor neutralization. To
eliminate factor exposures, the position size in each must be equal to the factor exposure of
the other, and with appropriately opposing signs.
   Next, we derive optimal antisymmetric strategies. The first step is to apply the eigen-
decomposition in (33) to the antisymmetric part of the transposed prediction matrix, (a ) .
By Lemma 3, the matrix (a ) has 2N a non-zero and purely imaginary eigenvalues, ia
                                                                                 k and




                                               24
-ia             a                              a
  k , for some N  N/2,. Their imaginary parts, k  R, can be ordered as



      a         a        a            a
      1  · · ·  N a  0  -N a  · · ·  -1 .                                                       (35)


For each eigenvalue a
                    j , we denote the corresponding real and imaginary parts of the eigen-

vectors by xj and yj , respectively.
   We define the j th principal alpha portfolio (PAP) as the linear strategy based on
the j th eigenvector: Lj = xj yj - yj xj . Equivalently, it has weights (wj,t
                                                                          a
                                                                              ) = St (xj yj - yj xj )
for j = 1, ..., N a . We note that, since N a  N/2, there exist at most N/2 principal alpha
strategies. Moreover, Lemma 3 implies that PAPs are orthonormal.
   The return of a principal alpha portfolio, like any rank-2 antisymmetric strategy, consists
of two parts:


                                                  x    y         y    x
      P APtj+1 = St (xj yj - yj xj )Rt+1 = St j Rt+1
                                                  j
                                                     - St j Rt+1
                                                              j
                                                                 .                              (36)


The PAP buys portfolio yj based on the signal coming from the portfolio xj and simultane-
ously shorts portfolio xj based on the signal from yj .
   Similar to the result for PEPs, we find that PAP expected returns are proportional to
their eigenvalues and that the sum of PAPs is in fact the optimal antisymmetric linear
trading strategy.

Proposition 8 A principal alpha strategy has expected return E (P APtj+1 ) = 2a
                                                                              j and zero

factor exposure. The sum of PAPs is the optimal antisymmetric linear strategy:

                                      Na                       Na
          max       E (St LRt+1 ) =         E (P APtk
                                                    +1 )   =         2a
                                                                      j.                        (37)
       L 1, L=-L
                                      k=1                      k=1


The next example helps illustrate the properties of PEPs and PAPs.




                                                      25
Example (Constant Signals). Suppose that signals are constant over time, St = S .7 In
this case, the prediction matrix is especially simple,  = E (Rt+1 St ) = RS , where we use
the short-hand notation R := E (Rt+1 ). We can now compute the PEPs and PAPs explicitly.
    First, consider a case in which returns align with signals exactly, R = S . In this case,
we have  = SS . This matrix is symmetric and has a rank of one. Hence, there is a single
principal exposure portfolio with a non-zero eigenvalue, namely the eigenvector S , and no
principal alpha portfolios. Therefore, this PEP is the only meaningful portfolio, and it is the
same as the simple factor, S , with expected return S R = R R > 0.
    Next, consider the case in which expected returns do not line up perfectly with the signal.
Then  = RS is no longer symmetric. The symmetric part is s = 0.5(RS + SR ), which
has a rank of 2. Hence, s has at most two non-zero eigenvalues, s
                                                                1 = 0.5(R S + R                      S ) >
0  s
   N = 0.5(R S - R                  S ) and the corresponding PEPs are8


       s              R         S                         R          S
      w1 = cs
            1              +              s
                                       , wN = cs
                                               N                -           ,
                      R         S                         R          S

where cs    s                                 s
       1 , cN are constants chosen such that w1
                                                                  s
                                                               = wN        = 1. We see that the first
principal exposure portfolio bets on securities with high average returns and high signals,
while the last PEP bets on securities with high average returns and low signals. The negative
eigenvalue PEP isolates losses due to the erroneous component of S and exploits them with
a short position.
    In this example, the prediction matrix also has an antisymmetric part. The strategy
that trades this is L = a = 0.5(SR - RS ). To derive the PAP, note that a has at
most two non-zero eigenvalues with purely imaginary parts a
                                                          1 = 0.5( R                     S - R S )1/2 
   7
     As a concrete example, consider sorting stocks into value (book-to-market) deciles, using the decile
portfolios as the baseline assets, and using a value signal defined as the decile number of each asset as the
predictive signal. This is in contrast to, for example, forming assets as value-sorted portfolios, but using
portfolio momentum as the trading signal. In this case signals are far from constant over time, and this is
what we do empirically.
   8
     These eigenvalues and eigenvectors can be verified by checking that s wk  s
                                                                                 = s   s
                                                                                    k wk for k = 1, N .




                                                     26
0  a     a
   N = - 1 and the corresponding PAP is the linear strategy with position matrix

L = xy - yx , where9


         y = ca R S     2
                            - S (R S ) , x = S/ S .


The short part of the portfolio (x) is exactly the factor hedge. It is in place to ensure that
the constraint (zero factor exposure) is satisfied. The remaining part of the problem is to
find the highest average return subject to the constraint. Since the factor uses all (and only)
the information in S , the remaining information that the PAP has at its disposal comes from
the unconditional mean of returns. Thus the long side of the PAP (y ) is determined by the
information in R that is missed by S , hence the emergence in y of the difference between R
and S .


Example (Betting Against Beta: PAP is the new BAB). Proceeding from the prior
example, suppose that the erroneous signals S are chosen to be the expected returns in an
asset pricing model, i.e. Sj = Cov(-Mt , Rj,t ) where M denotes the model's pricing kernel.
Suppose further that there is less dispersion in true expected returns than predicted by the
model--for simplicity, suppose that 1 S/N = 1 and suppose that R = 1. Then the alpha
portfolio arising from the antisymmetric part of the prediction matrix has portfolio weight
w = S (SR - RS ) = (S S )1 - N S . This strategy goes long the equal-weighted portfolio
(given by R = 1), while shorting the beta-weighted portfolio, S . To keep the portfolio
beta-neutral, the equal-weighted portfolio (which is lower beta) is scaled up relative to the
beta-weighted portfolio,10 S S > N . Hence, this strategy resembles the betting-against-beta
(BAB) strategy of Frazzini and Pedersen (2014). This strategy has expected excess return
of w R = N S S - N 2 > 0 and a beta of w S = N S S - N S S = 0.
   9 a
    c is determined such that y = 1
  10
    This result follows from Cauchy-Schwarz, which yields that N 2 = (1 S )2  (1 1)(S S ) = N S S , and the
inequality is strict since we assume that betas vary across stocks.



                                                    27
   In the preceding examples, signals are constant, which makes the math particularly
tractable to illustrate intuitive aspects of principal portfolios. But constant signals imply
that there are only static trading opportunities. In general, signals fluctuate over time, and
principal portfolios use information about both static and dynamic trading opportunities.
The prediction matrix can be written as a sum of its static and dynamic components:


       = E (Rt+1 St ) = E (Rt+1 )E (St ) + Cov(Rt+1 , St ).                                (38)


Suppose that signals do not predict future returns in the sense that Cov(Si,t , Rj,t+1 ) = 0 for
all i, j . In this case,  simplifies to the constant signal example,  = E (R) E (S ), and
we have up to two PEPs and one PAP with strictly positive expected return, but these are
purely based on the signals' time series average. The first term on the right side of equation
(38) thus embodies information in the prediction matrix regarding "static bets."
   The second term summarizes information in the prediction matrix regarding "dynamic
bets." To focus purely on dynamic bets, then we can demean signals in the time series,
           ~i,t = Si,t - E (Si,t ). This redacts static information from  and concentrates only
looking at S
on dynamic opportunities:


              ~ ) = Cov(Rt+1 , S
      E (Rt+1 S                ~ ) = Cov(Rt+1 , S ).                                       (39)
                t               t                t



Our approach allows both static and dynamic bets since both may be useful. Static bets are
useful if they pick up that certain assets generally have higher returns, and if it's possible
to time one's portfolio positions, then dynamic bets are profitable. We find in our empirical
analysis that most of the effects we see are driven by dynamic bets.
   To summarize, as the above examples illustrate, there are potentially two ways to earn
alpha relative to the factor. The first stems from the observation that if s has any negative
eigenvalues, then shorting the corresponding PEPs yields a positive expected return with a


                                                28
negative factor exposure, which is alpha with respect to the factor. The second is to identify
antisymmetric strategies with positive expected returns. Because an antisymmetric strategy
is guaranteed to have zero factor exposure, it is also alpha to the factor.


4         Asset Pricing Tests: Positivity Bounds

We next propose a test for whether our signal S is an exposure (i.e., beta) to the true
pricing kernel. Said differently, we wish to test whether the factor F corresponding to S is
proportional to the true pricing kernel, Ft+1  -Mt+1 (or M 's projection on the tradable
space; recall that Lemma 1 shows how F is related to S ). For example, we can consider
                                              m
signals given by betas to the market return, Rt +1 , which corresponds to testing that the

                                              m
pricing kernel is of the form Mt+1 = at - bt Rt +1 for at , bt  R (i.e., the CAPM). Or, we can

consider signals based on exposure to consumption, corresponding to testing that the pricing
kernel is of the form Mt+1 = u (ct+1 )/u (ct ) (consumption CAPM).
         Specifically, suppose that our signal Si,t is proportional to the exposure to the pricing
kernel, Covt (Rj,t+1 , -Mt+1 ), where we only assume proportionality (rather than equality)
since we may not know the equity premium in the CAPM or the risk aversion in CCAPM.
Then, signals should be closely related to expected returns. Indeed, the definition of a pricing
                                     f                                             f
kernel is a process M with Et ((1 + Rt + Rj,t+1 )Mt+1 ) = 1 for all assets, where Rt is the
risk-free rate, which implies11


                                f
           Et (Rj,t+1 ) = (1 + Rt )Covt (Rj,t+1 , -Mt+1 ) = t Sj,t ,                                           (40)


where t > 0 is a factor of proportionality due to the risk-free rate and to our assumption
that the signal S is proportional to (but not necessarily equal to) the covariance.
    11
    To see this result, note that the definition of a pricing kernel applied for the risk-free asset (which has
                                 f
0 excess return) yields (1 + Rt    )Et (Mt+1 ) = 1, which implies that Et (Rj,t+1 Mt+1 ) = 0 for excess returns.
                                   f                                 f
Therefore, Et (Rj,t+1 ) = (1 + Rt    )Et (Mt+1 )Et (Rj,t+1 ) = (1 + Rt )(Et (Rj,t+1 Mt+1 ) - Covt (Rj,t+1 , Mt+1 )) =
      f
(1 + Rt )Covt (Rj,t+1 , -Mt+1 ).


                                                         29
     For example, if we are testing the CAPM, then the signal Sj,t is typically the market beta,
                      m             m
j,t = Covt (Rj,t+1 , Rt +1 )/Vart (Rt+1 ). In this case, the expected excess return is Et (Rj,t+1 ) =

     m                                                      m
Et (Rt +1 )j,t , so here t is the market risk premium, Et (Rt+1 ). We would like to develop a test

                                                                  m
that does not require knowledge of t because we may not know Et (Rt +1 ) (or the coefficients

                           m
at , bt in Mt+1 = at - bt Rt +1 ).

     The key insight is that, when the signal is proportional to the beta to the pricing kernel,
the prediction matrix must be symmetric and positive definite--regardless of the factor of
proportionality, . To see that, note that any off-diagonal element of the prediction matrix
is


       j,i = E (Si,t Rj,t+1 ) = E (Si,t Et (Rj,t+1 )) = E (t Si,t Sj,t ) = i,j .                (41)


which shows that  is symmetric. Further, we see that the prediction matrix is positive
semi-definite since, for any w  RN :


       w w = w E (t St St )w = E (t [w St ]2 ) > 0                                              (42)


This finding provides new asset pricing tests as summarized here:

Proposition 9 (Positivity of Prediction Matrix) If there exists t  0 such that


       E (Ri,t+1 |t , St ) = t Si,t                                                             (43)


for all i, then the corresponding prediction matrix  is symmetric and positive semi-definite,
and, equivalently, all the corresponding PEPs have non-negative expected returns and all
PAPs have zero expected returns. The premise (43) holds, for example, if there is no arbitrage
so a pricing kernel exists, and the signal Si,t is proportional to exposures to the pricing kernel.

The intuition behind this result follows from our earlier portfolio theory: We know that

                                                 30
negative eigenvalues of s and a non-zero a give rise to alpha strategies (Sections 3.2 and
3.3, respectively). Since alpha strategies cannot exist in a rational asset pricing model,
all eigenvalues of s must be positive and a must be zero. In other words,  must be
symmetric and positive semi-definite.
    One benefit of this approach is that we do not need to know t , we just need to observe
signals and returns, and then consider the positivity of the corresponding prediction matrix.
Another helpful feature is that the test is unconditional, i.e., it relies on an unconditional
expected value,  = E (Rt+1 St ), even if the underlying asset pricing model in conditional.
Hence, while some tests require an understanding of how the risk premium varies over time
or make assumptions to get from a conditional CAPM to an unconditional test, we have
a test of the conditional CAPM (and other conditional models) based on an unconditional
moment condition. Further, this restriction also tests cross-asset effects.


5    Robust Strategies: Shrinkage via Principal Portfolios

Our theoretical analysis up to now has taken place in population with the prediction matrix,
 = E (Rt+1 St ), known. In reality,  is unknown and must be estimated. Unfortunately, this
is a highly parameterized framework; it requires estimating N 2 parameters. The standard
tradable factor approach from the literature (3) essentially restricts the set of linear strate-
gies to a single parameter problem--i.e., signals are typically assessed based only on their
average own-predictability    i   E (Si,t Ri,t+1 ). This approach can be viewed as a regularization
device that exploits a signal while imposing many restrictions to minimize the number of
parameters. But these restrictions may be unnecessarily severe. They sacrifice any and
all useful information about heterogeneity in own-predictability (differences among diagonal
elements of ) or cross-predictability (off-diagonal elements).
    Principal portfolios are ideally suited to balance two considerations: 1) exploiting po-
tentially rich information from throughout the predictability matrix, and 2) controlling


                                                 31
parameterization to reduce overfit and ensure robust out-of-sample portfolio performance.
In this section, we develop robust principal portfolio trading strategies by shrinking the
predictability matrix.
   The analysis in Sections 2 and 3 shows that a singular value decomposition of  (or
of its symmetric and antisymmetric parts) finds orthonormal portfolios and orders them
from highest expected return to lowest. This eigendecomposition has another great benefit
in that it lends itself naturally to a convenient form of regularization. In particular, if we
reconstitute the  matrix by retaining only the K largest singular values and zeroing out
the rest, we obtain the matrix of rank K that is as close as possible to the original . This
idea is familiar from principal components analysis, which finds low-rank approximations to
a variance-covariance matrix by zeroing out all but its largest eigenvalues.
   The following proposition operationalizes the idea of robust optimal trading strategies
by constraining the parameter space to position matrices with rank(L)  K . Here, K is a
tuning parameter that can be chosen empirically.
   To add further generality and another convenient tuning parameter, we introduce the
Schatten p-norm for a matrix L (see, Horn and Johnson (1991)):

                   N                  1/p

       L   p   =         |¯ k (L)|p         ,
                   k=1


where ¯ k (L) is the k -th singular value of L and p  [1, ]. The limiting case p = 

corresponds to the standard matrix norm L = L                         ,   whereas p = 2 corresponds to the
sum of squares of all elements L                2   = (   k,l   L2
                                                                 l,k )
                                                                      1/2
                                                                          (Frobenius norm). Interestingly, we
show that different matrix norms correspond to different ways of weighting the principal
portfolios.
   We are ready to state a result that generalizes all the optimization problems that we
considered so far (Propositions 3, 6, and 8).



                                                          32
Proposition 10 (General Solution) Optimal portfolios subject to rank(L) = K and ||L||p 
1, where p = [1, ] and q is defined by 1/p + 1/q = 1, satisfy:

  1. The solution with no symmetry constraints depends on the top K singular values, ¯k ,

     of :

                                                      K          1/q

                   max             E (St LRt+1 ) =          ¯q
                                                                         .                                                  (44)
                                                             k
             L   p 1,   rank(L)K
                                                      k=1


                                                                                                          -1/p
     The optimal L is St LRt+1 = c           K     ¯ q-1 P P k , where c =
                                                                                               K     ¯q
                                                                                                                 .
                                             k=1     k      t+1                                k=1    k


  2. The solution when restricting to symmetric strategies depends on the set K of the K
     largest absolute eigenvalues |s      s
                                   k | of  :


                                                                               1/q

                        max             E (St LRt+1 ) =              |s
                                                                      k|
                                                                        q
                                                                                     .                                      (45)
             L   p 1,   rank(L)K, L=L
                                                             kK


                                                    q -1                                                                q -1/p
     The optimal L is St LRt+1 = c           K   |s
                                                  k|     sign(s       k
                                                              k )P EPt+1 , where c = (                       K       |s
                                                                                                                      k| )     .

  3. The solution when restricting to antisymmetric strategies depends on the eigenvalues
     a    a
     k of  :


                                                                     K               1/q

                         max              E (St LRt+1 ) =        2           (a
                                                                              k)
                                                                                q
                                                                                           .                                (46)
             L   p 1,   rank(L)2K, L=-L
                                                                     k=1


                                                                                                                          -1/p
                                             K    a q -1                                              K    a q -1
     The optimal L is St LRt+1 = c           k=1 (k )    P APtk
                                                              +1 ,           where c = 2              k=1 (k )                   .

Proposition 10 shows that optimal low-dimensional trading strategies are the same as the
general optimality results proven earlier, with the exception that the strategies use only the
leading principal portfolios. This is true regardless of whether one considers general linear
strategies (L), symmetric and hence factor-exposed strategies (L = L ), or antisymmetric
pure alpha strategies (L = -L ). By truncating the strategy at the top K principal portfolios,

                                                     33
these robust strategies replace the lesser singular values with zeros.12 The lesser components
may be dominated by noise, and are therefore likely to have poor out-of-sample performance.
Zeroing them out regularizes the optimal strategy to controls overfit and its adverse out-
of-sample impact. The number of principal portfolios included in a robust strategy, K ,
determines the extent of regularization. It serves as a hyperparameter that can be controlled
by the researcher or tuned via cross-validation.
    What are the implications of the more general norm              ·   p   in this proposition, and what
economic role does it play? Proposition 10 shows that the optimal strategy is a weighted sum
of principal portfolios for any norm. This result shows that PPs are very general building
blocks. The choice of norm simply affects how the principal portfolios are weighted, which
also illustrates the connection between the tuning parameters p and K : The less important
PPs can be "zeroed out" by the choice of K and down-weighted by the choice of p.
    At that same time, the norm constraint captures the idea of constraining trading strategy
leverage in the optimization problem has a natural economic motivation--risk and institu-
tional frictions impose leverage considerations on every real-world investor. The way real-
world investors try to manage their leverage concerns is dictated in part by the performance
of strategies in their opportunity set. This raises an interesting practical implication of
Proposition 10. The norm exponent p can be treated as a hyperparameter that can be tuned
via cross-validation. An investor that tunes p along with K in essence chooses the form of
leverage constraint that lends itself to robust out-of-sample trading performance.
    Interestingly, when p = 2, part 1. of the proposition is similar to trading a version of
the  matrix that has been estimated via a reduced rank regression (see, e.g., Velu and
Reinsel (1998)).13 Further, when p = 2 and we do not impose a rank restrictions (i.e., we
  12
     Note that singular values of a symmetric or an anti-symmetric matrix coincide with the absolute values
of its eigenvalues.
  13
     Reduced rank regression (RRR) seeks to minimize the mean squared error E ( Rt+1 - L St 2 ) =
E ( Rt+1 2 ) - E (St LRt+1 ) + E (St LL St ) under a rank constraint on the matrix L. By direct calculation,
this objective is equivalent to maximizing tr(L) - tr(LL S ). Thus, reduced rank regression amounts
to maximizing the expected return, tr(L), with a punishment term for signal variance. If S = Id, the



                                                    34
let K = N ), then the solution is L =  /  2 . So, in this case, we uncover the prediction
matrix itself as the optimal strategy. For p = , i.e. q = 1, the solution selects components
that are large in absolute value, in the spirit of lasso applied to singular values, and with no
rank restriction we recover Proposition 4.
      The results in Sections 2 through 4 lay out a theoretical basis for principal portfolios, and
Proposition 10 prescribes a machine learning approach to implementing principal portfolios
in practice. Data-driven choices for hyperparameters K and p can allow the researcher to
select the level of principal portfolio model complexity best suited for constructing optimal
out-of-sample strategies.


6      Empirical Results

We next present a simple empirical implementation of our method using some of the most
standard data sets in finance.


6.1     Data, Signals, and Methodology

We must make a number choices to empirically implement our framework. We present a
"base-case" set of choices using relatively standard methods and consider several variations
around the base case for robustness. The base-case data is the 25 Fama-French portfolios, a
standard data set in finance. These portfolios are constructed by double-sorting U.S. stocks
by their size (measured by market capitalization) and valuation ratio (book-to-market).14
We compute alphas based on the 5-factor model of Fama and French (2015). We use daily
data from July 1963 until the end of 2019.
      For robustness, we also implement our model for several other data sets. In particular,
we also run the model for 25 U.S. size and operating profitability portfolios, 25 U.S. size
punishment term coincides with L 22 , and hence RRR is a modification of the problem solved in Proposition
10 for p = 2.
  14
     https://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data library.html



                                                   35
and investment portfolios, the international counterparts of the three sets of Fama-French
portfolios (i.e., developed countries excluding the U.S.), and a sample of 52 futures contracts
starting in 1985. This includes contracts for 21 commodities, 17 equity indices, 5 sovereign
bonds, and 9 currencies.
       For each data set, we need signals and returns. Starting with signals, the base case signal
is each asset's 20-day momentum (approximately one month). That is, for each asset in each
sample, we compute its past 20-day cumulative return, then standardize the signal each
period by converting it to a cross-sectional rank and dividing by the number of assets and
subtracting the mean (mapping the signal into the [-0.5,0.5] interval).15 We also consider
other momentum signals for robustness, namely based on 40, 60, 90, 120, and 250 day past
returns, following on the standard practice of considering momentum signals up to 1 year
(approximately the same as 250 trading days).
       Turning to returns, the base-case measure of returns is each asset's 20-day return (again,
one month). Specifically, we divide the sample into non-overlapping 20-day time periods,
denoted by t, and, in each time period t, we seek to predict the future 20-day returns based
on the momentum signals. We cross-sectionally demean returns to focus prediction on cross
section differences in returns rather than time series fluctuations in the common market
component of returns. We also consider other forecast horizons, namely 1-day, 5-day, and
10-day returns. Similarly to the base case, each of the other forecast horizons correspond to
a sample of non-overlapping time periods t of the same length. As advocated by Moskowitz
et al. (2012), in the case of futures contracts we time-series de-volatize returns (both in
the forecast target and in the momentum signal construction) using trailing 20-day return
  15
    All of our theoretical results apply to cross-sectionally demeaned signals. If we start with any signal S ,
we can work with the cross-sectionally demeaned signal: S    ~j,t = Sj,t - 1 N Sk,t . The corresponding
                                                                             N    k=1
simple factor F~ is dollar neutral. The eigenvalues of the prediction matrix with respect to S
                                                                                             ~ and S have the
same signs, except for at most two eigenvalues (see Proposition 11 in the Appendix). Further, demeaning
means that we only exploit cross-sectional predictability, not time series predictability, which essentially
leads to the "loss" of one eigenvalue (Proposition 12 in the Appendix).




                                                      36
volatility, which helps avoid a situation in which results are unduly driven by the large
cross-sectional differences in volatility of raw futures contract returns.16
       We estimate the prediction matrix as the sample counterpart of the definition  =
E (Rt+1 St ) using a rolling "training window." The training window is the past 120 time
periods. For example for the base case, the training period consists of the past 120 non-
overlapping 20-day time periods. The estimated prediction matrix at time period t is

                    t-1
         ^t = 1
                         R +1 S .                                                                        (47)
             120  =t-120


Based on this empirical prediction matrix, we compute its singular vectors to form principal
portfolios (PPs) and we compute and the eigenvectors of its symmetric and antisymmetric
parts, giving rise to the empirical principal exposure portfolios (PEPs) and principal alpha
portfolios (PAPs). We compare these to the simple factor Ft defined in (3). To limit the
undue effects of illiquidity on our conclusions, we always add an extra 1-day buffer between
the last day in the training sample and the first day in the forecast window.


6.2      The Prediction Matrix and Principal Portfolios

We first consider the PPs, PEPs, and PAPs for the base-case sample of 20-day returns using
20-day momentum signals for the 25 Fama-French size-value portfolios. Figure 1.A shows the
singular values of the prediction matrix, averaged over time. Recall that, according to the
theory, these singular values correspond to the expected returns of the corresponding PPs.
The realized next-month returns (i.e., out of sample) of the PPs are plotted in Figure 1.D,
along with their confidence bands. We find that the realized returns roughly match the shape
of the ex ante singular values, with the low-numbered PPs having large eigenvalues and high
realized returns. However, while this relation would be perfect on an in-sample basis (not
  16
    This adjustment has tiny effects in our equity asset analysis so, in the interest of simplicity, we do not
de-volatilize equity returns.



                                                     37
shown), we naturally see some degradation of realized returns relative to the eigenvalues
when looking out of sample.
      In a similar vein, Figures 1.B and 1.C show the eigenvalues of the symmetric and
antisymmetric parts of the prediction matrix, respectively. Figures 1.E and 1.F report the
realized returns of the corresponding PEPs and PAPs, respectively. Again we see a close
relation between the ex ante predicted returns, and the out-of-sample realized ones. In this
sample, only the first two PPs and first two PEPs appear to have a significant out-of-sample
return, and only the first PAP return is significant.
      One might wonder what these portfolios look like? We explore this in the case of PEPs
and PAPs. Figure 2.A plots the weights of the eigenvector w1 underlying the first PEP.
Interestingly, this eigenvector tends to be long value versus shorting growth stocks, and
simultaneously tends to be long larger stocks versus short smaller ones. Recall that PEP1
trades w1 based its on signal, that is, PEP1 is going long or short a size-value bet based
on its own momentum. Said differently, when large-value has recently outperformed, then
PEP1 buys large-value, and, otherwise, it buys small-growth. To illustrate this strategy
further, Figure 2.B plots the momentum, S w1 , of the eigenvector. Lastly, Figure 2.C show
the overall portfolio weight, S w1 w1 , averaged over time. Similarly, Figure 2, Panels D­E
illustrate the PAP1 trading strategy.


6.3     PP, PEP, and PAP Returns across Forecast Horizons

Figure 3 plots the performance of the PPs, PEPs, and PAPs across several forecast horizons.
In addition to the base-case specification with 20-day return periods considered above, we
also consider 1-day, 5-day, and 10-day forecast horizons. In all cases, the signal is the past
20-day momentum. For simplicity, we only report the return of the sum of the top three
principal portfolios (among each the PPs, PEPs, and PAPs), and the combination of the




                                              38
top 3 PEPs plus top 3 PAPs.17 In each case, we compare their performance to that of
the simple factor, which is just the sum-product of signals and returns. When analyzing
factor performance, we use the exact same signal construction for the factor and PPs and
evaluate both over the same forecast horizons, so each group of bars is an apples-to-apples
comparison.
      The five bars on the right in Figure 3.A show performance for the base case with 20-day
returns. We see that the PEP has a similar Sharpe ratio (SR) to that of the simple factor,
where SR is the average excess return divided by volatility. The PAP has a higher SR, and
the combination of PEP and PAP is higher yet, more than double the SR of the simple
factor. The PP strategy performs similarly to PAP, handily beating the simple factor. The
best overall performance is achieved by the combination of PEPs and PAPs.
      Figure 3.B plots the information ratio (IR) and its confidence interval as a measure of the
risk-adjusted return of the principal portfolios. Specifically, the IR is computed by regressing
the return of the PP (or PEP, PAP, or their combination) on the simple factor (F ) and the
five Fama-French factors (the market M KT , the size factor SM B , the value factor HM L,
the profitability factor RM W , and the investment factor CM A):


      P EPt =  +  0 Ft +  1 M KTt +  2 SM Bt +  3 HM Lt +  4 RM Wt +  5 CM At + t (48)


The IR is the alpha divided by residual volatility, IR= / (t ), which can be interpreted as
the Sharpe ratio when all the factors on the right hand side are hedged out (i.e., the alpha
expressed as a Sharpe ratio).
      Table 2 reports the details of this regression. As seen from Table 2 (and the confidence
intervals in Figure 3.B), the PEP does not have a significant alpha (or, equivalently, a
significant IR), but the PAP is highly significant (t-statistic of 4.42) and so is the PP strategy
 17
   When combining PEPs and PAPs, we rescale the PAP component to have the same volatility as the
PEP component, then take a 50/50 combination.



                                                39
and the combination of PEP and PAP. Interestingly, Table 2 also shows that PEP has a
highly significant loading on the simple factor with a high R2 , while, in contrast, PAP has
small and insignificant factor loadings and low R2 . These findings are consistent with the
idea that PEP provides factor exposure while PAP provides uncorrelated alpha.
      Finally, Figure 3 shows that the principal portfolios perform even better at shorter
forecast horizons, especially the PP and PEP strategies. Indeed, at the shorter forecast
horizons, even PEP earns a higher SR than the simple factor, and the risk-adjusted return
as measured by the IR becomes highly significant at 1-, 5-, and 10-day forecast horizons.


6.4     Other Samples and Markets

We next implement the model in other samples. In particular, we consider three samples of
U.S. stocks (the base case from before, plus two other sets of Fama-French portfolios), three
sets of international stocks (i.e., global stocks outside the U.S. sorted into similar portfolios),
and a set of 52 futures contracts (consisting of equity index futures, bond futures, commodity
futures, and currency forwards).
      Figure 4.A and B show the Sharpe ratios and information ratios for these seven data
sets. In support of the model's predictive power, we see that all of the SRs and IRs are
positive, and several, but not all, are statistically significant. In further support of the
model, Figure 4.C shows that the ex ante eigenvalues are highly correlated to the ex post
realized returns in each sample.


6.5     Robustness across Momentum Horizons and Sub-samples

Finally, we analyze the robustness of our method across momentum horizons and sub-
samples. Figure 5 shows the performance of the leading PPs, PEPs, and PAPs for different
look-back periods in the specification of the momentum signal. Panel A shows that the
PEP performs similarly to the simple factor for all momentum horizons. However, PP,



                                                40
PAP, and the PEP/PAP combination deliver higher SR across all horizons. Turning to the
information ratios in Panel B, we see the these are more statistically significant for the short-
and medium-term momentum periods, and less significant for the longer-term momentum
horizons.
    Finally, Figure 6 reports the performance of the base-case strategy for each decade in the
sample. We see that the performance tends to be positive across decades -- so the strong
overall performance is not being driven by a single decade -- but, naturally, the statistical
significance in each decade is reduced due to the short time window.


7    Conclusion: The Power of Principal Portfolio Analysis

We present a new method to analyze return predictability and asset pricing tests. The
method provides novel intuitive portfolios that can generate effective factor exposures and
alpha strategies relative to the factor. We implement our method empirically using a range
of standard data sets and find significant evidence consistent with our predictions.




                                               41
References


Arnott, Robert D, Mark Clements, Vitali Kalesnik, and Juhani T Linnainmaa,
    "Factor momentum," Available at SSRN 3116974, 2019.

Asness, Clifford S, Tobias J Moskowitz, and Lasse Heje Pedersen, "Value and
    momentum everywhere," The Journal of Finance, 2013, 68 (3), 929­985.

Bhatia, Rajendra, Matrix Analysis, Springer, 1997.

Cochrane, John H, Asset pricing: Revised edition, Princeton university press, 2009.

Collin-Dufresne, Pierre, Kent D Daniel, Ciamac C Moallemi, and Mehmet
    Saglam, "Dynamic asset allocation with predictable returns and transaction costs,"
    Available at SSRN 2618910, 2015.

    , Kent Daniel, and Mehmet Saglam, "Liquidity regimes and optimal dynamic asset
    allocation," Journal of Financial Economics, 2019.

Fama, Eugene F and Kenneth R French, "A five-factor asset pricing model," Journal
    of financial economics, 2015, 116 (1), 1­22.

Fan, Ky, "On a theorem of Weyl concerning eigenvalues of linear transformations.,"
    Proceeding of the National Academy of Sciences USA, 1950, 36, 31­35.

    and A. J. Hoffman, "Some metric inequalities in the space of matrices," Proceedings
    of the American Mathematical Society, 1955, 6, 111­116.

Frazzini, Andrea and Lasse Heje Pedersen, "Betting against beta," Journal of
    Financial Economics, 2014, 111 (1), 1 ­ 25.

G^
 arleanu, Nicolae and Lasse Heje Pedersen, "Dynamic Trading with Predictable
    Returns and Transaction Costs," The Journal of Finance, 2013, 68 (6), 2309­2340.

     and      , "Dynamic Portfolio Choice with Frictions," Journal of Economic Theory,
    2016, 165, 487­516.


                                             42
Gibbons, Michael R, Stephen A Ross, and Jay Shanken, "A test of the efficiency of
   a given portfolio," Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, 1989, pp. 1121­
   1152.

Gu, Shihao, Bryan Kelly, and Dacheng Xiu, "Empirical asset pricing via machine
   learning," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2018.

Gupta, Tarun and Bryan Kelly, "Factor momentum everywhere," The Journal of
   Portfolio Management, 2019, 45 (3), 13­36.

Hansen, Lars Peter and Ravi Jagannathan, "Implications of security market data for
   models of dynamic economies," Journal of political economy, 1991, 99 (2), 225­262.

Horn, Toger A. and Charles R. Johnson, Topics in Matrix Analysis, Cambridge, 1st
   Edition, 1991.

Jegadeesh, Narasimhan and Sheridan Titman, "Returns to buying winners and selling
   losers: Implications for stock market efficiency," The Journal of finance, 1993, 48 (1),
   65­91.

Kelly, Bryan, Seth Pruitt, and Yinan Su, "Characteristics are Covariances: A Unified
   Model of Risk and Return," Journal of Financial Economics, 2020.

   ,       , and    , "Instrumented Principal Component Analysis," Working paper, 2020.

Marshall, Albert W. and Ingram Olkin, Inequalities: Theory of Majorization and
   Applications, Academic, 1979.

Moskowitz, Tobias J, Yao Hua Ooi, and Lasse Heje Pedersen, "Time series
   momentum," Journal of financial economics, 2012, 104 (2), 228­250.

Pedersen, Lasse Heje, Abhilash Babu, and Ari Levine, "Enhanced Portfolio Opti-
   mization," Working paper, AQR and Copenhagen Business School, 2020.

Tao, Terrence, Topics in Random Matrix Theory, Springer, 2012.

Velu, Raja and Gregory C. Reinsel, Multivariate Reduced-Rank Regression. Theory and
   Applications, Springer, 1998.

                                           43
Welch, Ivo and Amit Goyal, "A comprehensive look at the empirical performance of
   equity premium prediction," The Review of Financial Studies, 2008, 21 (4), 1455­1508.




                                          44
A     On Mean-Variance Optimization of Linear Strategies

A.1    Robust Mean-Variance Framework of Linear Strategies

Consider the following robust mean-variance objective function:


      max E (St LRt+1 ) subject to max Vart (S LRt+1 )  1                                   (49)
       L                            S : S 1



This objective is a robust in the sense that we require that the variance is bounded regardless
of the signal S . The variance term can be written as


                                                                1/2      2      1/2    2
       max Vart (S LRt+1 ) = max S LR,t L S = max              R,t L S       = R,t L        (50)
      S : S 1                  S : S 1               S : S 1



So, if the assets are normalized and uncorrelated such that R,t = Id, then the robust
variance constraint is the same as our matrix constraint L  1.
    We also get a similar solution when R,t =  2 Id for some   R, since, in this case, the
portfolio constraint simply becomes L   1. Hence, we just scale the position accordingly
(i.e., use L = L / , where L is the standard solution with  = 1). We note that, when
R,t =  2 Id, an alternative constraint is to require that the risk of the linear strategy cannot
be greater than the risk of the simple factor as we do in (10), which is, again, equivalent to
 L  1.
    We can also easily solve a version of the robust mean-variance problem for general R,t .
                                                                                1/2
Solving (10) directly is not convenient since it would lead us to impose R,t L          1, which
is not consistent with choosing a constant position matrix L. (Recall that the idea of linear
strategies is to have a constant L, but rich portfolio dynamics, St L, driven by the signals.)
Instead, we consider the transformed "synthetic assets" with returns


      ~ t+1 = -1/2 Rt+1 ,
      R                                                                                     (51)
              R,t



                                              45
signals given by


       ~t = -1/2 St ,
       S                                                                                  (52)
            R,t



and the corresponding prediction matrix is ~ = E (R     ~ ) = E (-1/2 -1/2 ). For example,
                                                  ~ t+1 S
                                                         t       R,t  R,t

if the original assets are uncorrelated (i.e., a diagonal R,t ), then creating these synthetic
assets simply means scaling the assets to have the same constant volatility (as we do in the
empirical analysis of futures).
   Then we consider the robust mean-variance problem for the synthetic assets:


             ~t L
       max E S  ~R~ t+1                         ~t L
                           subject to max Vart (S  ~R~ t+1 ) = L
                                                               ~  1.                      (53)
        ~
        L                                   ~t
                                            S



So we see that this is our standard problem, expressed in terms of the synthetic assets. In
other words, all our results apply for the robust mean-variance problem of the synthetic
                                                                      ~ = (
assets. For example, the optimal strategy for the synthetic assets is L      ~ -1/2 
                                                                           ~ )      ~ , using

Proposition 3. Of course, this solution can be translated back to the original assets by noting
that


            -1/2 ~ -1/2
       Lt = R,t L R,t ,                                                                   (54)


                                    ~L
which holds since we must have that S ~~           -1/2 ~
                                                       LR -1/2 Rt+1 = St Lt Rt+1 .
                                     t Rt+1 = St R



A.2    Risk Aversion instead of Risk Constraint

We can also consider a robust mean-variance problem in which the investor has risk aversion
 rather than a risk constraint:

                             
       max E (St LRt+1 ) -         max Vart (S LRt+1 )   .                                (55)
        L                    2    S : S 1




                                                 46
We can rewrite the objective using (50) as

                                1/2     2
      max E (St LRt+1 ) -        L                                                                         (56)
       L                       2 R,t

Let us first solve this portfolio problem when R,t = Id. To find the solution, we start by
finding the solution for each level of volatility:


      L(c) = arg max E (St LRt+1 ) = c( )-1/2  .                                                           (57)
                    L: L =c



where the last equality uses Proposition 3. Now we can solve the objective function (60) by
maximizing over all possible volatilities, c:

                                                           N                        N     ¯ i )2
                                                                ¯ i -  c2       (         
      max    E (St L(c)Rt+1 ) - c2         = max c                          =       i=1
                                                                                                   ,       (58)
        c                      2              c
                                                          i=1
                                                                      2             2

                                             N     ¯i
                                                   
where the optimum is achieved by c =         i=1
                                              
                                                        , implying that the optimal strategy is

              N     ¯i
                    
      L=      i=1
                         ( )-1/2  .                                                                        (59)
               

We see that the optimal strategy is the same as in Proposition 3, except for a scaling factor.
The scaling factor naturally decreases in  , reflecting that a more risk averse investor takes
a smaller position. Similarly, the scaling factor increases in the sum of the singular values,
since higher singular values imply stronger predictability, leading to a larger position.
   Finally, consider the problem with a general variance-covariance matrix R,t . Rather
than solving the objective function (60) (which could lead to a time-varying L), we consider
the similar objective function for the synthetic assets:


             ~L ~~                           ~L~R
                                                ~ t+1 )                    ~L~~         ~              2
      max E (S t Rt+1 ) -          max Vart (S                    = max E (St Rt+1 ) -   L                 (60)
       ~
       L                  2       S  ~ 1
                                  ~: S                               ~
                                                                     L                 2


                                                   47
Since the synthetic assets have a variance-covariance matrix equal to the identity, their
optimal solution is

              N ¯ i ()
                     ~
      ~=
      L       i=1
                       (  ~ -1/2 
                        ~ )      ~ ,                                                       (61)
                

which can be translated back to the original assets using (54).


A.3   Relation to the Standard Mean-Variance Framework

We next consider a standard mean-variance objective function, that is, we don't use the
worst-case variance, but instead assume that conditional return variance is constant over
time, R,t = R . In this case, we naturally recover the standard Markowitz solution. To see
this, we use the notation S = E (St St ) as before and calculate:

                                                                 
      max E Et (St LRt+1 ) - Vart (St LRt+1 ) = max E St LRt+1 - St LR L St
       L                    2                    L               2
                                                              
                                              = max tr(L) - tr(LR LS )                     (62)
                                                 L            2
                                                       ~ )    
                                                         ~ - tr(L  ~L
                                                                    ~)
                                              = max tr(L
                                                 ~
                                                 L            2
                                                         ~ - L
                                                       ~ )
                                              = max tr(L        ~ 22 ,
                                                 ~
                                                 L            2

                                    ~ = 1/2 LR 1/2 and 
where we use the change of variable L                  ~ = R -1/2 -1/2 . So we see
                                        S                         S

that this problem has the same form as our normal objective function, except that we have
another matrix norm, namely the Frobenius 2-norm, ·      2.   Since we solve the problem for all
p-norms in Proposition 10 (and in the proof of Propostion 3), we know that solution, which
                ~ = c
is very simple: L    ~ , where c is a constant that depends on the risk aversion  . So the

solution to the mean-variance problem using the original variables is


            -1/2 ~             -1/2 ~
      L = S         LR -1/2 = cS    R -1/2 = c- 1
                                              S R
                                                  -1
                                                                                           (63)



                                             48
In other words, the optimal portfolio is


      wt = L St = cR -1 - 1       -1
                        S St = c R E (Rt+1 |St )                                           (64)


which is the standard Markowitz tangency portfolio (scaled by c depending on risk aversion).
The last equality assumes that the conditional expected return can be computed using the
multivariate regression of Rt+1 on St , that is, Rt+1 = ASt + t+1 , and uses that the regression
coefficient is A = - 1
                   S .

    So while our framework can nest the standard Markowitz solution, we seek to add
robustness in several ways. First, we introduce the worst-case variance (captured by the
operator matrix norm). Second, we avoid having to invert two matrices. Indeed, the
Markowitz would first run a regression, requiring the matrix inversion - 1
                                                                       S and then perform

a portfolio optimization, requiring the matrix inversion, R -1 , which is known to be unstable
in practice. Instead, we formulate a simpler objective function, leading to a solution that is
simply a sum of singular vectors.


B    Cross-Sectionally Demeaning the Signals

We start with a signal S , which is not cross-sectionally demeaned, and use the notation ""
(tilde) to indicate demeaning:

                          N
      ~j,t = Sj,t - 1
      S                         Sk,t
                    N     k=1


Similarly, the prediction matrix based on demeaned signals is


      ~ = (Ri,t+1 S
                  ~j,t )N .
                        i,j =1



and ~ s and ~ a are the eigenvalues of ~ s and ~ a , respectively.
      k       k



                                               49
Proposition 11 The demeaned eigenvalues ~ s are interlacing with the non-demeaned ones
                                          k

s
k in the sense that



      s    ~s s
      k+1  k  k-1                                                                           (65)


for all k = 2, . . . , K - 1, s  ~s      ~s s
                              2  1 , and N  N -1 and similarly for the antisymmetric

eigenvalues. Hence, if s has N p positive eigenvalues, then ~ s has between N p - 1 and N p +1

positive eigenvalues. Furthermore, the total performance of the cross-sectional factor

             N                          N
      E            ~i,t Ri,t+1
                   S               =           ~s
                                                i
             i=1                       i=1


satisfies

       N                    N                          N -1
             s
             i      E            ~i,t Ri,t+1
                                 S                            s
                                                              i .                           (66)
       i=2                 i=1                         i=1


In particular, if all eigenvalues s
                                  i are positive, then cross-sectional factor performs worse

than the time series factor.


Proof. We use Weyl inequalities (Horn and Johnson (1991)): for any two symmetric or
Hermitian matrices A, B,


      j (A) + k (B )  i (A + B )  r (A) + s (B )                                            (67)


whenever j + k - N  i  r + s - 1.
   Then, we note that, by direct calculation,


      ~ s = s + X ,
      


                                                                    1               N
where X = 0.5( 1 + 1 ) , and where the vector  = (i ) = -(E (Ri,t+1 N               k=1   Sk,t )).

                                                              50
The matrix X has rank two and at most two non-zero eigenvalues that always have opposite
signs: 1 (X )  0  N (X ). Thus, by the Weyl inequalities,


      i+1 (s )  N (X ) + i+1 (s )  i (~ s )  i-1 (s ) + 2 (X )  i-1 (s ) .


The proof for the antisymmetric part is analogous.
                                                                          1
   To prove the last inequality, define the orthogonal projection P = Id- N             ~t =
                                                                            1N ×N Then, S
P St and hence, by direct calculation, ~ = P . Furthermore, since signals are demeaned,

        N                         N
              ~i,t Ri,t+1 =
              S                         ~i,t R
                                        S    ~ i,t+1
        i=1                       i=1


where


      ~ t+1 = P Rt+1
      R


and hence

               N                                 N
      E             ~i,t Ri,t+1
                    S                 = E              S    ~ i,t+1
                                                       ~i,t R                       ~ ))
                                                                              ~ t+1 S
                                                                      = tr(E (R       t
              i=1                               i=1                                           (68)
        = tr(P P ) = tr(P s P ) .


The eigenvalues of P s P coincide with the N - 1 eigenvalues {^ s }N -1 of P s P           P RN   re-
                                                                k k=1

stricted onto the subspace P RN , plus a zero eigenvalue. By the interlacing inequalities Horn
and Johnson (1991), we have s    ^s s
                            k+1  k  k , and therefore


                           N -1
                s
      tr(P  P ) =                 ^s
                                   k
                            k=1


satisfies the required inequalities.



                                                                 51
B.1     Cross-Sectionally Demeaning Portfolio Signals

Given any orthonormal tuple of portfolios {k }K
                                              k=1 , we define the corresponding demeaned

signals as

                                     K
      ~tk = Stk - 1
      S                                    Sti .
                  K                  i=1


Interestingly, we "lose" one eigenvalue when using demeaned factors rather than non-demeaned
ones as seen in the following proposition where s         s
                                                1  · · ·  N are still the eigenvalues of 
                                                                                          s


(i.e., based on the original, non-demeaned signals).

Proposition 12 The expected excess return of demeaned portfolios based on any orthonor-
mal tuple of portfolios {k }K
                            k=1 satisfies


      K -1                 K                           N
              s
              k    E(            ~tk Rt
                                 S    k
                                        +1 )                    s
                                                                k
        i=1                k=1                      i=N -K +2


and the bounds are exact.


Proof of Proposition 12. Let

                                 K
                    1
      ~k      = k -                   i .
                    K          i=1


Then,


      ~tk = St
      S       ~k




and, since        k   St~k
                           = 0, we have


              St~ k k
                   Rt+1 =             St~k ~k
                                          Rt +1 .
        k                        k


                                                            52
Define the matrix


          1 , · · · , 
     X = (~           ~K ),


with the columns given by ~i . Then,


     E(       St~k ~k
                  Rt             s         s
                     +1 ) = tr(X  X ) = tr( XX )
          k


Since, by assumption, k are orthonormal, we have

                              K                K
                  1                        1
     ~k ~l = (k -                 i ) (l -           i ) = k,l - 1/K
                  K       i=1
                                           K   i=1


and hence the matrix P = X X  RK ×K has rank K - 1 and eigenvalues 1 (of multiplicity
K - 1) and 0 and is therefore an orthogonal projection. Thus, we can write X = U P where
U  RN ×K is an orthogonal matrix satisfying U U = IdK . Thus,


     tr(X s X ) = tr(P U s U P ) .


                                         ~ = V P V is the projection onto the span of the
Let V be the orthogonal matrix such that P
first K - 1 standard basis vectors of RN . Then,


                                                                           ~U
     tr(P U s U P ) = tr(P U s U P V V ) = tr(V P V V U s U V V P V ) = tr(P ~ s U
                                                                                 ~P~)


      ~ = U V. Then, U
where U              ~ is an arbitrary orthogonal matrix with columns u1 , · · · , uk , and

                         K -1
        ~U
     tr(P ~ s U
              ~P~) =              uk s uk
                          i=1


and the claim follows from the Ky Fan inequality (Fan (1950)).


                                                 53
C     Proofs

Proof of Proposition 1. Using the identity tr(AB ) = tr(AB ) for any two square matrices
A, B, we get


      tr(E (St LRt+1 )) = tr(E (LRt+1 St )) = tr(L E (Rt+1 St )) = tr(L) = tr(L) .




Proof of Proposition 2. The proof follows directly from Proposition 1 and the fact that
tr(X X )  0 for any matrix X.



Proof of Proposition 3. We provide a proof in the case of a general Schatten p-norm
considered in Proposition 10, where p = [1, ] and q is defined by 1/p + 1/q = 1. First, the
trace of any square matrix A = U DV is less than the sum of its singular values (dk ):


      | tr(A)| = | tr(U DV )| = | tr(V U D)| = |             dk (V U )k,k |        dk = A   1   .   (69)
                                                         k                     k


since |(V U )k,k | = |Vcolumn k Ucolumn k |  Vcolumn k        Ucolumn k = 1. Combining this inequal-
ity with H¨
          older's inequality for Schatten norms (see, e.g., Bhatia (1997), Corollary IV.2.6;
or Tao (2012), p. 55, Exercise 1.3.9), we get:


      | tr(L)|  L         1         q   L   p   ,                                                   (70)


Finally, equality is achieved if L is proportional to ( )q/2-1  . Thus,


      arg max tr(L) = ( )q/2-1  / ( )q/2-1                        p   .                             (71)
           L   p 1




                                                    54
Proof of Proposition 4. Follows from the calculations in the main text.


Proof of Lemma 1. Suppose that there exists a tradable factor


     Ft+1 = xt Rt+1


such that

               Covt (Ri,t+1 , Ft+1 )
     Si,t =                          .
                  Vart (Ft+1 )

We have


     Covt (Ri,t+1 , Ft+1 ) = Covt (Ri,t+1 , xt Rt+1 ) = (R
                                                         t xt ) i



and, hence,


     St = R
          t xt /y ,



where we have defined


     y = Vart (Ft+1 ) .


Furthermore,


     Vart (Ft+1 ) = xt R
                       t xt




                                                55
Thus, we get


                 -1
      xt = y (R
              t ) St ,



and we get a fixed point equation for y :


                                         R -1              R -1
      y = Vart (Ft+1 ) = xt R       2
                            t xt = y St (t ) St  y = 1/St (t ) St .



Reverting the arguments, we see that the converse is also true: the just computed portfolio
                          Covt (Ri,t+1 ,Ft+1 )
xt does satisfy Si,t =       Vart (Ft+1 )
                                                 .


Proof of Proposition 5. By Lemma 2, we have


      tr(L) = tr((Ls + La )(s + a ))
                                                                                                (72)
      = tr(Ls s ) + tr(Ls a ) + tr(La s ) + tr(La a ) = tr(Ls s ) + tr(La a ) .

Finally,


             wt
      Covt (Rt +1 , Ft+1 ) = Covt (wt Rt+1 , Ft+1 ) = wt Covt (Rt+1 , Ft+1 )                    (73)

                         = Vart (Ft+1 ) wt St = Vart (Ft+1 ) St LSt = Vart (Ft+1 ) St Ls St ,


where the third identity uses the definition of F from Lemma 1 and the fact that Vart (Ft+1 ) =
1/(St (R,t )-1 St ), and the last identity follows because, by Lemma 2,


      St LSt = St Ls St + St La St = St Ls St .                                                 (74)




                                                     56
Proof of Lemma 2. Since the trace of a matrix equals the trace of its transpose, we have


     tr(AB ) = tr((AB ) ) = tr(B A ) = - tr(BA) = - tr(AB )


which shows that tr(AB ) = tr(BA) = 0. Similarly, x Ax = (x Ax) = x A x = -x Ax,
showing that x Ax = 0.


Proof of Proposition 6. To see the first result, note that the return equation (23) com-
bined with the eigendecomposition (25) yield

                                                             K
           ws wk  s
                               s        s    s         s
     E    St k Rt+1      =   (wk )          wk   =   (wk )          s  s   s    s   s
                                                                    j wj (wj ) wk = k .            (75)
                                                             j =1



   The last claim follows directly from (71) for s because, for L = L , by Proposition 5 we
have that


          max          tr(L) =              max          tr(Ls )
      L   p 1,   L=L                 L      p 1,   L=L



is attained by the symmetric matrix c((s ) s )q/2-1 (s ) = (|s |)q-2 s . For q = 1, we get
|s |-1 s = sign(s ). Here, we have used the standard functional calculus for symmetric
matrices (Horn and Johnson (1991)): for any function f (x) (such as |x| or sign(x)) we define
f (L) = W diag(f ((L)))W where L = W diag((L))W is the eigen-decomposition of a
symmetric matrix L.

                                          s         s
Proof of Proposition 7. Next, since W = (w1 , ..., wN ) forms an orthonormal basis of RN ,
we have W W = Id so

                                                                                  N
                                                                                        ws   ws
     Ft+1 = St Rt+1 = St W W Rt+1 = (W St ) · (W Rt+1 ) =                              St k Rt+1
                                                                                              k
                                                                                                   (76)
                                                                                 k=1




                                                                 57
Hence, the result follows from the fact that including negative eigenvalues lowers the expected
return relative to the other options considered.


Proof of Lemma 3. Equip CN with the standard inner product


      ·y =
     x^              xi y
                        ¯i                                                                (77)
                 i


                                                                       ¯ , where B
and recall that the Hermitian adjoint of a matrix B is defined as B  = B         ¯ is the

complex adjoint of B. Furthermore, for any matrix B , we have


      ·(By ) = (B  x)^
     x^              ·y .                                                                 (78)


Let now A be a real anti-symmetric matrix. Consider the matrix iA. The first observation
is that iA is a Hermitian matrix. Indeed, iA = -iA = iA. Thus, iA has real eigenvalues
and a basis of complex eigenvectors {wk }N
                                         k=1 . Let   R be an eigenvalue of iA :



     iAw = w                                                                              (79)


Then, taking a complex conjugate of this identity, we get


     -iAw
        ¯ = w
            ¯                                                                             (80)


          ¯ is an eigenvector of iA with the eigenvalue -. Hence, all non-zero eigenvalues
and hence w
come in pairs.
   Furthermore, det(A) = det(A ) = det(-A) = (-1)N det(A) so, if N is odd, A is
degenerate and has a zero eigenvalue, whereas all non-zero eigenvalues come in pairs. Let us
take all nonnegative eigenvalues 1  · · ·  K of iA and let wk be the respective complex
eigenvectors. By the above, -k is also an eigenvalue, and the respective eigenvectors are


                                              58
w
¯k . By the spectral decomposition theorem, we have

               K
     iA =                 ¯ k - k w
                    (k wk w       ¯ k wk )                                                   (81)
              k=1


                                                                ¯k , where w
where we have used that the orthogonal projection onto wk is wk w          ¯k is the complex
conjugate vector. Now, we have


          ¯ k - k w
     k wk w       ¯k wk = 0.5k ( wk,1 + iwk,2 )(wk,1 - iwk,2 )

                                - 0.5k (wk,1 - iwk,2 )(wk,1 + iwk,2 )                        (82)

                              = ik (wk,2 wk,1 - wk,1 wk,2 )


and the claim follows.
   For any Hermitian matrix (and, hence, also for iA), eigenvectors for different eigenvalues
are always orthogonal. Thus, wk,1 ± iwk,2 must be orthogonal to wj,1 ± iwj,2 and hence
wk,1 , wk,2 are orthogonal to wj,1 , wj,2 . Furthermore, wk,1 ± iwk,2 correspond to different
eigenvalues ±k and hence they also must be orthogonal:


                                                          2            2
     0 = (wk,1 + iwk,2 ) · (wk,1 + iwk,2 ) =       wk,1       - wk,2       + 2iwk,1 · wk,2   (83)


and hence wk,1 = wk,2 and wk,1 · wk,2 = 0. Thus, the two vectors are wk,1 , wk,2 are also
orthogonal.
   Note that


     iA(wk,1 + iwk,2 ) = k (wk,1 + iwk,2 )                                                   (84)


is equivalent to Awk,1 = k wk,2 and Awk,2 = -k wk,1 implying that, in the basis {(wk,1 , wk,2 )}K
                                                                                                k=1




                                                  59
the matrix A is block-diagonal, composed of diagonal blocks

                        
           0    -1
                                                                                               (85)
           1        0




Proof of Proposition 8. By definition, (a ) (xj + iyj ) = ia                       a
                                                           j (xj + iyj ), that is ( ) xj =

-a       a       a
 j yj , ( ) yj = j xj . The expected return is


               wa
            j,t
       E (Rt+1  ) =E (St (xj yj - yj xj )Rt+1 ) = tr((xj yj - yj xj )a ) = - tr((a ) (xj yj - yj xj ))

                    = a                       a
                      j tr(yj yj + xj xj ) = 2j .



The last statement follows from (71) for a because, for L = -L , by Proposition 5 we have
that


               max      tr(L) =         max        tr(La )
       L   p 1, L=-L               L   p 1, L=-L




is attained by the anti-symmetric matrix c((a ) a )q/2-1 (a ) = (|ia |)q-2 (a ) . For q = 1,
we get |ia |-1 (a )        = sign(ia ). Here, we have used the standard functional calculus
for Hermitian matrices (Horn and Johnson (1991)): for any function f (x) (such as |x| or
sign(x)) we define f (L) = W diag(f ((L)))W where L = W diag((L))W is the eigen-
decomposition of a Hermitian matrix L.


Proof of Proposition 9. Follows from calculations in the body of the paper.


Proof of Proposition 10. Let X = L. Then, by a result of Fan and Hoffman (1955), we
have i (X s )  ¯ i (X ). Furthermore, since rank(L)  K, we also have rank(X )  K and

rank(X X ) = rank(X )  K, and hence there are at most K non-zero singular values of X.


                                                    60
Thus,

                                                              N                               K
        tr(L) = tr(X ) = tr(X ) =                   s
                                                                      i (X )    s                   ¯ i (X ) .
                                                                                                    
                                                              i=1                          i=1


Second, by known result about singular values of products of matrices (see, for example,
Marshall and Olkin (1979), p. 248), we have

        K                        K
               ¯ i (L) 
                                       ¯ i (L) 
                                               ¯ i ()
        i=1                     i=1


Third, by the H¨
               older inequality

        K                                 K                   1/p           K                     1/q                       K               1/q
               ¯ i (L) 
                       ¯ i ()                   ¯ i (L)p                            ¯ i ()q
                                                                                                         =       L   p            ¯ i ()q         .
        i=1                               i=1                            i=1                                                i=1


Thus,

                                                        K                       1/q

                 max            tr(L)                         ¯ i ()
                                                                        q
                                                                                      .
        L     p 1,   rank(L)K
                                                        i=1



Thus, it remains to verify that the equality holds with L = c                                                    K       ¯ q-1 vk (uk ) , where c =
                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                 k=1       k
                 -1/p
    K     ¯q
                          . This follows directly from the identity tr(Lvk (uk ) ), established in (15)
    k=1    k

   Items 2 and 3 of the Proposition are in fact special cases of item 1. Indeed, for item 2,
we have by Proposition 5 that


                      max               tr(L) =                             max                         tr(Ls )
          L   p 1, L=L rank(L)K                               L   p 1, L=L , rank(L)K

                                                                  K                       1/q                                                         (86)
                          max          tr(L ) = s                       ¯ i ( )
                                                                                 s q
                                                                                                .
                L    p 1,   rank(L)K
                                                                  i=1


Furthermore, ¯ i (s ) is the i-th largest absolute eigenvalue of s and the equality is achieved
                             q -1
with L = c            K   |s
                           k|     sign(s   s   s
                                       k )wk (wk )



                                                                         61
   Similarly, for the anti-symmetric part, we have


                   max              tr(L) =                 max              tr(La )
      L   p 1,   L=-L rank(L)K                  L   p 1,   L=-L , rank(L)K

                                                K                 1/q                          (87)
                    max                a
                                   tr(L ) =           ¯ i (a )q
                                                                        .
            L    p 1,   rank(L)K
                                                i=1


Top 2K singular value of a are just a
                                    i counted twice, and the equality is achieved with
          K    a q -1   a ¯a
L=c       k=1 (k )    (wk (w k )      ¯a k (wk
                                     -w      a             a
                                               ) ), where wk = xk + iyk are the complex eigenvectors
of a and come in complex conjugate pairs according to Lemma 3.




                                                       62
                              Table 1: Analogy between PCA and PPA

This table shows five analogies between principal component analysis (PCA) and principal portfolio analysis
(PPA) for the symmetric part of the prediction matrix. For PCA (PPA): (i) the variance (expected excess
returns) of each component equals its eigenvalue; (ii) different components k = l are orthogonal; (iii) the
sum variances (returns) of individual securities equals that of the components, and also equals the trace of
the variance-covariance matrix (prediction matrix); (iv) the top K components maximize variance (return)
for orthonormal portfolios; and (v) component k + 1 maximizes variance (return) among all portfolios that
are orthogonal to the first k ones.

               Principal Component Analysis             Principal Portfolio Analysis (Symmetric Part)
                          k                                                ws   ws
 (i)              Var(Rt  +1 ) = k (R )                               E (St k Rt+1
                                                                                k
                                                                                   ) = k (s )
                          k       l                                   ws   ws           ws    ws
 (ii)             Cov(Rt   +1 , Rt+1 ) = 0                       E (St k Rt+1
                                                                           l
                                                                              ) + E (St l Rt+1
                                                                                            k
                                                                                               )=0
                                       k                                                 ws    ws
 (iii)     k Var(Rk,t+1 ) =     k Var(Rt+1 )= tr(R )      k E (Sk,t Rk,t+1 ) = k E (St k Rt+1
                                                                                            k
                                                                                              ) = tr(s )
                                                 xk        s                                    xk xk
 (iv)    (k ) = arg maxorthon.{xk }K
                                   k=1   k Var(Rt+1 )    (wk ) = arg maxorthon.{xk }K
                                                                                    k=1  k E (St Rt+1 )
                                           x                   s                                  x x
 (v)       k+1 = arg maxx{1 ,··· ,k } Var(Rt +1 )             wk +1 = arg maxx{w1
                                                                                s ,··· ,w s } E (S R
                                                                                         k        t t+1 )
                           Table 2: Principal Portfolio Factor Exposures

Statistics for regressions of out-of-sample principal portfolio returns on own-predictor strategy ("Factor") and
the five Fama-French factors. Portfolios are constructed from the Fama-French 25 size and value portfolios
based on a 20-day momentum signal. The table reports regressions for the own-predictor strategy itself, the
equal-weighted average of the top three principal portfolios ("PP 1-3"), the equal-weighted average of the
top three principal exposure portfolios ("PEP 1-3"), the equal-weighted average of the top three principal
alpha portfolios ("PAP 1-3"), and the equal weighted average of the top three PEP's and PAP's combined
("PEP and PAP 1-3"). In each regression, the left-hand-side portfolio is scaled to have the same full-sample
volatility as the excess market return. Results are shown for a 20-day forecast horizons, and each forecast
is made on an out-of-sample basis using a rolling training sample of the 120 most recent non-overlapping
return observations. Sample period is 1963-2019.

   Portfolio               Factor     Mkt-Rf       SMB       HML       RMW        CMA        Alpha      R2
   Factor                               -0.2       0.13      -0.28      -0.26      0.36       9.35      0.08
   t-statistic                          -4.59       1.9      -3.43      -3.03      2.79       4.12

   PP 1-3                   0.82        0.03       0.02      0.15       -0.09     -0.02       4.69      0.67
   t-statistic              32.69       1.09       0.53      3.05       -1.63     -0.29       3.38

   PEP 1-3                  0.94        0.01       -0.02     0.06       -0.13     -0.01       0.89      0.89
   t-statistic              67.00       0.88       -0.76     1.95       -4.4      -0.16       1.14

   PAP 1-3                  -0.08       0.08       0.19      0.06       0.28       0.06      10.41      0.04
   t-statistic              -1.94       1.71       2.65      0.72        3.1       0.42       4.42

   PEP and PAP 1-3          0.65        0.07       0.13      0.09       0.11       0.04       8.51      0.41
   t-statistic              19.53       1.93       2.31      1.32       1.58       0.35       4.62
                                                                                 Figure 1: Prediction Matrix Eigenvalues

Panels A, B, and C show estimated eigenvalues of the prediction matrix and its symmetric and anti-symmetric
components, respectively, averaged over training samples. Panels D, E, and F show average out-of-sample
returns and ±2 standard error confidence bands for corresponding principal portfolios, principal exposure
portfolios, and principal alpha portfolios, respectively. Estimates are based on predictions of 20-day returns
of the Fama-French 25 size and value portfolios based on a 20-day momentum signal. Each training sample
consists of 120 non-overlapping 20-day return observations. Sample period is 1963-2019.

                                                        Panel A:  singular values                                                                   Panel D: PP average returns
                                       2                                                                                              1.6

                                     1.8
                                                                                                                                      1.4
                                     1.6
                                                                                                                                      1.2
    Eigenvalue Return Estimate (%)




                                     1.4
                                                                                                                                        1
                                     1.2




                                                                                                                    PP Return (%)
                                                                                                                                      0.8
                                       1
                                                                                                                                      0.6
                                     0.8
                                                                                                                                      0.4
                                     0.6

                                     0.4                                                                                              0.2


                                     0.2                                                                                                0

                                       0                                                                                             -0.2
                                            1           5              10              15           20         25                           1         5           10              15           20         25
                                                                       Eigenvalue Number                                                                          Eigenvalue Number

                                                                Panel B: s eigenvalues                                                              Panel E: PEP average returns
                                      1.6                                                                                             1.4

                                      1.4
                                                                                                                                      1.2
                                      1.2
                                                                                                                                        1
    Eigenvalue Return Estimate (%)




                                           1
                                                                                                                                      0.8
                                                                                                                    PEP Return (%)




                                      0.8

                                      0.6                                                                                             0.6

                                      0.4
                                                                                                                                      0.4
                                      0.2
                                                                                                                                      0.2
                                           0
                                                                                                                                        0
                                     -0.2

                                     -0.4                                                                                            -0.2
                                                1       5              10              15           20         25                           1         5           10              15           20         25
                                                                       Eigenvalue Number                                                                          Eigenvalue Number

                                                                Panel C: a eigenvalues                                                              Panel F: PAP average returns
                                     0.9                                                                                              0.6

                                     0.8
                                                                                                                                      0.5
                                     0.7
    Eigenvalue Return Estimate (%)




                                                                                                                                      0.4
                                     0.6
                                                                                                                    PAP Return (%)




                                     0.5                                                                                              0.3


                                     0.4
                                                                                                                                      0.2

                                     0.3
                                                                                                                                      0.1
                                     0.2

                                                                                                                                        0
                                     0.1

                                       0                                                                                             -0.1
                                            1       2       3      4   5     6     7        8   9    10   11   12                           1   2         3   4   5     6     7        8   9    10   11   12
                                                                       Eigenvalue Number                                                                          Eigenvalue Number
                                                                            Figure 2: Portfolio Weights for Leading Principal Portfolios

Weights of the first principal exposure portfolio (Panel A) and first principal alpha portfolio (Panel B) on
the 25 size and value portfolios, averaged over training samples. Portfolios are constructed based on a 20-
day momentum signal and for a 20-day forecast horizon/holding period. Portfolios and estimates are made
on an out-of-sample basis using a rolling training sample of the 120 most recent non-overlapping return
observations. Sample period is 1963-2019.


                 Panel A: Average PEP eigenvector w1                                                                                                                                                                                                        Panel D: Average PAP eigenvector x, y
  0.2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.25


  0.1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.15
    0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.1

 -0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.05


 -0.2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -0.05
 -0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -0.1
 -0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -0.15

 -0.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -0.2
              S1V1
                       S1V2
                                S1V3
                                          S1V4
                                                    S1V5
                                                              S2V1
                                                                     S2V2
                                                                            S2V3
                                                                                       S2V4
                                                                                                 S2V5
                                                                                                           S3V1
                                                                                                                    S3V2
                                                                                                                             S3V3
                                                                                                                                      S3V4
                                                                                                                                               S3V5
                                                                                                                                                        S4V1
                                                                                                                                                                 S4V2
                                                                                                                                                                         S4V3
                                                                                                                                                                                 S4V4
                                                                                                                                                                                         S4V5
                                                                                                                                                                                                 S5V1
                                                                                                                                                                                                         S5V2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                S5V3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       S5V4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              S5V5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         S1V1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                S1V2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       S1V3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               S1V4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       S1V5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                S2V1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         S2V2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   S2V3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             S2V4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         S2V5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  S3V1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           S3V2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   S3V3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           S3V4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  S3V5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         S4V1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                S4V2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        S4V3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                S4V4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         S4V5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  S5V1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            S5V2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       S5V3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 S5V4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          S5V5
   Panel B: PEP portfolio scale S w1 each period                                                                                                                                                                                        Panel E: PAP portfolio scales S x , S y each period
  1.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1.5



    1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1



  0.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.5



    0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0



 -0.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -0.5



   -1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -1



 -1.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -1.5
        197411                 198006                         198602                   199109                        199705                      200212                     200808                      201404                201911            197411                  198006                   198602                          199109                    199705                 200212                200808                     201404                        201911


 Panel C: Average PEP portfolio weights S w1 w1                                                                                                                                                                                        Panel F: Average PAP portfolio weights S (yx - xy )
  0.015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.015

    0.01

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.01
  0.005

          0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.005
 -0.005

  -0.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0
 -0.015

  -0.02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -0.005

 -0.025

  -0.03                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -0.01
                     S1V1
                              S1V2
                                       S1V3
                                                 S1V4
                                                           S1V5
                                                                  S2V1
                                                                         S2V2
                                                                                S2V3
                                                                                          S2V4
                                                                                                    S2V5
                                                                                                             S3V1
                                                                                                                      S3V2
                                                                                                                               S3V3
                                                                                                                                        S3V4
                                                                                                                                                 S3V5
                                                                                                                                                          S4V1
                                                                                                                                                                  S4V2
                                                                                                                                                                          S4V3
                                                                                                                                                                                  S4V4
                                                                                                                                                                                          S4V5
                                                                                                                                                                                                  S5V1
                                                                                                                                                                                                         S5V2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                S5V3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       S5V4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               S5V5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                S1V1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       S1V2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              S1V3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      S1V4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              S1V5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       S2V1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                S2V2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          S2V3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  S2V4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           S2V5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    S3V1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            S3V2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    S3V3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           S3V4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  S3V5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         S4V1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                S4V2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       S4V3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               S4V4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       S4V5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                S5V1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         S5V2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                S5V3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          S5V4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   S5V5
                Figure 3: Principal Portfolio Performance by Forecast Horizon

Out-of-sample performance of principal portfolios in terms of annualized Sharpe ratio (Panel A) and
annualized information ratio versus the own-predictor strategy and the Fama-French 5-factor model (Panel
B) along with ±2 standard error band around each estimate. Portfolios are constructed from the Fama-
French 25 size and value portfolios based on a 20-day momentum signal. The figure reports performance of
the own-predictor strategy ("Factor"), the equal-weighted average of the top three principal portfolios ("PP
1-3"), the equal-weighted average of the top three principal exposure portfolios ("PEP 1-3"), the equal-
weighted average of the top three principal alpha portfolios ("PAP 1-3"), and the equal weighted average of
the top three PEP's and PAP's combined ("PEP and PAP 1-3"). Results are shown for forecast horizons
(and, equivalently, holding periods) of 1, 5, 10, and 20 days. Each forecast is made on an out-of-sample basis
using a rolling training sample of the 120 most recent non-overlapping return observations. Sample period
is 1963-2019.

                                                                       Panel A: Sharpe Ratio
                                                       2.5
                                                                                                          PP 1-3
                                                                                                          PEP 1-3
                                                                                                          PAP 1-3
                                                                                                          PEP and PAP 1-3
                                                         2                                                Factor




                                                       1.5
                Sharpe Ratio




                                                         1




                                                       0.5




                                                         0
                                                                 1         5                         10      20
                                                                          Forecast Horizon (Days)



                                                                     Panel B: Information Ratio
                                                        1.6

                                                        1.4

                                                        1.2
                Info. Ratio vs. Factor and FF5 Model




                                                             1

                                                        0.8

                                                        0.6

                                                        0.4

                                                        0.2

                                                             0

                                                       -0.2
                                                                 1         5                         10       20
                                                                           Forecast Horizon (Days)
             Figure 4: Principal Portfolio Performance in Other Asset Universes

Out-of-sample performance of principal portfolios in terms of annualized Sharpe ratio (Panel A) and
annualized information ratio versus the own-predictor strategy and the Fama-French 5-factor model (Panel
B) along with ±2 standard error band around each estimate. Portfolios are constructed based on a 20-day
momentum signal from either the 25 U.S. size and value portfolios, 25 U.S. size and operating profitability
portfolios, 25 U.S. size and investment portfolios, their international counterparts (developed countries
excluding the U.S.), or 52 futures contracts. The figure reports performance of the own-predictor strategy
("Factor"), the equal-weighted average of the top three principal portfolios ("PP 1-3"), the equal-weighted
average of the top three principal exposure portfolios ("PEP 1-3"), the equal-weighted average of the top three
principal alpha portfolios ("PAP 1-3"), and the equal weighted average of the top three PEP's and PAP's
combined ("PEP and PAP 1-3"). Panel C shows the correlation between out-of-sample average portfolio
returns and eigenvalues of the prediction matrix. Blue bars show the correlation between PP's and singular
values from the total prediction matrix, red bars show the correlation between PEP's and eigenvalues from
the symmetric component, and yellow bars show the correlation between PAP's and eigenvalues from the
anti-symmetric component. Results are shown for a 20-day forecast horizon/holding period. Each forecast
is made on an out-of-sample basis using a rolling training sample of the 120 most recent non-overlapping
return observations. Sample period is 1963-2019 for U.S. equity portfolios, 1990-2019 for international equity
portfolios, and 1985-2019 for futures contracts.

                                                                                          Panel A: Sharpe Ratio
                                                        1.6
                                                                                                                                                                     PP 1-3
                                                        1.4                                                                                                          PEP 1-3
                                                                                                                                                                     PAP 1-3
                                                                                                                                                                     PEP and PAP 1-3
                                                        1.2                                                                                                          Factor

                                                          1

                                                        0.8
                Sharpe Ratio




                                                        0.6

                                                        0.4

                                                        0.2

                                                          0

                                                       -0.2

                                                       -0.4
                                                                                                                                                                              Futures
                                                              25 Size/BM




                                                                           25 Size/OP




                                                                                             25 Size/Inv




                                                                                                           25 Size/BM Intl.




                                                                                                                              25 Size/OP Intl.




                                                                                                                                                 25 Size/Inv Intl.




                                                        1.2
                                                                                        Panel B: Information Ratio

                                                          1
                Info. Ratio vs. Factor and FF5 Model




                                                        0.8


                                                        0.6


                                                        0.4


                                                        0.2


                                                          0


                                                       -0.2


                                                       -0.4
                                                                                                                                                                              Futures
                                                              25 Size/BM




                                                                           25 Size/OP




                                                                                             25 Size/Inv




                                                                                                           ize/BM Intl.




                                                                                                                              ize/OP Intl.




                                                                                                                                                 ize/Inv Intl.
                              Correlation of Return and Eigenvalue




                        0.1
                                 0.2
                                       0.3
                                             0.4
                                                   0.5
                                                         0.6
                                                               0.7
                                                                     0.8
                                                                           0.9




                    0
                                                                                 1

     25 Size/BM




      25 Size/OP




     25 Size/Inv




25 Size/BM Intl.




25 Size/OP Intl.




25 Size/Inv Intl.




          Futures
                                                                           PP
                                                                           PEP
                                                                           PAP
                                                                                     Panel C: Correlation between average portfolio returns and eigenvalues
       Figure 5: Principal Portfolio Performance by Momentum Lookback Window

Out-of-sample performance of principal portfolios in terms of annualized Sharpe ratio (Panel A) and
annualized information ratio versus the own-predictor strategy and the Fama-French 5-factor model (Panel
B) along with ±2 standard error band around each estimate. Portfolios are constructed based on a 20, 40,
60, 120 or 250-day momentum signal from 25 size and value portfolios. The figure reports performance of
the own-predictor strategy ("Factor"), the equal-weighted average of the top three principal portfolios ("PP
1-3"), the equal-weighted average of the top three principal exposure portfolios ("PEP 1-3"), the equal-
weighted average of the top three principal alpha portfolios ("PAP 1-3"), and the equal weighted average of
the top three PEP's and PAP's combined ("PEP and PAP 1-3"). Each forecast is made on an out-of-sample
basis using a rolling training sample of the 120 most recent non-overlapping return observations. Sample
period is 1963-2019.

                                                                          Panel A: Sharpe Ratio
                                                        1.4
                                                                                                            PP 1-3
                                                                                                            PEP 1-3
                                                        1.2                                                 PAP 1-3
                                                                                                            PEP and PAP 1-3
                                                                                                            Factor
                                                          1


                                                        0.8
                Sharpe Ratio




                                                        0.6


                                                        0.4


                                                        0.2


                                                          0


                                                       -0.2
                                                              20   40           60            90      120          250
                                                                             Lookback Window (Days)

                                                                        Panel B: Information Ratio
                                                        1.2


                                                          1
                Info. Ratio vs. Factor and FF5 Model




                                                        0.8


                                                        0.6


                                                        0.4


                                                        0.2


                                                          0


                                                       -0.2


                                                       -0.4
                                                              20   40           60            90      120          250
                                                                             Lookback Window (Days)
                                                         Figure 6: Principal Portfolio Performance in Subsamples

Out-of-sample performance of principal portfolios by decade in terms of annualized Sharpe ratio (Panel A)
and annualized information ratio versus the own-predictor strategy and the Fama-French 5-factor model
(Panel B) along with ±2 standard error band around each estimate. Portfolios are constructed based on
a 20-day momentum signal from 25 size and value portfolios. The figure reports performance of the own-
predictor strategy ("Factor"), the equal-weighted average of the top three principal portfolios ("PP 1-3"),
the equal-weighted average of the top three principal exposure portfolios ("PEP 1-3"), the equal-weighted
average of the top three principal alpha portfolios ("PAP 1-3"), and the equal weighted average of the
top three PEP's and PAP's combined ("PEP and PAP 1-3"). Results are shown for a 20-day forecast
horizon/holding period. Each forecast is made on an out-of-sample basis using a rolling training sample of
the 120 most recent non-overlapping return observations.

                                                                               Panel A: Sharpe Ratio
                                                        2.5
                                                                                                                   PP 1-3
                                                                                                                   PEP 1-3
                                                          2                                                        PAP 1-3
                                                                                                                   PEP and PAP 1-3
                                                                                                                   Factor

                                                        1.5
                Sharpe Ratio




                                                          1


                                                        0.5


                                                          0


                                                       -0.5


                                                         -1
                                                              1970-1979   1980-1989     1990-1999      2000-2009    2010-2019
                                                                                       Subsample

                                                                            Panel B: Information Ratio
                                                          2


                                                        1.5
                Info. Ratio vs. Factor and FF5 Model




                                                          1


                                                        0.5


                                                          0


                                                       -0.5


                                                         -1


                                                       -1.5
                                                              1970-1979   1980-1989     1990-1999      2000-2009    2010-2019
                                                                                       Subsample
