                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          GAINS FROM WAGE FLEXIBILITY AND THE ZERO LOWER BOUND

                                          Roberto M. Billi
                                            Jordi Galí

                                        Working Paper 27386
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w27386


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2020




We thank Pierrick Clerc, Yoon J. Jo, Michael Kumhof, Cristina Manea, Ales Marsal, Francesco
Zanetti, and two anonymous referees for useful comments. Galí acknowledges financial support
from the Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness, through an I+D Grant
(ECO2017-87827) and the Severo Ochoa Programme for Centres of Excellence in R&D
(SEV-2015-0563). The views expressed herein are solely the responsibility of the authors and
should not be interpreted as reflecting the views of Sveriges Riksbank or the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Roberto M. Billi and Jordi Galí. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Gains from wage Flexibility and the Zero Lower Bound
Roberto M. Billi and Jordi Galí
NBER Working Paper No. 27386
June 2020
JEL No. E24,E32,E52

                                         ABSTRACT

We analyze the welfare impact of greater wage flexibility in the presence of an occasionally
binding zero lower bound (ZLB) constraint on the nominal interest rate. We show that the ZLB
constraint generally amplifies the adverse effects of greater wage flexibility on welfare when the
central bank follows a conventional Taylor rule. When demand shocks are the driving force, the
ZLB implies that an increase in wage flexibility reduces welfare even under the optimal monetary
policy with commitment.


Roberto M. Billi
Sveriges Riksbank
Sweden
roberto.billi@riksbank.se

Jordi Galí
Centre de Recerca en Economia Internacional (CREI)
Ramon Trias Fargas 25
08005 Barcelona
SPAIN
and NBER
jgali@crei.cat
1        Introduction

Most mainstream economists view wage rigidity as an undesirable feature for an economy, one that

is likely to hamper macroeconomic stability and cause a high and volatile unemployment rate. The

perceived costs of wage rigidity rely on a logic based on the familiar labor-market diagram found

in introductory textbooks: a decrease in wages should o¤set, at least partly, the negative e¤ects on

employment (and output) of any adverse aggregate shock that reduces labor demand. If wages are

rigid and that adjustment doesn'
                               t take place (or it is slow) the negative employment and output

e¤ects of adverse shocks are likely to be ampli...ed and unemployment will rise, at least temporarily.1

        In the General Theory, Keynes (1936) already called into question the previous logic, which

he associated with "classical" economics, and deemed it irrelevant to understand the workings of

modern economies. In his view, the wage level does not have a direct role in the determination of

employment. The latter is instead determined by aggregate demand for goods. Accordingly, aggregate

demand management, rather than wage exibility, is key to employment stability.

        More recently, Galí (2013) revisited Keynes'argument through the lens of a standard New Key-

nesian model with price and wage stickiness à la Calvo, and in the absence of a zero lower bound

(ZLB) constraint on the nominal interest rate. Two results are worth stressing from that analysis.

First, the extent to which greater wage exibility contributes to employment and output gap stability

hinges critically on the monetary policy rule in place. More precisely, it is the strength of the central

bank'
    s systematic response to ination that largely determines the response of aggregate demand to

changes in wages.

        Secondly, Galí (2013) also shows, an increase in wage exibility tends to raise the volatility of

price and wage ination, both of which are costly because they generate an ine¢ cient allocation

of resources in the presence of staggered price and wage setting. Thus, if the central bank follows

a policy rule that calls for a relatively weak response to ination, the bene...ts of increased wage

exibility in the form of a more stable output gap and employment will generally be small, and likely

more than o¤set by the welfare losses brought about by the more volatile price and wage ination.

On the other hand, when the Taylor rule calls for a su¢ ciently aggressive response to ination, or

when the central bank follows the optimal policy (with commitment) an increase in wage exibility
    1
     See e.g. Hall (2005) and Shimer (2005, 2012) for a discussion of the role of wage rigidities in accounting for labor-
market    uctuations in the context of the search and matching model. Blanchard and Galí (2007, 2010) emphasize the
policy tradeo¤s generated by the presence of wage rigidities in a New Keynesian model. Zanetti (2007) shows how wage
setting by unions can be a source of such wage rigidities.



                                                            1
tends to improve welfare, at least for reasonable calibrations of the economy'
                                                                             s parameters.

   In the present paper, we extend the analysis in Galí (2013) by taking explicitly into account a

ZLB constraint on the nominal interest rate, and study the role of that constraint in determining

the welfare e¤ects from greater wage exibility. The reason for focusing on the interaction between

wage exibility and the ZLB is that the presence of the latter may limit the ability of a central bank

to respond to downward pressures on wage and price ination in the face of a shock triggering such

pressures. Our analysis seeks to assess the extent to which the presence of the ZLB constraint may

a¤ect the gains (or losses) from an increase in wage exibility, under alternative monetary policy

regimes (Taylor rule vs. optimal policy) and sources of uctuations (demand vs. technology shocks).

   Several ...ndings of interest emerge from our analysis, which we summarize next.

   Firstly, we show that a downward adjustment in labor costs (implemented through a wage subsidy)

in a recessionary environment with a binding ZLB may (unintentionally) deepen the downturn, due

to the implied procyclical response of the real interest rate when the ZLB binds.

   Secondly, we show that the main ...nding in Galí (2013), namely that under a (realistic) Taylor

rule an increase in wage exibility is welfare reducing, is robust to the presence of the ZLB constraint.

Most importantly for our purposes, we show that the ZLB constraint generally ampli...es the adverse

e¤ects of greater wage exibility on welfare.

   Thirdly, when demand shocks are the source of uctuations, we show that an increase in wage

exibility is associated with larger welfare losses even when the central bank follows an optimal

monetary policy. However, this is not true for technology shocks.

   Finally, we show that under a Taylor rule and conditional on either demand or technology shocks,

the introduction of the ZLB constraint (i) ampli...es the increase in welfare losses from a (local)

simultaneous reduction in both price and wage rigidities and (ii) increases the range of those rigidities

for which welfare losses are decreasing in the degree of nominal rigidities, relative to the case without

ZLB constraint.

   Overall, our ...ndings call into question the presumed gains from using labor cost adjustments as

a stabilizing device, especially in the presence of an occasionally binding ZLB constraint.

   Our paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 reviews the related literature. Section 3 contains a

description of our baseline model. Section 4 analyzes the e¤ects of an exogenous adjustment in labor

costs. Section 5 studies the e¤ect of wage exibility on macro stability and welfare. Section 6 looks

at the implications of simultaneous changes in price and wage exibility. Section 7 concludes.


                                                   2
2        Related Literature

The present paper is related to several branches of the literature. At a more general level, our paper is

related to the recent literature that seeks to understand the implications of the ZLB constraint along

di¤erent dimensions, including the design of optimal monetary policy (e.g. Adam and Billi (2006,

2007), Nakov (2008), Jung et al. (2005)), the role of forward guidance (e.g. Eggertsson and Woodford

(2003)), the emergence of multiple steady states (e.g. Benhabib et al. (2001, 2002), Mertens and

Ravn (2014), Benigno and Fornaro (2017)), and the e¤ectiveness of ...scal policy (Eggertsson (2011),

Christiano et al. (2011), among others).2 That theoretical literature has been complemented by

attempts to identify and characterize empirically the impact of a binding ZLB during the recent

historical episode. See, e.g., Swanson and Williams (2014), Aruoba et al. (2018), Liu et al. (2019),

and Debortoli et al. (2020).

        On the other hand, our paper is closely connected to a literature that studies the impact of

(changes in) nominal rigidities on macroeconomic stability, without reference to the ZLB constraint.

In particular, De Long and Summers (1986) have used a model with staggered Taylor contracts to

show that an increase in wage exibility may be destabilizing due to the contractionary impact of

falling prices, working through the expected real rate. More recently, a number of papers have ad-

dressed similar concerns using a New Keynesian model. Bhattarai et al. (2018) study the conditions

under which an increase in price exibility may have destabilizing e¤ects on output and employment,

without considering the case of a binding ZLB constraint. They show that this will be the case if

demand shocks are dominant and interest rates do not respond strongly to ination; by contrast,

when supply shocks prevail, greater price exibility is destabilizing only if interest rates respond

strongly to ination.

        Galí (2013) addresses a similar question with a focus on wage exibility and its impact on welfare.

He shows that an increase in wage exibility may be welfare reducing if the interest rate is not too

responsive to ination. Galí and Monacelli (2016) revisit the impact of wage exibility on macro

stability and welfare in the context of an open economy, focusing on the role of the exchange rate

regime. They show that a strong concern for exchange rate stability or, in the limit, the adoption of

a foreign currency or the membership in a large currency union, make it more likely that welfare is
    2
    Erceg and Lindé (2012) study the di¤erences between the constraints on monetary policy imposed by a binding
ZLB and those resulting from a credible exchange rate peg. The two are related, but not identical. In particular, a
binding ZLB does not, by itself, constitute an anchor for nominal variables, in contrast to an exchange rate peg.




                                                        3
reduced in response to greater wage exibility.3 The present paper extends that line of research by

taking into account the impact of the ZLB constraint.

        Several papers have analyzed the interaction between price exibility and the ZLB. Werning

(2011) uses a continuous-time version of the New Keynesian model and shows, among other ...ndings,

that when monetary policy lacks commitment and the ZLB is binding, the magnitude of the nega-

tive output gap and of deation resulting from an adverse demand shock are exacerbated by price

exibility. Eggertsson and Krugman (2013) argue that an increase in price and/or wage rigidity may

help o¤set the adverse e¤ects of deationary shocks in an environment with a binding ZLB, in which

lower prices tend to reduce aggregate demand by raising real interest rates, as well as the real value

of (nominal) debt, with the consequent drop in spending by debtors. They refer to that stabilizing

property of price rigidities as the "paradox of exibility."4 Roulleau-Pasdeloup and Zhutova (2018)

use an estimated DSGE model representing the U.S. economy during the Great Depression, and

conclude that the Hoover "high wage" policies helped limit the damage from the adverse negative

demand shock and succeeded in delaying the liquidity trap episode. Finally, Coibion et al. (2012)

show that the introduction of downward nominal wage rigidities in a calibrated DSGE model reduces

the incidence of ZLB episodes, implying a lower optimal ination rate. Relative to the previous

works, our paper provides an explicit welfare-theoretic analysis of the e¤ects of wage rigidities in the

presence of an occasionally binding ZLB constraint.

        We next turn to a description of our baseline model.



3        Our Baseline Model

We carry out our analysis using a version of the New Keynesian model with staggered price and wage

setting à la Calvo, originally developed by Erceg et al. (2000), augmented with a ZLB constraint

on the short-term nominal interest rate. In some of the scenarios considered, monetary policy is

described by a (truncated) Taylor rule, while in others the central bank is assumed to follow the

optimal policy under commitment. We rely on a standard calibration of the model as a baseline for

our analysis. Next we introduce briey the key equations describing the model's equilibrium. The

reader can ...nd detailed derivations of those equations as well as a complete analysis of the model in
    3
     Related, Eggertsson et al. (2014) raise a warning on the possible contractionary e¤ects of structural reforms
(modelled as favorable supply shocks) in an economy that is part of a larger currency union, due to the increase in real
interest rates resulting from the combination of de  ationary pressures and an unresponsive nominal rate.
   4
     Eggertsson (2010) provided an early conjecture of that result, focusing exclusively on the expected ination channel.


                                                           4
the absence of the ZLB constraint in Galí (2015).5


3.1        Private Sector

The behavior of the private sector is described by the equilibrium conditions introduced in this

section, which correspond to a closed economy version of the New Keynesian model with staggered

price and wage setting, without capital accumulation or a ...scal sector. All the equations are log-

linearized around a steady state with zero price and wage ination. A wage subsidy is assumed,

...nanced through lump-sum taxes. The size of that wage subsidy in the steady state exactly o¤sets

the distortions resulting from price and wage markups. Derivations can be found in Galí (2015,

chapter 6).

         The supply side of the economy is described by the following three equations representing the
                                                                p             w
dynamics of price and wage ination,                             t   and       t   :


                                                          p                  p
                                                          t   = Et f         t+1 g    + {p y
                                                                                           ~t +            p!
                                                                                                            ~t                                                (1)


                                                          w                  w
                                                          t   = Et f         t+1 g    + {w y
                                                                                           ~t              w!
                                                                                                            ~t                                                (2)

                                                                                      w      p
                                                          et
                                                          !         et
                                                                    !    1   +        t      t         !n
                                                                                                        t                                                     (3)

where y
      ~t          yt     n and !
                        yt     ~t              !t     !n                                                     n       n
                                                       t denote respectively the output and wage gaps, with yt and ! t

representing the (log) natural output and (log) natural wage (i.e. their corresponding equilibrium
                                                                                                                              p                           '
values in the absence of nominal rigidities). In addition, we note that {p                                                1       , {w       w    +   1         ,
           (1   p )(1   p)       1                             (1    w )(1        w)
 p                 p         1       +   p
                                             , and    w             w (1+ w ')
                                                                                          , where      p   2 [0; 1) and       w   2 [0; 1) are the Calvo

indexes of price and wage rigidities, while                              p   > 1 and          w   > 1 denote the elasticities of substitution

among varieties of goods and labor services, respectively. Parameters , ' and                                                            denote the house-

hold'
    s coe¢ cient of relative risk aversion, the curvature of labor disutility and the discount factor,

respectively. Parameter                      denotes the degree of decreasing returns to labor in production. As shown

in Galí (2015), equations (1) and (2) can be derived from the aggregation of price and wage setting

decisions of workers and ...rms, in an environment in which such re-optimization takes place with

probabilities 1              p   and 1           w,   respectively. Much of the focus of our analysis below is on the

consequences of changes in the wage rigidity parameter                                            w.
     5
    For convenience, we use identical notation to Galí (2015). The only di¤erence with that model lies in the introduc-
tion of a wage subsidy. See Galí and Monacelli (2016) for details.


                                                                                  5
       The natural output and wage are given by (ignoring constant terms):


                                                      n
                                                     yt =       ya at    +    y     t



                                                     !n
                                                      t         !a at    +    !     t


where at is an exogenous technology shifter which follows an exogenous AR(1) process with au-

toregressive coe¢ cient        a.   Variable     t   denotes a proportional wage subsidy that subtracts from
                                                                                                    1+'                     1
the labor cost incurred by ...rms.6 It can be shown that                                ya    (1     )+'+   ,   y      (1       )+'+   ,
                +'                       (1  )+'
 !a        (1   )+'+    and    !       (1   )+'+       .

       The demand side of the economy is described by a dynamic IS equation:


                                                                1                   p         n
                                      et = Et fy
                                      y        et+1 g               it       Et f   t+1 g    rt                                    (4)

                                            n is the natural rate of interest. Under our assumptions,
where it is the nominal interest rate, and rt
                        n = + (1
the latter is given by rt                                        n g, where
                                             z )zt +       Et f yt +1                             log   is the discount rate and zt

is a discount factor shifter (which we refer to as "demand" shock) which follows an exogenous AR(1)

process with autoregressive coe¢ cient               z.     Note that in the absence of nominal rigidities, demand

shocks have no e¤ect on output or employment, only on the real interest rate.7


3.2      Monetary Policy

In our analysis we consider two alternative monetary policy regimes. The ...rst regime is described

by a "truncated" Taylor rule given by:


                                                           it = max [0; it ]                                                       (5)
   6
      More speci...cally, we assume that the e¤ective wage per hour of work paid by the ...rm is given by (1     t )Wt , which
we approximate in logs as wt         t with wt    log Wt and t is taken to be "small". Total wage subsidy expenses are
...nanced with a lump-sum tax.
    7
      In the absence of nominal rigidities, the demand shock bares no e¤ect on output or employment. The reason has
to do with the particular way in which it is introduced in the model, namely as a shock to the discount factor, which
changes in the same proportion the marginal disutility of labor and the marginal utility of consumption. As a result,
labor supply doesn'    t change. Labor demand does not change either, so employment and output do not change, they
are fully pinned down by the supply block of the model. Only the real rate adjusts in order to keep consumption
unchanged. With nominal rigidities, there is no longer a simple mapping between the real wage and employment
(because the markup is variable). Instead employment and output are determined by the aggregate demand for goods,
which changes in response to the discount factor shock, as long as monetary policy doesn'      t o¤set it fully. See chapters
2 and 3 in Galí (2015) for details.




                                                                    6
where
                                                                         p
                                    it =   i it 1   + (1    i)    +    p t   +    yy
                                                                                   ~t   :                             (6)

       The previous rule, which incorporates explicitly a ZLB constraint, can be viewed as capturing in

a parsimonious way the behavior of central banks in many advanced economies. Note that it can be

interpreted as a shadow interest rate in that context.8 Hence, equations (1) through (6) describe the

equilibrium under the Taylor rule.

       The second regime we consider corresponds to the optimal policy under commitment and subject

to a ZLB constraint. That policy is a state contingent plan that maximizes the representative

household'
         s welfare, subject to a sequence of private sector constraints given by (1) through (4), and

the ZLB constraint, it         0 , all for t = 0; 1; 2; ::: That optimal policy problem is described formally

in the Appendix and gives rise to a set of di¤erence equations which, together with equations (1)

through (4), describe the equilibrium under the optimal policy with commitment.


3.3      Baseline Calibration

Our baseline calibration is quite conventional and largely follows Galí (2015). We set the discount

factor      to 0:995, implying a (annualized) steady-state real interest rate of 2 percent. We set                  = 1,

' = 5 and       = 0:25. Elasticity of substitution parameters          p   and    w   are set to 9 and 4:5, respectively,

implying a steady state subsidy            = 0:31.9 We set         p   =     w   = 0:75, consistent with an average

duration of price and wage spells of one year. We adopt the interest rate rule coe¢ cients proposed

in Taylor (1993), i.e.     p   = 1:5 and    y   = 0:125. The smoothing coe¢ cient in the Taylor rule is set to

0:8, close to the estimates in Clarida et al. (2000) and others. The autoregressive coe¢ cient of the

driving variables is set to 0:8 to generate su¢ cient persistence, while the standard deviation of their

respective innovation is chosen in order to have a ZLB incidence of 5 percent under the Taylor rule,

and conditional on each of the shocks (demand or technology) being the only source of uctuations

in the economy. Our baseline calibration is summarized in Table 1.

       Next we turn to the analysis of some of the model'
                                                        s predictions regarding the interaction of wage
   8
      Our speci...cation of the rule for the shadow rate it , which makes the latter a function of its own lag (as opposed
to the lag of the actual policy rate it ) implies a kind of "forward guidance" that dampens the extent of the economy'   s
collapse (and its perverse feedback e¤ects) during ZLB episodes. The previous feature is also needed to prevent the
economy from "blowing up" when we reduce nominal rigidities in the scenarios considered. Simulations of the model
with values of i equal or close to zero generally crashed when wage and/or price rigidities were su¢ ciently low. This
is never the case under our baseline setting i = 0:8.
    9
      The optimal steady-state subsidy satis...es (1    ) P P 1 ww 1 = 1. See chapter 6 in Galí (2015) for details.




                                                            7
exibility and the ZLB.10 We start by studying the impact of the latter on the e¤ectiveness of labor


cost reductions.



4         The E¤ects of Labor Cost Reductions Facing the ZLB

The eventual stabilizing role of wage exibility hinges critically on the inuence that adjustments in

wages (or other components of labor costs) may have on output and employment.

         As argued in Galí (2013), in an economy described by the New Keynesian model, the amount

of labor hired is determined, in the short run and for a given technology, not by the prevailing

wage but by the quantity of output that ...rms want to produce which, in turn, is determined by

aggregate demand. Thus, the e¤ect of a change in labor costs on employment is transmitted through

the impact of the former on marginal costs, ination and-- through the monetary policy rule-- on

nominal and real interest rates, which ...nally a¤ect consumption. If the ZLB is binding and, as a

result, the change in ination does not elicit a change in the nominal rate, the previous causal chain

in the transmission of labor cost adjustments to employment breaks down. Furthermore, in the face

of a constant nominal rate, any reduction in expected ination caused by a downward adjustment

in labor costs will lead to a rise in the real interest rate, and thus may end up having a "perverse"

e¤ect on output and employment.

         In order to illustrate the role played by the ZLB in determining the e¤ects of labor cost adjust-

ments, we use the model above to analyze the impact of a large, unanticipated, negative demand

shock, to which the government responds with a wage subsidy increase. The latter is presumably

enacted in order to counteract the adverse e¤ects of the shock on output and employment. The

adverse demand shock is assumed to last for 20 quarters, and its (constant) size is normalized so that

the drop of output on impact is 4 percent when in the presence of a ZLB constraint and the absence

of a change in the wage subsidy.

         Figure 1 displays the responses of output, ination, and the nominal and real interest rates to

the demand shock just described and a simultaneous wage subsidy increase, in the absence of a ZLB
    10
     The model outcomes are obtained with Dynare (https://www.dynare.org). Speci...cally, we feed the equilibrium
conditions of the model into Dynare. Then, in order obtain the dynamic responses in Figures 1 and 2, we use the
perfect foresight, deterministic simulations algorithm implemented in Dynare with the "simul" command. Whereas to
generate the simulated equilibrium paths needed to construct Figures 3 to 10 (as well as Figures A1 to A3 in the online
appendix), we employ the stochastic simulations algorithm (assuming agents believe there will be no more shocks in the
following periods) implemented in Dynare with the "extended_path" command. Replication ...les are available from
the authors upon request.




                                                          8
constraint. We assume that the increase in the wage subsidy lasts for as long as the shock (i.e. 20

quarters) and has an alternative size of 0, 1 or 3 percent, corresponding respectively to the lines

with (black) squares, (blue) circles and (red) diamonds. As Figure 1 makes clear, in the no ZLB

environment, the e¤ects of the wage subsidy accord to conventional wisdom: the larger the subsidy

increase, the more it stabilizes output in the face of the adverse demand shock. The reason is that a

larger subsidy triggers a larger decrease in ination and hence a stronger monetary policy response

in the form of lower nominal and real interest rates, as captured in the bottom panels.

   As shown in Figure 2, however, things are considerably di¤erent in the presence of the ZLB

constraint. Note that the size of the demand shock is large enough to make the ZLB binding for many

periods, independently of the response of the wage subsidy. The latter, however, has a signi...cant

impact on the response of output and ination. Thus, we see that the larger is the increase in the

wage subsidy, the weaker is its stabilizing e¤ect (i.e. the deeper is the short run decline in output in

response to the adverse demand shock).

   In particular, the fourth panel of Figure 2 displays the response of the real interest rate under

the three alternative sizes of the wage subsidy, and points to the mechanism responsible for the

"counterproductive" impact of a larger wage subsidy: the deationary e¤ects of the latter combined

with a binding ZLB lead to a higher real rate, thus amplifying the initial negative e¤ects of the shock

on aggregate demand and output.

   The previous exercise provides an illustration of the potentially perverse e¤ects that large down-

ward adjustments in labor costs may have in combination with a binding ZLB constraint. Needless to

say, actual economies are not always facing a binding ZLB. In the remainder of the paper we keep the

wage subsidy unchanged, and instead we look at the di¤erential response of the economy to adverse

shocks under alternative degrees of wage rigidities. To the extent that ZLB episodes are recurrent,

the associated recessions may be deeper and more persistent if they bring about large downward wage

adjustments, which will generally be the case if wages are more exible. In that case, the presence

of the ZLB may reduce or even reverse the sign of the welfare gains that the conventional wisdom

associates with greater wage exibility. The analysis below seeks to evaluate the plausibility of that

hypothesis.




                                                   9
5         Wage Rigidities, Welfare and the ZLB

A key objective of our analysis is the evaluation of the impact of changes in the degree of wage rigidity

on welfare in the presence of a ZLB constraint. For that purpose, we use as a welfare metric the

second-order approximation to the average welfare losses experienced by the representative household

as a result of uctuations around an e¢ cient, zero ination steady state, expressed as a fraction of

steady state consumption. Such a welfare metric can be written as:11


                                 1         '+                      p           p         w (1       )           w
                         L=            +             var (~
                                                          yt ) +       var (   t)   +                   var (   t )
                                 2         1                       p                            w

         Note that the welfare loss has three distinct components, respectively associated with the volatil-

ities in the output gap, price ination, and wage ination. Parameter                                      w   enters the welfare loss

function through            w,   to which it is inversely related. Thus, an increase in wage exibility (i.e. a

smaller        w)   reduces welfare losses, for any given volatility of wage ination. The reason is that, given

var (       w ),   more exible wages are associated with less wage dispersion, and a smaller ine¢ ciency
            t

resulting from misallocation of labor. In equilibrium, however, the volatility of wage ination, price

ination and the output gap is not invariant to a change in                          w.   In particular, we expect that greater

wage exibility will be associated with higher volatility of wage ination and, ceteris paribus, of

price ination as well. On the other hand, more exible wages should make employment (and, thus,

output) deviate less from their natural counterparts, thereby reducing var (~
                                                                            yt ). As a result, the net

e¤ect on welfare from a reduction in             w   is generally ambiguous ex ante. As emphasized in Galí (2013)

(and Galí and Monacelli (2016) in the context of a small open economy), which welfare component

ends up dominating depends to a large extent on the monetary policy regime in place. The latter

is, in turn, a¤ected by the presence of a ZLB constraint. Next we describe such e¤ects through a

number of simulations.

         Figure 3 displays arti...cial time series for the output gap, price ination, wage ination and the

nominal rate, generated by the equilibrium of our calibrated model, with the ZLB constraint and

demand shocks as the source of uctuations. The two lines correspond to alternative assumptions

on the degree of wage rigidity: our baseline assumption (                      w   = 0:75; in solid blue) and an alternative

with more exible wages (              w   = 0:25; in dotted red). The shaded areas highlight the periods during

which the ZLB is binding. The simulations reported in the ...gure allow us to illustrate visually some
    11
         See chapter 6 in Galí (2015) for a derivation.



                                                               10
of the ...ndings discussed below in more detail. As is clear from the top panel, an increase in wage

exibility has only a small e¤ect on output gap volatility: the two lines almost lie on top of each

other. This contrasts with the behavior of price and wage ination, whose volatility is much larger

when wages are more exible. A closer look at the ...gure suggests that it is precisely during episodes

when the ZLB is binding that the gap in the volatility between the two series is particularly large.

       Figure 4 shows the welfare losses as a function of the index of nominal wage rigidities,                   w,   with

the latter's baseline value (0:75) indicated by a vertical line.12 Each of the four panels corresponds

to a particular combination of monetary policy regime (Taylor rule vs. optimal policy) and source of

uctuations (demand vs. technology shocks), and displays the welfare losses with and without a ZLB

constraint as lines with red diamonds and blue circles, respectively. Not surprisingly, welfare losses

appear to be generally larger with the ZLB constraint, which bring about greater instability. But

this is not the focus of our inquiry, which pertains instead to the e¤ect of changes in                    w   on welfare,

i.e. on the slope of the welfare loss function, rather than on its relative position.

       Our results for the case of no ZLB, represented by the lines with blue circles in Figure 4, replicate

the main qualitative ...ndings in Galí (2013). First, and under the calibrated Taylor rule, an increase

in wage exibility (i.e. a decrease in          w)   leads to higher welfare losses for a large range of initial           w

values (one that includes the baseline setting of 0:75). This is true for both technology and demand

shocks. Under the optimal policy, on the other hand, welfare losses are either zero independently

of wage rigidity (in the case of demand shocks, which are fully o¤set by the central bank), or they

are decreasing as wages become more exible (in the case of technology shocks).13 The previous

simulations thus make clear that the existence of welfare gains from greater wage exibility is not

generally true. On the contrary, the sign and extent of the resulting welfare e¤ects depend critically

on the monetary policy in place (and the nature of the shock in the case of the optimal policy).

       The introduction of a ZLB constraint alters those ...ndings in two ways, as a comparison of the

two lines in each panel makes clear. Firstly, under the Taylor rule, the presence of the ZLB ampli...es

the adverse e¤ects of greater wage exibility on welfare, both for demand and technology shocks,
  12
      We generate simulated equilibrium paths of 10.000 periods for each parameter con...guration considered. This long
simulation is used to compute the variances of price in       ation, wage in   ation and the output gap that are needed to
determine the welfare losses associated with each parameter con...guration. Note that the duration of the ZLB is not
normalized for di¤erent values of w . Rather, the shock volatility is chosen so that under the baseline calibration the
economy is at the ZLB 5% of the time. When we change w the ZLB frequency and duration change endogenously.
   13
      As discussed in Galí (2013), the ...nding that welfare losses are an inverse monotonic function of wage rigidity under
the optimal policy is not completely general and may be overturned for some extreme calibrations (e.g. extreme price
stickiness).




                                                            11
as reected in a steeper welfare loss function for a broad range of                  w   values (including the baseline

one). Secondly, under the optimal policy and demand shocks, an increase in wage exibility raises

welfare losses when the ZLB constraint is present, for a very large range of initial                        w   values. Under

technology shocks, on the other hand, the introduction of the ZLB raises welfare losses, without

a¤ecting signi...cantly the sensitivity of welfare to wage rigidity (though the gains from greater wage

exibility appear to be slightly smaller in the ZLB case).

      Next we show that the ...nding that the presence of a ZLB ampli...es the adverse welfare e¤ects

of greater wage exibility is robust to alternative model calibrations. Figure 5 shows the ratio of

welfare losses with and without the ZLB constraint, as a function of                    w,   and for alternative values

of another parameter (a di¤erent parameter for each graph). For concreteness, the ...gure assumes

demand shocks as the source of uctuations. The top four panels examine the impact of di¤erent

settings for the Taylor rule parameters (          p,   y,    i,    ). Several results are worth pointing out. First,

we see that the loss ratio is larger than 1 in all cases, i.e. the introduction of the ZLB constraint

always reduces welfare for any given calibration. Secondly, we see that in response to greater wage

exibility (i.e. a reduction in          w ),   welfare losses increase in a greater proportion when the ZLB

constraint is present, as reected by the negative slope of the loss ratio curves. That impact of the

ZLB on the welfare e¤ect of greater wage exibility holds for all the rule coe¢ cients considered, but

is particularly strong for large values of          p   and    y,   and small values of      i   and , because in all of

those cases the incidence of a binding ZLB is higher.

      The two bottom panels of Figure 5 examine the robustness of the main ...ndings to alternative

calibrations of the weights in the welfare loss function.14 In particular, the bottom-left panel compares

the ratio of welfare losses under the weights implied by our baseline calibration, with that from a

speci...cation of welfare losses that assigns a zero weight to wage ination uctuations, possibly in

accordance to central bank's conventional focus on output gap and price ination stabilization. The

bottom-right panel instead considers two settings for the weight of output gap volatility di¤erent

from the one implied by our baseline calibration. It is clear from these two panels that our main

...nding regarding the impact of the ZLB on the welfare e¤ects of changes in wage exibility is also

robust to those changes in the weights of the loss function.

      Similar ...ndings to those in Figure 5 obtain when technology shocks are the source of uctuations
 14                                                                                                  '+                    p
      The baseline calibration implies the weights in the welfare loss function are Ly =         +   1
                                                                                                          = 8, L   p   =   p
                                                                                                                               = 426
                 w (1   )
and L    w   =      w
                            = 938.



                                                              12
(see Figure A1 in the online appendix).

       We show next how the presence of the ZLB constraint a¤ects the three components of the welfare

loss function, associated respectively with the volatility of the output gap, price ination, and wage

ination. Figure 6 shows the welfare loss and its components under a Taylor rule with demand shocks

as the source of uctuations, with and without the ZLB constraint. Absent the ZLB, an increase

in wage exibility (starting from its baseline value) stabilizes the output gap (which reduces welfare

losses), but on the other hand increases the volatility in price and wage ination (which increases

welfare losses). The latter e¤ect appears to dominate, except when the initial degree of wage rigidities

is very low. Note in particular that the (local) increase in the losses from higher volatility of wage

ination occurs despite the fact that the cost of any given level of such volatility is smaller when

wages are more exible.15 The presence of the ZLB constraint raises the volatility in the output

gap, price ination, and wage ination for any given level of                  w,   thereby raising the corresponding

welfare loss components. More interestingly, we see that the three components play a role in the

ampli...cation of the adverse welfare e¤ects of greater wage exibility that results from the presence

of the ZLB constraint. Similar ...ndings obtain when technology shocks are the source of uctuations

though with lower magnitudes of ampli...cation (see Figure A2 in the online appendix).

       Figure 7 shows the welfare loss function and its components under the optimal policy with com-

mitment, with and without the ZLB, when demand shocks are the source of uctuations. As discussed

above, absent the ZLB, the optimal policy fully stabilizes the output gap, price ination and wage

ination, so no losses emerge from any of those components, as captured by the at lines at zero.

The presence of the ZLB makes it impossible for monetary policy to fully o¤set large adverse demand

shocks. As a result, the output gap, price and wage ination deviate from their ...rst-best values and

welfare losses arise. An increase in wage exibility, starting from the baseline value, partly o¤sets

the larger costs resulting from the ZLB by reducing the volatility of the output gap (see top-right

panel). But that bene...cial impact of greater wage exibility is more than o¤set by the increase in

the costs resulting from greater volatility in price and wage ination, as shown in the two bottom

panels, accounting for the net increase in welfare losses.

       In the case of an optimal policy under technology shocks our ...ndings are somewhat di¤erent,
  15
    In the ...gure, there is a non-monotonic e¤ect of wage       exibility on the component of welfare associated with
volatility in wage in  ation (bottom-right panel). The reason for this non-monotonicity is that, as explained earlier, if
wages become more       exible, the volatility in wage ination increases; however, the weight attached to such volatility
in the social welfare function decreases. Thus, if wages are very    exible, a further increase in wage exibility leads to
a reduction in the welfare loss associated with wage in   ation volatility.



                                                           13
as shown in Figure 8. In this case, and as discussed above, an increase in wage exibility reduces

welfare losses both with and without the ZLB constraint. The main di¤erence, with respect to

demand shocks, is that with technology shocks an increase in wage exibility reduces the volatility

of price ination. In response to a positive technology shock, prices tend to go down, due to a fall in

marginal costs, and wages tend to increase. Greater wage exibility allows for larger wage raises and

hence a smaller decline in marginal costs and prices, thus accounting for the smaller price ination

volatility associated with lower             w   values. This e¤ect contributes to the positive relation between

wage rigidity and welfare losses. Note also that regarding total welfare losses, the slope of the two

curves is similar with and without the ZLB constraint, suggesting that in this case, and in contrast

with the cases considered previously, the presence of the ZLB constraint doesn'
                                                                              t alter signi...cantly

the welfare impact of a change in wage exibility.



6         Nominal Rigidities, Welfare and the ZLB

Next we study the welfare e¤ect of simultaneous changes in price and wage exibility on welfare, and

how those e¤ects depend on the monetary policy regime and the presence or not of a ZLB constraint.

         Figure 9 shows the welfare loss from uctuations in the economy, as a function of                 w   (line with

blue circles) and as a function of               (line with red diamonds).16 We use      to denote a common value

for           and        17
          w         p.        The other parameters are kept at their baseline value. The ...gure shows outcomes

without the ZLB constraint. The top panels show the outcome under a Taylor rule, conditional on

demand shocks or technology shocks being the source of uctuations. As discussed above, in both

cases, an increase in wage exibility leads to a deterioration in welfare for a large range of initial                  w

values. On the other hand, and starting from the baseline setting of 0:75 for , a similar deterioration

of welfare obtains locally in response to a simultaneous increase in price and wage exibility (i.e. a

decrease in ). However, as the same graph reveals, the relation between welfare losses and nominal

rigidities changes sign at relatively large values of , implying that a nontrivial joint increase in price

and wage exibility from their baseline value generates a welfare improvement.

         The bottom-right panel of Figure 9 shows the corresponding outcome under the optimal policy
    16
     In the online appendix the reader can ...nd 3D graphs showing welfare losses as a function of w and p (see Figure
A3). We show the ZLB and no ZLB cases as separate graphs, because combining two 3D surfaces in the same graph
would generate a visually confusing object which is di¢ cult to interpret.
  17
     As w and p share the same value in our baseline calibration, the vertical line in the ...gure indicates the baseline
value of both these parameters.




                                                             14
when technology shocks are the source of uctuations.18 In this case, and as discussed above, an

increase in wage exibility (while keeping          p   constant) is welfare improving. Interestingly, as shown

in Figure 9, that improvement vanishes (and becomes a welfare deterioration) when both prices and

wages become more exible (locally) starting from the baseline value for . The reason is that both

price and wage ination become more volatile in that case (with and without the ZLB), o¤setting

the smaller losses due to a more stable output gap.

         Next we show how the presence of a ZLB constraint a¤ects the relation between welfare and

nominal rigidities (i.e. price and wage rigidities, jointly). Figure 10 shows the welfare loss as a

function of , with and without a ZLB constraint. As shown in the top two panels, under a Taylor

rule and conditional on either demand or technology shocks, the introduction of a ZLB constraint

ampli...es the increase in welfare losses from a (local) reduction in nominal rigidities. The ZLB

constraint is also seen to increase the range of           values for which welfare is reduced in response to

a decrease in nominal rigidities, relative to the case without ZLB. The bottom-left panel shows the

outcome under the optimal policy conditional on demand shocks. In contrast with the case of a

change in wage exibility only, discussed above in the context of Figure 4, now a welfare gain can be

attained with a relatively small increase in both price and wage exibility, starting from their baseline

value. This is not the case when we condition on technology shocks (bottom-right panel): in that

case, under the optimal policy, a small parallel increase in both wage and price exibility from the

baseline leads to a welfare deterioration, with and without a ZLB constraint.

         Note ...nally that in the limit, if both prices and wages are fully exible, the ...rst-best is attained

with the resulting welfare losses being zero in all the scenarios considered. Accordingly, a su¢ ciently

large joint increase in price and wage exibility generates a welfare gain, independently of the mon-

etary regime in place and the presence or not of the ZLB constraint (because both become irrelevant

for real allocations and welfare in the absence of nominal rigidities).



7         Concluding Remarks

We have revisited the analysis in Galí (2013) on the welfare consequences of greater wage exibility

by explicitly taking into account the existence of a ZLB constraint on the nominal interest rate. In

a ...rst exercise, we have shown how a downward adjustment in labor costs (implemented through a
    18
    Welfare losses are zero with demand shocks as a source of uctuations and in the absence of the ZLB, as reected
in the bottom-left panel of Figure 9.


                                                          15
wage subsidy) in a recessionary environment with a binding ZLB may (unintentionally) deepen the

downturn, due to the implied procyclical response of the real interest rate.

   We then have studied the impact of an occasionally binding ZLB constraint on the relationship

between wage exibility and the welfare costs of recurrent uctuations. Several ...ndings have emerged

from our analysis. Firstly, and perhaps not surprisingly, the presence of the ZLB increases welfare

losses for any calibration of nominal rigidities and/or policy regime. Secondly, the main ...nding in

Galí (2013), namely that under a (realistic) Taylor rule an increase in wage exibility is welfare

reducing, is robust to the presence of the ZLB constraint. Furthermore, we show that the ZLB

constraint generally ampli...es the adverse e¤ects of greater wage exibility on welfare. Thirdly, when

demand shocks are the driving force, an increase in wage exibility is associated with larger welfare

losses even when the central bank follows an optimal monetary policy. This is not true however

for technology shocks. Finally, we have shown that under a Taylor rule and conditional on either

demand or technology shocks, the introduction of the ZLB constraint (i) ampli...es the increase in

welfare losses from a (local) simultaneous reduction in both price and wage rigidities and (ii) increases

the range of those rigidities for which welfare losses are decreasing in the degree of nominal rigidities,

relative to the case without a ZLB constraint.

   To summarize: through the lens of the New Keynesian model the case for greater wage exibility

appears to be weaker than commonly held, and it is only weakened further by the introduction of an

explicit ZLB constraint on the nominal interest rate.




                                                   16
APPENDIX: Optimal Policy under Commitment with a ZLB Constraint

The problem of optimal policy with commitment is given by

                            1
                  1 X             t           '+                 2         p       p 2             w (1       )       w 2
               min E0                     +                    y
                                                               ~t  +           (   t)      +                      (   t )
                  2                           1                            p                              w
                          t=0


subject to (1)-(4) and it        0:


Write the period Lagrangian

                    1         '+              2        p        p 2            w (1            )       w 2
             Lt =            +              y
                                            ~t  +          (    t)     +                           (   t )    + Et Vt+1
                    2         1                        p                               w
                              1                                                    1                          1   p
                + m1t     yt + (it                (1           z ) zt )                m1t     1       yt +       t

                            p                                          p
                + m2t (     t       ~t
                                 {p y         p!
                                               ~ t)        m2t       1 t

                            w                                            w
                + m3t (     t        ~t +
                                  {w y         w!
                                                ~ t)           m3t     1 t

                                              w        p
                + m4t (! t       !t   1       t   +    t):




The Kuhn-Tucker conditions are

                    @Lt            '+                1
               0=         =      +        ~t + m1t
                                          y            m1t 1 {p m2t                                               {w m3t     (7)
                    @yt             1
                    @Lt       p p     1
               0=     p =        t      m1t 1 + m2t m2t 1 + m4t                                                              (8)
                    @ t       p
                    @Lt       w (1    ) w
               0=          =            t + m3t    m3t 1 m4t                                                                 (9)
                    @ w
                      t            w
                    @Lt      @ Et Vt+1
               0=         =               p m2t + w m3t + m4t                                                               (10)
                    @! t        @! t
                    @Lt       1
               0=        it = m1t it ; m1t 0 and it 0;                                                                      (11)
                    @it

whereas the envelope condition gives

                                          @ Et Vt+1
                                                    =                  Et m4t+1 :
                                            @! t

The equilibrium conditions under the optimal policy are then given by (1)-(4) and (7)-(11).



                                                               17
   REFERENCES


   Adam, Klaus and Roberto Billi (2006): "Optimal Monetary Policy under Commitment with a

Zero Bound on Nominal Interest Rates," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 38, 1877-1905.

   Adam, Klaus and Roberto Billi (2007): "Discretionary Monetary Policy and the Zero Bound on

Nominal Interest Rates," Journal of Monetary Economics 54 (3), 728-752.

   Aruoba, Bora¼
               gan S., Pablo Cuba-Borda, Frank Schorfheide (2018): "Macroeconomic Dynamics

Near the ZLB: A Tale of Two Countries," Review of Economic Studies 85(1), 87­118.

   Bhattarai, Saroj, Gauti Eggertsson, and Raphael Schoenle (2018) "Is Increased Price Flexibility

Stabilizing (Redux)?" Journal of Monetary Economics, forthcoming.

   Benhabib, Jess, Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé and Martin Uribe (2001): "The Perils of Taylor Rules,"

Journal of Economic Theory 96, 40-69.

   Benhabib, Jess, Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé and Martin Uribe (2002): "Avoiding Liquidity Traps,"

Journalof Political Economy 110(3), 535-563.

   Benigno, Gianluca and Luca Fornaro (2017): "Stagnation Traps," Review of Economic Studies,

forthcoming.

   Blanchard, Olivier J. and Jordi Galí (2007): "Real Wage Rigidities and the New Keynesian

Model." Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, supplement to volume 39 (1): 35-66.

   Blanchard, Olivier J. and Jordi Galí (2010): "Labor Markets and Monetary Policy: A New

Keynesian Model with Unemployment." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2 (2): 1-33.

   Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler (2000): "Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeco-

nomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory," Quarterly Journal of Economics 115(1), 147-180

   Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum and Sergio Rebelo (2011): "When is the Government

Spending Multiplier Large?," Journal of Political Economy 119(1), 78-121.

   Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Johannes Wieland (2012): "The Optimal Ination

Rate in New Keynesian Models: Should Central Banks Raise their Ination Targets in Light of the

Zero Lower Bound?" Review of Economic Studies 79, 1371-1406.

   Debortoli, Davide, Jordi Galí and Luca Gambetti (2020): "On the Empirical (Ir)Relevance of the

Zero Lower Bound Constraint," NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2019, forthcoming.

   De Long, J. Bradford and Lawrence H. Summers (1986): "Is Increased Price Flexibility Stabiliz-

ing?" American Economic Review 76(5): 1031-44.



                                               18
   Eggertsson, Gauti, and Michael Woodford (2003): "The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Op-

timal Monetary Policy," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, vol. 1, 139-211.

   Eggertsson, Gauti (2010): "The Paradox of Toil," unpublished manuscript.

   Eggertsson, Gauti (2011): "What Fiscal Policy is E¤ective at Zero Interest Rates?" NBER Macro-

economics Annual 2010, 59-112.

   Eggertsson, Gauti and Paul Krugman (2012): "Debt, Deleveraging, and the Liquidity Trap: A

Fisher-Minsky-Koo Approach," Quarterly Journal of Economics 127(3), 1469-1513.

   Eggertsson, Gauti, Andrea Ferrero, and Andrea Ra¤o (2014): "Can Structural Reforms Help

Europe?" Journal of Monetary Economics 61: 2-22.

   Erceg, Christopher J., Dale W. Henderson, and Andrew T. Levin (2000): "Optimal Monetary

Policy with Staggered Wage and Price Contracts." Journal of Monetary Economics 46 (2): 281-314.

   Erceg, Christopher J., and Jesper Lindé (2012): "Fiscal Consolidation in an Open Economy."

American Economic Review 102 (3): 186-91.

   Galí, Jordi (2013) "Notes for a New Guide to Keynes (I): Wages, Aggregate Demand and Em-

ployment." Journal of the European Econmic Association 11 (5): 973-1003.

   Galí, Jordi (2015) Monetary Policy, Ination and the Business Cycle. An Introduction to the

New Keynesian Framework, second edition, Princeton University Press (Princeton, NJ).

   Galí, Jordi and Tommaso Monacelli (2016): " Understanding the Gains from Wage Flexibility:

The Exchange Rate Connection," American Economic Review 106(12), 3829-3868.

   Hall, Robert (2005) "Employment Fluctuations with Equilibrium Wage Stickiness." American

Economic Review 95 (1): 50-64.

   Jung, Taehun, Yuki Teranishi, and Tsutomo Watanabe (2005): "Optimal Monetary Policy at the

Zero Interest Rate Bound," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 37 (5), 813-835.

   Keynes, John M. (1936): The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money, MacMillan,

London.

   Liu, Philip, Konstantinos Theodoridis, Haroon Mumtaz, and Francesco Zanetti (2019): "Chang-

ing Macroeconomic Dynamics at the Zero Lower Bound," Journal of Business and Economic Statis-

tics 37(3), 391-404.

   Mertens, Karel R.S. and Morten O. Ravn (2014) : "Fiscal Policy in an Expectations-Driven

Liquidity Trap," Review of Economic Studies 81, 1637-1667.

   Nakov, Anton (2008): "Optimal and Simple Monetary Policy Rules with a Zero Floor on the


                                               19
Nominal Interest Rate," International Journal of Central Banking vol 4(2), 73-127.

   Roulleau-Pasdeloup, Jordan and Anastasia Zhutova (2018): "Labor Market Policies and the

Missing Deation Puzzle: Lessons from Hoover Policies during the Great Depression," unpublished

manuscript.

   Shimer, Robert (2005): "The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemployment and Vacancies."

American Economic Review 95 (1): 25-49.

   Shimer, Robert (2012): "Wage Rigidities and Jobless Recoveries." Journal of Monetary Eco-

nomics 59: S65-S77.

   Swanson, Eric T., and John C. Williams (2014): "Measuring the E¤ect of the Zero Lower Bound

on Medium- and Longer-Term Interest Rates," American Economic Review, 104 (10), 3154­3185.

   Taylor, John B. (1993): "Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice," Carnegie-Rochester Series

on Public Policy 39, 195-214.

   Werning, Iván (2011): "Managing a Liquidity Trap: Monetary and Fiscal Policy," NBER WP

#17344

   Zanetti, Francesco (2007): "A Non-Walrasian Labor Market in a Monetary Model of the Business

Cycle," Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 31, 2413­2437




                                               20
                 Table 1: Baseline calibration



Parameter      Description                               Value

               Discount factor                           0:995

               Curvature of consumption utility          1

    '          Curvature of labor disutility             5

               Index of decreasing returns to labor      0:25

     p         Elasticity of substitution of goods       9

    w          Elasticity of substitution of labor       4:5

     p         Calvo index of price rigidities           0:75

    w          Calvo index of wage rigidities            0:75

     i         Smoothing coe¢ cient in the Taylor rule   0:8

     p         Rule coe¢ cient on price ination          1:5

     y         Rule coe¢ cient on output gap             0:125

    a;z        Persistence of shocks                     0:8

     a         Std. deviation of technology shock        0:033

     z         Std. deviation of demand shock            0:044

Note: Values are shown in quarterly rates.




                                 21
                                  Output                                                         Price inflation
          1                                                                     1


          0                                                                     0
Percent




                                                                      Percent
          -1                                                                    -1

                                                     =0
          -2                                         = 1%                       -2
                                                     = 3%

          -3                                                                    -3
               0   4     8   12     16     20   24   28     32                       0   4   8    12   16   20     24   28   32
                              Quarters                                                             Quarters
                        Nominal interest rate                                                Real interest rate
          1                                                                0.5

          0                                                                     0
Percent




          -1                                                     Percent   -0.5

          -2                                                                    -1

          -3                                                               -1.5

          -4                                                                    -2
               0   4     8   12     16     20   24   28     32                       0   4   8    12   16   20     24   28   32
                              Quarters                                                             Quarters

                       Figure 1: Dynamic responses to a wage subsidy if ZLB absent
                                  Output                                                 Price inflation
               1                                                           1
               0
                                                                           0
               -1
     Percent




                                                                 Percent
               -2                                                          -1

               -3                                                          -2
                                           =0
               -4                          = 1%
                                                                           -3
               -5                          = 3%

               -6                                                          -4
                 0     4   8    12   16    20     24   28   32               0   4   8    12   16    20    24   28   32
                                 Quarters                                                  Quarters
                           Nominal interest rate                                     Real interest rate
          0.5                                                              2

               0
                                                                           1
          -0.5
Percent




               -1                                                Percent   0

          -1.5
                                                                           -1
               -2

          -2.5                                                             -2
              0        4   8    12   16    20     24   28   32               0   4   8    12   16    20    24   28   32
                                 Quarters                                                  Quarters


                    Figure 2: Dynamic responses to a wage subsidy during a ZLB episode
Figure 3: Paths conditional on demand shocks: e¤ect of wage rigidities
                               Taylor rule, demand shocks                                           Taylor rule, technology shocks
                          2                                                                   0.8
                                                        ZLB
                                                        No ZLB
                         1.5                                                                  0.6
        Welfare loss %




                                                                             Welfare loss %
                          1                                                                   0.4


                         0.5                                                                  0.2


                          0                                                                    0
                           0    0.2     0.4       0.6   0.8      1                              0     0.2     0.4       0.6   0.8    1
                                              w                                                                     w

                                Optimal, demand shocks                                               Optimal, technology shocks
                         0.2                                                                  0.2


                 0.15                                                                 0.15
Welfare loss %




                                                                     Welfare loss %
                         0.1                                                                  0.1


                 0.05                                                                 0.05


                          0                                                                    0
                           0    0.2     0.4       0.6   0.8      1                              0     0.2     0.4       0.6   0.8    1
                                              w                                                                     w



                                      Figure 4: Wage rigidities and welfare: e¤ect of ZLB
                            Taylor rule, demand shocks                                              Taylor rule, demand shocks
                      1.5                                                                     1.5

                                                        p
                                                            =1                                                              y
                                                                                                                                =0
                      1.4                                                                     1.4
 Welfare loss ratio




                                                                         Welfare loss ratio
                                                        p
                                                            = 1.5                                                           y
                                                                                                                                = 0.125

                                                        p
                                                            =2                                                              y
                                                                                                                                = 0.25
                      1.3                                                                     1.3

                      1.2                                                                     1.2

                      1.1                                                                     1.1

                       1                                                                       1
                        0    0.2    0.4       0.6   0.8              1                          0    0.2    0.4       0.6   0.8            1
                                          w                                                                       w

                            Taylor rule, demand shocks                                              Taylor rule, demand shocks
                      2.5                                                                     2.5

                                                        i
                                                            = 0.7
                                                                                                                                 = 1 pa
 Welfare loss ratio




                                                                         Welfare loss ratio
                                                        i
                                                            = 0.75                                                               = 2 pa
                       2                                    = 0.8                              2                                 = 3 pa
                                                        i




                      1.5                                                                     1.5



                       1                                                                       1
                        0    0.2    0.4       0.6   0.8              1                          0    0.2    0.4       0.6   0.8            1
                                          w                                                                       w

                            Taylor rule, demand shocks                                              Taylor rule, demand shocks
                      1.3                           L   w   =0                                1.3                               Ly = 0
                                                    L   w   = 938
 Welfare loss ratio




                                                                         Welfare loss ratio




                                                                                                                                Ly = 8
                                                                                                                                L y = 32
                      1.2                                                                     1.2



                      1.1                                                                     1.1



                       1                                                                       1
                        0    0.2    0.4       0.6   0.8              1                          0    0.2    0.4       0.6   0.8            1
                                          w                                                                       w



Figure 5: Wage rigidities and welfare loss from ZLB: robustness to parameter changes
                                Total (a+b+c)                                                  Output gap (a)
                   2                                                               1
                                                    ZLB
                                                    No ZLB                        0.8
                  1.5
 Welfare loss %




                                                                 Welfare loss %
                                                                                  0.6
                   1
                                                                                  0.4

                  0.5
                                                                                  0.2

                   0                                                               0
                    0   0.2      0.4       0.6      0.8      1                      0   0.2      0.4       0.6     0.8   1
                                       w                                                               w

                              Price inflation (b)                                             Wage inflation (c)
                   1                                                               1

                  0.8                                                             0.8
 Welfare loss %




                                                                 Welfare loss %
                  0.6                                                             0.6

                  0.4                                                             0.4

                  0.2                                                             0.2

                   0                                                               0
                    0   0.2      0.4       0.6      0.8      1                      0   0.2      0.4       0.6     0.8   1
                                       w                                                               w



Figure 6: Wage rigidities and welfare components: Taylor rule and demand shocks
                                  Total (a+b+c)                                                   Output gap (a)
                    0.2                                                              0.1
                                                      ZLB
                                                      No ZLB                        0.08
                   0.15
  Welfare loss %




                                                                   Welfare loss %
                                                                                    0.06
                    0.1
                                                                                    0.04

                   0.05
                                                                                    0.02

                     0                                                                0
                      0   0.2      0.4       0.6      0.8      1                       0   0.2      0.4       0.6     0.8   1
                                         w                                                                w

                                Price inflation (b)                                              Wage inflation (c)
                    0.1                                                              0.1

                   0.08                                                             0.08
  Welfare loss %




                   0.06                                            Welfare loss %   0.06

                   0.04                                                             0.04

                   0.02                                                             0.02

                     0                                                                0
                      0   0.2      0.4       0.6      0.8      1                       0   0.2      0.4       0.6     0.8   1
                                         w                                                                w



Figure 7: Wage rigidities and welfare components: optimal policy and demand shocks
                                   Total (a+b+c)                                                   Output gap (a)
                    0.08                                                             0.06


                    0.06
   Welfare loss %




                                                                    Welfare loss %
                                                                                     0.04

                    0.04
                                                       ZLB
                                                       No ZLB                        0.02
                    0.02


                      0                                                                0
                       0   0.2      0.4       0.6      0.8      1                       0   0.2      0.4       0.6     0.8   1
                                          w                                                                w

                                 Price inflation (b)                                              Wage inflation (c)
                    0.06                                                             0.06
   Welfare loss %




                                                                    Welfare loss %
                    0.04                                                             0.04



                    0.02                                                             0.02



                      0                                                                0
                       0   0.2      0.4       0.6      0.8      1                       0   0.2      0.4       0.6     0.8   1
                                          w                                                                w



Figure 8: Wage rigidities and welfare components: optimal policy and technology shocks
                               Taylor rule, demand shocks                                           Taylor rule, technology shocks
                         1.5                                                                  0.6
        Welfare loss %                                       w




                                                                             Welfare loss %
                          1                                                                   0.4



                         0.5                                                                  0.2



                          0                                                                    0
                           0    0.2    0.4       0.6   0.8       1                              0     0.2     0.4       0.6   0.8    1
                                             ,   w
                                                                                                                    ,   w

                                Optimal, demand shocks                                               Optimal, technology shocks
                         0.1                                                                  0.1

                 0.08                                                                 0.08
Welfare loss %




                 0.06                                                Welfare loss %   0.06

                 0.04                                                                 0.04

                 0.02                                                                 0.02

                          0                                                                    0
                           0    0.2    0.4       0.6   0.8       1                              0     0.2     0.4       0.6   0.8    1
                                             ,   w
                                                                                                                    ,   w



                                  Figure 9: Nominal rigidities and welfare if ZLB absent
                              Taylor rule, demand shocks                                         Taylor rule, technology shocks
                        0.8                                                                0.3


                        0.6
       Welfare loss %




                                                                          Welfare loss %
                                                                                           0.2

                        0.4

                                                                                           0.1
                        0.2
                                                      ZLB
                                                      No ZLB
                         0                                                                  0
                          0    0.2    0.4     0.6    0.8       1                             0      0.2    0.4     0.6     0.8    1


                               Optimal, demand shocks                                             Optimal, technology shocks
                        0.1                                                                0.1

                 0.08                                                               0.08
Welfare loss %




                 0.06                                              Welfare loss %   0.06

                 0.04                                                               0.04

                 0.02                                                               0.02

                         0                                                                  0
                          0    0.2    0.4     0.6    0.8       1                             0      0.2    0.4     0.6     0.8    1




                                 Figure 10: Nominal rigidities and welfare: e¤ect of ZLB
