                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             PREDICTABLE FINANCIAL CRISES

                                       Robin Greenwood
                                       Samuel G. Hanson
                                         Andrei Shleifer
                                      Jakob Ahm Sørensen

                                       Working Paper 27396
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27396


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2020




Greenwood and Hanson gratefully acknowledge funding from the Division of Research at
Harvard Business School. Sørensen gratefully acknowledges support from FRIC Center for
Financial Frictions (grant no. DNRF102). We thank Matthew Baron, Xavier Gabaix, Jeremy
Stein, Adi Sunderam, Emil Verner, and Wei Xiong as well as seminar participants at Harvard and
Princeton for helpful comments, and Peggy Moreland for editorial assistance. We are grateful to
Matthew Baron, Emil Verner, and Wei Xiong for generously sharing their data. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27396.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Robin Greenwood, Samuel G. Hanson, Andrei Shleifer, and Jakob Ahm Sørensen. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Predictable Financial Crises
Robin Greenwood, Samuel G. Hanson, Andrei Shleifer, and Jakob Ahm Sørensen
NBER Working Paper No. 27396
June 2020
JEL No. E44,E7,G01,G4

                                          ABSTRACT

Using historical data on post-war financial crises around the world, we show that crises are
substantially predictable. The combination of rapid credit and asset price growth over the prior
three years, whether in the nonfinancial business or the household sector, is associated with about
a 40% probability of entering a financial crisis within the next three years. This compares with a
roughly 7% probability in normal times, when neither credit nor asset price growth has been
elevated. Our evidence cuts against the view that financial crises are unpredictable "bolts from
the sky" and points toward the Kindleberger-Minsky view that crises are the byproduct of
predictable, boom-bust credit cycles. The predictability we document favors macro-financial
policies that "lean against the wind" of credit market booms.

Robin Greenwood                                  Andrei Shleifer
Harvard Business School                          Department of Economics
Baker Library 267                                Harvard University
Soldiers Field                                   Littauer Center M-9
Boston, MA 02163                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER                                         and NBER
rgreenwood@hbs.edu                               ashleifer@harvard.edu

Samuel G. Hanson                                 Jakob Ahm Sørensen
Harvard Business School                          D4.17
Baker Library 361                                Solbjerg Plads 3
Soldiers Field                                   Frederiksberg 2000
Boston, MA 02163                                 Denmark
and NBER                                         jso.fi@cbs.dk
shanson@hbs.edu
1. Introduction
         A central issue in the study of macroeconomic stability is the predictability of financial
crises. An important line of thought holds that crises are largely unpredictable. For example,
each of the three principal policymakers in the 2008 U.S. financial crisis, Hank Paulson, Tim
Geithner, and Ben Bernanke, has taken this position at different times. 1 Similarly, Gorton
(2012, p.42) argues that "crises are sudden, unpredictable events." This view is bolstered by
theories that see crises as being due to sunspot equilibria (Cole and Kehoe 2000, Chari and
Kehoe 2003), and by early evidence showing that, while crises are often preceded by weak
economic fundamentals, the degree of predictability is low (Kaminsky and Reinhart 1999).
         An alternative view sees financial crises as substantially predictable byproducts of rapid
expansions of credit accompanied by asset price booms (Minsky 1977, 1986 and Kindleberger
1978). Borio and Lowe (2002) show that rapid credit growth and asset price growth predict
banking crises in 34 countries between 1970 and 1999, spurring an extensive literature on so-
called "early warning indicators." More recently, Schularick and Taylor (2012) and others
show that credit expansions, growth of risky credit as a share of the total, and narrow credit
spreads, all predict financial fragility and deteriorating macroeconomic outcomes (Greenwood
and Hanson 2013, Baron and Xiong 2017, Lopez-Salido, Stein, and Zakrajsek 2017, Mian,
Sufi, and Verner 2019). Kirti (2020) and Richter, Schularick, and Wachtel (2020) document
the characteristics that can help separate good and bad credit booms. Yet even with all this
evidence, precise estimates of the probability of a financial crisis following credit and asset
price booms remain unavailable. More importantly, it remains an open question how high the
probability of a crisis should be permitted to climb before prompting early policy action.
         In this paper, we estimate the probability of financial crises as a function of past credit
and asset price growth. Such an estimate has been made significantly easier by the development
of historical chronologies of financial crises by Reinhart and Rogoff (2011), Jordà, Schularick,
and Taylor (2017), and Baron, Verner, and Xiong (BVX 2020). Most recently, BVX use hand-
collected historical data on bank stock returns to improve existing crisis chronologies, which
to date have been based solely on narrative accounts. We use BVX's chronology to construct


1
 According to former U.S. Secretary of the Treasury Tim Geithner, "Financial crises cannot be reliably anticipated
or preempted" (see Geithner 2014). According to former U.S. Secretary of the Treasury Hank Paulson, "My strong
belief is that these crises are unpredictable in terms of cause, timing, or the severity when they hit." (See
https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2018/09/es_20180912_financial_crisis_day2_transcript.pdf).
According to Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke, "This crisis involved a 21st century electronic panic by
institutions. It was an old-fashioned run in new clothes." (See https://www8.gsb.columbia.edu/articles/chazen-
global-insights/financial-system-will-survive-says-ben-bernanke.)


                                                        1
an indicator variable for the onset of a financial crises. We combine historical data on the
growth of outstanding credit to nonfinancial businesses and households with data on the growth
of equity and home prices, to estimate the future probability of a financial crisis in a panel of
42 countries over 1950­2016.
       We present six findings. First, consistent with Schularick and Taylor (2012), crises can
be predicted using past credit growth in simple linear forecasting regressions. We show that
both nonfinancial business and household credit growth forecast the onset of a future crisis.
However, the degree of predictability is modest, even at horizons of up to five years. Schularick
and Taylor (2012) find that a one standard deviation rise in real 1-year credit growth leads to a
2.8 percentage point increase in the probability of a crisis over the next five years. Repeating
their analysis on our sample with BVX's crisis chronology, we obtain virtually the same result.
       Second, we show that the degree of predictability rises substantially when we focus on
large credit expansions that are accompanied by asset price booms. Specifically, when
nonfinancial business credit growth is high and stock market valuations have risen sharply, or
when household credit growth is high and home prices have risen sharply, the probability of a
subsequent crisis is substantially elevated. The combination of rapid credit growth and asset
price growth in the same sector is a natural signal of an outward shift in the supply of credit,
which then sows the seeds of its own destruction (Borio and Drehmann 2009, Greenwood and
Hanson 2013, Jorda, Schularick, and Taylor 2015, López-Salido, Stein, and Zakrajsek 2017,
and Kirti 2020). Our results are robust to different classifications of financial crises such as
those in Reinhart and Rogoff (2011) and Jordà, Schularick, and Taylor (2017). However, we
do not use data on credit spreads in this paper, which would likely increase the predictability
of crises, because the historical scarcity of these data would substantially reduce our sample.
       To demonstrate these results, we construct a simple indicator variable called the Red-
zone, or the "R-zone" for short, that identifies periods of potential credit-market overheating.
Specifically, we say that a country is in the "business R-zone" if nonfinancial business credit
growth over the past three years is in the top quintile of the historical distribution, and stock
market returns over the same window are in the top tercile. The probability of a crisis at a 1-
year horizon is 13% if a country is in the business R-Zone, a substantial increase over the
unconditional probability of 4%. The comparable 1-year probability is 14% if a country is in
the household R-zone--i.e., if household credit growth and home price growth are jointly
elevated. Crucially, the degree of predictability increases dramatically with horizon. The
probability of experiencing a financial crisis within the next three years is 45% for countries



                                               2
that are in the business R-zone, and 37% for countries in the household R-zone. Put differently,
even after entering the R-zone, crises are slow to develop, suggesting that policymakers have
time to act based on early warning signs.
       Third, we show that overheating in the business and household credit markets are
separate phenomena. Both independently predict the arrival of future crises, but they are
particularly dangerous in the rare instances--e.g., Japan in 1988--when they occur in tandem.
63% of the crises in our sample were preceded by either a household or business R-zone event
within the prior three years. Perhaps not surprisingly, the United States was in the household
R-zone from 2002­2006 and a financial crisis arrived in 2007.
       Fourth, overheating in credit markets naturally has a global component and is correlated
across countries. We construct global business R-zone and global household R-zone variables
which measure the fraction of countries in our sample that are in the R-zone in each year. We
find that including these global variables in our forecasting regressions substantially increases
the predictability of crises. For example, while Germany was nowhere near the R-zone in 2007,
33% of countries were in the business R-zone and 36% were in the household R-zone at the
time. As a result, the predicted probability of experiencing a crisis within 3 years was 37% for
Germany in 2007 and, indeed, Germany experienced a crisis in 2008. Furthermore, when we
account for these global variables, we estimate that the probability of a subsequent crisis in the
U.S. rose from 31% in 2002 when U.S. first entered the household R-zone to 51% in 2006.
       Fifth, we show that R-zone events predict future contractions in real gross domestic
product (GDP). López-Salido, Stein, and Zakrajsek (2017) show that periods of credit market
overheating predict lower real GDP growth at a horizon of two years. Mian, Sufi, and Verner
(2019) demonstrate that rapid credit growth--especially household credit growth--forecasts
low real GDP growth over the medium run. Adrian, Grinberg, Liang, and Malik (2018) find
that financial stability measures--which include credit growth--predict higher downside risks
to GDP growth. We show that the business and household R-zones also reliably predict GDP
contractions, which we define as a 2% decline in real GDP in a year. This result is only partially
driven by the well-known fact that financial crises themselves are associated with GDP
contractions (Reinhart and Rogoff 2009a).
       In the final section of the paper, we turn to the question motivating our analysis: How
high should the probability of a financial crisis be allowed to climb before prompting early
action on the part of policymakers? The answer to this question turns on the statistical tradeoff
between false positive and false negative classification errors. As we increase the credit and



                                                3
asset price growth thresholds for assigning country-years to the R-zone, we increase the
likelihood that a given R-zone event is followed by a financial crisis. At the same time, using
more stringent assignment thresholds raises the likelihood that a given crisis is not preceded
by a R-zone event. We illustrate this tradeoff with a downward-sloping "policy possibility
frontier" that plots the true negative rate (the percentage of non-crisis years that are not
preceded by a R-zone event) against the true positive rate (the percentage of crises preceded by
a R-zone event). What point on this frontier should a policymaker tasked with promoting
financial stability choose? We show that financial crises are sufficiently predictable that
policymakers should adopt a "do nothing" strategy--i.e., never taking preventative action even
when concerns about credit-market overheating become acute--only if they think the costs of
false alarms are extremely large, perhaps implausibly so, relative to those of false negatives.
       Our findings favor the Kindleberger-Minsky view of credit cycles and financial crises.
This view has been formalized in recent theoretical models, including Bordalo et al. (2018),
Gennaioli and Shleifer (2018), and Greenwood, Hanson, and Jin (2019). These models share
the common premise that expectations errors (typically due to over-extrapolation) lead to
excessive borrowing and investment during credit booms. Since these overly optimistic beliefs
will be disappointed on average, they predictably give rise to credit busts and financial crises.
In this way, the Kindleberger-Minsky view provides a foundation for the "credit supply
shocks" that are often used as a starting point for modeling economic busts (Guerrieri and
Lorenzoni 2011, Hall 2011, Eggertsson and Krugman 2012, and Korinek and Simsek 2016).
       Our findings also have implications for macro-financial policy. The adherents of the
"bolt from the sky" view of crises often advocate a wait-and-see attitude to policy interventions
as credit expands rapidly. In this view, policymakers should not try to be policemen ex ante
and should only fight fires ex post. The Kindleberger-Minsky view that our evidence favors, in
contrast, argues for more proactive measures to lean against the wind of incipient credit booms.
When an economy is heading towards the R-zone, a government might consider tightening
monetary policy, increasing bank equity capital ratios, or adopting other counter-cyclical
macroprudential policies. Stein (2013, 2014) and Borio (2014) advocate prophylactic measures
of this sort, which inevitably involve taking away the punch bowl when the party starts to get
out of hand. Indeed, the post global financial crisis era has witnessed the advent of several
macroprudential tools that have been used in precisely this manner. When a policymaker faces
a greater than 40% probability of a financial crisis over the near-term, and a comparable
probability of a recession, a wait-and-see attitude appears ill-advised.



                                                4
2. Predicting financial crises
2.1.     Data
         Our data consist of indicator variables for financial crises merged with annual data on
household and nonfinancial business credit growth, home prices, and equity prices, which we
collect for 42 countries from 1950 through 2016. As we describe below, some data on financial
crises reaches back earlier than 1950, but the availability of data on household and business
credit constrains our sample to the postwar period.
         The key dependent variables in most of our analysis are binary indicators for the onset
of a financial crisis, which have been painstakingly constructed in several papers. Traditional
chronologies of financial crises rely solely on narrative accounts of bank runs, failures, or
bailouts. Reinhart and Rogoff (RR 2011) construct a list of financial crises covering 70
countries from 1800 to 2010 based on these narrative criteria. Jordà, Schularick, and Taylor
(JST 2017) combine crisis indicators from several narrative chronologies and consult country
experts to construct a list of financial crises, which covers 17 countries from 1870 to 2016.
         Baron, Verner, and Xiong (BVX 2020) identify several shortcomings of existing crisis
chronologies. BVX define a banking crisis as "an episode in which the aggregate banking
sector's ability to intermediate funds is severely impaired." BVX argue that a large decline in
the market value of banks' equity is necessary, but not sufficient, for the arrival of a crisis.
They also argue that a bout of widespread bank failures or of severe short-term funding
withdrawals--a banking panic--is sufficient, but not necessary, for the arrival of a crisis. 2
         To operationalize their definition of banking crises, BVX assemble data for 46 countries
from 1870­2016 on (i) bank equity prices, (ii) narrative accounts of widespread bank failures,
and (iii) narrative accounts of severe bank panics. Using this data, BVX define two broad types
of banking crises. The first type, which BVX call "bank equity crises," are events where bank
stocks declined by more than 30% from their previous peak and where there is narrative
evidence of widespread bank failures. The second type, which BVX call "banking panic
crises," are events where there is narrative evidence of severe withdrawals of short-term
funding from banks. A given crisis in BVX's composite chronology may be either a bank


2
 While not a strictly necessary condition, most episodes with widespread bank failures or panics also feature a
bank stock price decline of 30% or more. In our sample, BVX record 112 episodes where bank stock prices fell
more than 30%, 47 episodes featuring widespread bank failures, and 39 banking panics. Of the 47 episodes with
widespread failures, 41 saw a greater than 30% drop in bank stocks. Similarly, of the 39 panic episodes, 34 saw a
greater than 30% drop in bank stocks. And, in the six episodes in which widespread failures or panics were not
associated with a 30% drop in bank stocks, bank stocks fell by at least 16% and by 22% on average.


                                                       5
equity crisis, a banking panic, or both. 3 While most of crises in the resulting chronology had
been identified in existing chronologies, BVX uncover several previously overlooked crises,
remove a number of spurious episodes, and exclude a handful of minor episodes that had
smaller effects on the banking system.
         Figure 1 illustrates the BVX crisis chronology in our sample and Table 1 compares the
BVX, RR, and JST financial crisis indicator variables for the country-years in our sample.
Based on the BVX indicator, the unconditional probability of a crisis onset in any given country
year is 4.0%. This compares to an unconditional probability of 2.6% based on the JST indicator
and 3.6% based on the RR indicator. 4 Some of the differences reflect discrepancies in when
these chronologies date the onset of a crisis. For instance, according to BVX, the United
Kingdom suffered financial crises beginning in 1973, 1991, and 2008, whereas the JST
database lists these same crises as beginning in 1974, 1991, and 2007. However, these are not
the only differences. For instance, RR say that the United Kingdom suffered two additional
crises in 1984 and 1995. The chronologies also sometimes disagree about whether an extended
episode of banking distress should be treated as a single crisis or as a sequence of crises. For
example, JST treat the 2008 global financial crisis and the 2010-2011 Eurozone crisis as a
single crisis for European countries whereas BVX treat them as separate crisis episodes.
         The International Monetary Fund's (IMF) Global Debt Database (Mbaye, Moreno-
Badia, and Chae 2018) provides data on total credit outstanding--including both loans and
debt securities--to nonfinancial businesses and households. The IMF data covers 190 countries
going back to 1950, with 84 countries reporting outstanding credit separately for nonfinancial
businesses and households. We supplement the IMF credit data using information from the JST
(2017) MacroHistory database, which contains annual information on outstanding loans to
nonfinancial businesses and households in 17 countries. Lastly, we collect credit data for
Thailand from the Bank of International Settlements' (BIS) Total Credit Statistics, which
provides total outstanding loans and debt securities to nonfinancial businesses and households. 5




3
  In BVX's chronology, a crisis begins in the first year in which bank stocks first fall by 30% from their prior peak
or in which there is a banking panic. Even when a crisis eventually culminates in a panic, BVX show that the
panic is typically preceded by a large decline in the value of bank equity.
4
  If we restrict attention to the 858 country-years where all three indicators are defined, then the unconditional
probability of crisis onset is 3.5%, 2.8%, and 3.0% according to BVX, JST, and RR, respectively.
5
   When splicing together credit data from different sources for a country, we calculate 3-year changes in
outstanding credit separately using each data source and then splice together the resulting 3-year changes. Since
outstanding debt securities are generally quite small for those country-years where we have JST loan data but not
IMF credit data, this splicing procedure yields smooth series for 3-year cumulative credit growth.


                                                         6
        Data on equity price indices are primarily from Global Financial Data (GFD). Where
suitable data is not available from GFD, we obtain equity price data from the IMF's
International Financial Statistics database or the JST MacroHistory database. Using data on
nominal price inflation from the World Bank's World Development Indicators and the
MacroHistory database, we use these price indices to compute the inflation-adjusted change in
equity prices. We obtain inflation-adjusted home price indices from the BIS Residential
Property Price database which we use to compute real home price growth. We again
supplement the BIS data on real home prices with data from the JST MacroHistory database
and the OECD's Housing Prices database. 6
        Finally, we obtain nominal and real GDP from the World Bank's World Development
Indicators and the MacroHistory database.
        Our data on credit growth and asset prices are summarized in the bottom panel of Table
1, with Tables A1, A2, and A3 in the Internet Appendix providing further details on the sources
for the individual country series. Our baseline sample includes every country-year observation
beginning in 1950 and ending in 2016 for which we have data on either (i) past 3-year
nonfinancial business credit growth and equity price growth or (ii) past 3-year household credit
growth and home price growth, as well as the BVX crisis indicator in the following 4 years.
The result is an unbalanced panel dataset that includes data on 42 countries.

2.2.    Predicting financial crises with past credit growth
        Schularick and Taylor (2012) show that financial crises can be predicted by elevated
bank loan growth over the previous five years. We start by presenting linear forecasting
regressions that revisit these results, but with two small changes. First, we expand the sample
to include the additional crises identified by BVX (2020). Second, motivated by recent work
suggesting different roles for household and business credit (Mian, Sufi, and Verner 2017), we
separately examine how well these two forms of credit growth predict future financial crises.
        Table 2 presents Jordá-style (2005) linear forecasting regressions of the form:
                                  ()
        ,+1 to + =                     +  ()  3  + ,+1 to + ,                                              (1)
                                  ()
for h = 1, 2, 3, and 4 where           is a country fixed effect, and 3 is the change in predictor 
over three years ending in t. ,+1 to + is an indicator variable that equals one if a crisis
begins in country i in any year between t+1 and year t+h--i.e., letting -, be an


6
 For more information on the BIS Residential Property Price database, see http://www.bis.org/statistics/pp.htm.
For more on the OECD's Housing Prices database, see https://data.oecd.org/price/housing-prices.htm.


                                                      7
indicator that switches on if a crisis begins in country i in year t, we define ,+1 to + =
max {-,+1 , ... , -,+ }. In Table 2 and throughout the paper, we stop
making forecasts in t = 2012, so we have the same number of observations for all prediction
horizons. t-statistics are in brackets and are computed using Driscoll-Kraay (1998) standard
errors.
          As predictors, we examine 3-year changes in the ratio of total private credit to GDP
(labeled 3 ( /) ), the ratio of business debt to GDP (3 ( / ) ), and
the ratio of household debt to GDP (3 ( /) ). Our fourth predictor, which is closer
to the original Schularick and Taylor (2012) variable, is the 3-year log change in real total
private debt outstanding (3 log( /) ). Each of these variables is normalized by its
sample standard deviation, so the coefficient  () gives the change in the probability of a crisis
beginning within h years if past 3-year debt growth rises by one standard deviation.
          Table 2 shows that despite a shorter sample period and slightly different definitions of
crises, we reproduce Schularick and Taylor's (2012) central result that credit growth forecasts
the onset of a financial crisis. As shown in columns (1.1) and (3.1) of Panel B, a one standard
deviation rise in 3 ( /) is associated with a 2.6 and 5.3 percentage point
increase in the probability of a crisis beginning within one and three years, respectively.
          The remaining specifications in Table 2 separate private debt growth into its
nonfinancial business and household components. Column (3.2) shows, for example, that a one
standard deviation increase in 3 ( / ) is associated with a 3.4 percentage point
increase in the probability of a crisis beginning within three years. Column (3.3) shows that a
one standard deviation increase 3 ( / ) is associated with a 9.2 percentage point
increase in the probability of a crisis within three years. Column (3.4) shows results when the
predictor variable is the change in debt scaled by the CPI rather than by GDP.
          While the results in Table 2 show that credit growth forecasts financial crises, the
degree of predictability is low, lending credence to the view that crises are largely
unpredictable. At a 3-year horizon, for example, the within R2 in column (3.1) is only 2.5%,
and the coefficient of 5.3 means that a two standard deviation increase in credit growth only
raises the probability of a crisis by 10.6%.

2.3.      Predicting financial crises with past credit growth and asset price growth
          The univariate linear relationship between past credit growth and the probability of a
future crisis in Table 2 masks stronger relationships in the data. In this section, motivated by
prior work suggesting that credit booms are marked by increases in both asset prices and credit


                                                 8
quantities (Borio and Lowe 2002 and Borio and Drehmann 2009), we investigate whether
refined measures of credit booms have greater success in predicting financial crises.
          To start, we divide all country-years through 2012 in our sample into 15 bins based on
past price growth tercile and past debt growth quintile for each sector, either business or
household. The assignment thresholds are based on the distribution of credit and price growth
in our full panel dataset and, thus, are the same for all 42 countries in the sample. For instance,
country-years in the top quintile of business debt growth have 3 ( / ) > 8.99%. 7
We then compute the probability that a crisis begins within the next h years conditional on
being in price growth tercile T and debt growth quintile Q at time t--i.e., we compute
    ( )
, = ,+1 to +  Tercile(3 log( )) = , Quintile(3 (/ ) ) = .
This exercise, shown in Table 3, is a simple nonparametric way of understanding the
multivariate nonlinear relationship between past debt and asset price growth and the probability
of a future crisis at various horizons h. Panel B of Table 3 shows the results of this exercise for
the business sector, while Panel D shows the results for the household sector. Panel A and C
reports the distribution of country-year observations across these 15 bins. 8
          In Panel B of Table 3 we measure debt growth by the 3-year change in the ratio of
nonfinancial business credit to GDP (3 ( / ) ) and price growth by the 3-year log
                                                               
change in the real equity price index (3 log (                          )). In Panel B, the first matrix on the
left reports the probability of a crisis arriving within one year based on past business debt
growth and equity prices. The unconditional probability that a crisis begins within one year is
4.1%. When equity price growth is in the middle tercile and debt growth is in the middle
                                                                  (1)
quintile, the probability of a crisis in the next year is 2,3 =4.5%. However, when price growth
is in the top tercile and credit growth is in the top quintile, the probability of a crisis in the next
                    (1)
year rises to 3,5 =13.3%. The matrix on the right reports the difference between the
conditional probability for each bin and the probability for the "median" bin where price
growth is in the middle tercile and debt growth is the middle quintile--i.e., we report
    (1)    (1)
, - 2,3 . We also indicate whether this difference in probabilities is statistically



7
  See Table 1 for the full set of thresholds. For example, country-years in the top quintile of household debt growth
                                                                                                            
have 3 ( / ) > 7.60%, those in the top tercile of equity price growth have 3 log (                                )>
                                                                             
26.56%, those in the top tercile of home price growth have 3 log(                  ) > 12.67%, and so on.
8
  In Table 3 and throughout the paper, we obtain qualitatively similar results if we use price growth quintiles as
opposed to price growth terciles. We have opted to use price growth terciles since this ensures we have a similar
number of observations in each of the 15 cells, enhancing statistical power.


                                                         9
distinguishable from zero at conventional significance levels. Specifically, we have
 (1)     (1)
3,5 - 2,3 = 8.8%, but at a 1-year horizon this difference is not statistically significant.
       The strong interaction between credit and price growth strengthens markedly at longer
forecasting horizons. Conditional on high credit growth and high price growth, the cumulative
probability of crisis arrival rises sharply with the forecast horizon. This is because the marginal
probability of crisis arrival remains persistently elevated for several years following rapid
credit and price growth, implying that crises are slow to develop. Specifically, the probability
                                                        (3)
of a crisis beginning within the next three years is 3,5 = 45.3% when equity price growth is
in the top tercile and business credit growth is in the top quintile. The difference between the
probability of a crisis when credit and equity price are jointly elevated and the probability in a
                                     (3)     (3)
median year is highly significant: 3,5 - 2,3 = 37.4% (p-value = 0.006).
       In Panel B, we repeat this analysis for the household sector, measuring debt growth by
the 3-year change in household credit to GDP (3 ( /) ) and price growth by the
3-year log change in the real home price index (3 log ( ). We see a similar pattern:
the crisis probability is highest following rapid growth in household credit that is accompanied
by elevated home price growth. When home price growth is in the top tercile and household
credit growth is in the top quintile, the probability of a crisis beginning in the next year is
 (1)                 (3)
3,5 =14.0%; and 3,5 =36.8% beginning within three years.
       To explore crisis prediction in greater detail, we define three indicator variables:

       -- = 1{3 (/ ) > 80th percentile}                                                        (2a)

       -- = 1{3 log( ) > 66.7th percentile}                                                    (2b)

        - = -- × --                                                                            (2c)
where the cutoffs are based on the distribution of credit growth and price growth in our full
country-year panel as in Table 3. Thus, High-Debt-Growth is an indicator that switches on
when credit growth is in the top quintile and High-Price-Growth is an indicator that price
growth is in the top tercile. Finally, the Red-zone, or R-zone for short, is the interaction between
these two indicators, so it only switches on when credit and asset price growth are jointly
elevated. These three indicators can be defined based on either business-sector variables--i.e.,
based on business credit growth and equity price growth--or on household-sector variables--
i.e., based on household credit growth and home price growth. Figure 1 shows the full
chronology of BVX crises and R-zone events in our sample.




                                                   10
         To assess how elevated credit and asset price growth jointly affect the probability of a
future financial crisis, we estimate the following Jordá-style (2005) forecasting regressions:
                                    ()
         ,+1 to + =                      +  ()  --                                                               (3)
                               +  ()  -- +  ()   - + ,+1 to +

for h = 1, 2, 3, and 4. ,+1 to + is defined as above. 9 We include a set of country fixed
           ( )
effects          to focus on within-country time-series variation. However, we obtain very similar
results in Table 4 and throughout the paper if we omit the country fixed effects. The sum of
coefficients  () +  () +  () gives the increase in the probability that a crisis begins within
h years when credit growth and price growth are jointly elevated.
         Compared to the findings reported in Table 3, these predictive regressions allow us to
separately estimate the direct relationship between high credit growth and high price growth
and the future probability of a crisis, as well as their interaction, R-zone. 10
         To draw appropriate statistical inferences in this setting, we need to account for two
features of the specification in Eq. (3). First, since we measure debt and price growth using
cumulative growth rates over the prior over three years, our High-Debt-Growthit, High-Price-
Growthit, and R-zoneit indicators tend to arrive in streaks in our country-year panel. For
instance, Sweden was in the business R-zone in 1987­1989 and 1998. Similarly, even though
each crisis has a unique onset date when -, switches on, our h-year cumulative
crisis indicator ,+1 to + = max {-,+1 , ... , -,+ } occurs in
streaks. For instance, according to BVX, Sweden suffered financial crises that began in 1991
and 2008, so for Sweden ,+1 to +3 equals one in 1988­1990 and 2005­2007. In
combination, these features mean that the residuals in Eq. (3) will be serially correlated within
a given country when we forecast overlapping outcomes--i.e., when h > 1. Second, different
countries in our panel are not statistically independent, so the residuals in Eq. (3) are likely to
be contemporaneously correlated across countries at a point in time. For example, in the mid-
2000s, many countries experienced rapid credit and price growth and, in many cases, this was
followed by the arrival of a crisis in either 2007 or 2008.



9
  These forecasting regressions are in the spirit of Jordá (2005), but they differ from his local projection approach
to estimating impulse response functions, which would entail controlling for lags of the independent variable as
well as the contemporaneous and lagged values of the dependent variable. Naturally, in Table 4 and throughout
the paper, we obtain qualitatively similar results if we explicitly use Jordá's (2005) local projection approach.
10
   These regressions also allow us to include other control variables, such as lags of GDP growth. However, adding
controls has little impact on the estimated coefficients of interest, so we omit them here for brevity.


                                                        11
         To deal with both forms of residual correlation in our country-year panel, our t-statistics
are computed using Driscoll-Kraay (1998) standard errors, the panel data analog of Newey-
West (1987) time-series standard errors. When estimating Eq. (3) when h > 1, we thus allow
for arbitrary residual correlation within our panel up to ceiling(1.5 × h) annual lags. Concretely,
this means that our t-statistics correct for residual serial correlation within a given country over
time (e.g., we correct for the fact that the Sweden-1988 and Sweden-1989 observations are not
statistically independent), contemporaneous residual correlation across countries at a point in
time (e.g., the Sweden-2005 and Denmark-2005 observations are not independent), as well as
residual cross-autocorrelation (e.g., Sweden-2005 and Denmark-2006 are not independent). 11
When h = 1, we do not allow for any residual autocorrelation--i.e., we use Driscoll-Kraay
(1998) errors with no lags--which is equivalent to clustering by time.
         Table 4 presents the results. Conditional on entering the R-zone, the incremental
probability that a financial crisis arrives increases sharply for the first three years and plateaus
at 38.2% for the business R-zone (Panel A, column (4.3)), and at 30.1% for the household R-
zone (Panel B, column (3.3)). In both cases, there is a strong interaction between elevated debt
growth and asset price growth above and beyond their direct effects on the probability of a
financial crisis. Specifically, the coefficient on the R-zone interaction term is economically
large and statistically significant in the presence of the High-Debt-Growth and High-Price-
Growth main effects for both sectors at all prediction horizons except 1- and 2-year horizons
in the business sector.
         A practical question raised by these results is whether we need to include the High-
Debt-Growth and High-Price-Growth variables to forecast crises, or whether simply using the
R-zone indicator is enough. Comparing the full specifications, listed in the third columns at
each horizon, with the specification only including the R-zone interaction effect listed in the
fourth column at each horizon, we do not lose much forecasting ability in terms of R2 if we
leave out the main effects, High-Debt-Growth and High-Price-Growth. In Panel A, for
example, compare regressions in columns (3.3), which include the main effects of credit growth


11
   To see that Driscoll-Kraay standard errors are conservative, consider the specification in column (4.4) in Panel
A. Using Driscoll-Kraay standard errors, we obtain a t-statistic of 3.1 on the business R-zone indicator. If we used
heteroskedasticity robust standard errors, ignoring all residual correlation, the t-statistic would be 5.6. If we
clustered by year, only correcting for contemporaneous correlation at a point in time, the t-statistic would be 4.2.
If we clustered by country, only correcting for within-country serial correlation, the t-statistic would be 4.7.
Finally, if we cluster by both country and year, thereby ignoring cross-autocorrelation, the t-statistic would be 3.8.
To address the tendency for statistical tests based on Driscoll-Kraay (1998) standard errors to over-reject in finite
samples, we compute p-values using the asymptotic theory of Kiefer and Vogelsang (2005) which gives more
conservative p-values and has better finite-sample properties than traditional Gaussian asymptotic theory.


                                                         12
and price growth and (3.4), which do not. The differential probability of a crisis in the R-zone
is similar (38.2% versus 33.7%) across specifications and the R2 only drops from 7.8% to 6.1%
when we drop the main effects. The bottom line is that at horizons of three years and longer,
crises seem highly predictable using a simple indicator variable that switches on when credit
growth and asset price growth are jointly elevated.
       While the probability of a crisis following the R-zone is high, the within-country
forecasting R2 is more modest. For example, at a 3-year horizon, R2 is 7.8% in the multivariate
specification (3.3) for the business sector and 6.1% in the univariate specification (3.4). To see
why, suppose we omit the country effects from Eq. (3). The R2 from a univariate regression of
,+1 to + on  - is  2 = ( () )2 × [ - (1 -  - )] × [ () (1 -  () )],
where  () is the regression coefficient on the R-zone indicator--i.e., the change in the
conditional probability of a crisis conditional on entering the R-zone, qR-zone is the probability
of a R-zone event, and p ( h ) is the unconditional probability of a crisis within h years. While
the increase in the probability of a crisis conditional on entering the R-zone is large--e.g.,
 () = 33.7% in column (3.4)--it is far from 100% since not every crisis is preceded by R-
zone event. As a result, R-zones events are a good deal rarer than crises--qR-zone = 6% of
country-years are in the Red-zone, whereas p (3) = 12.0% of country-years are followed by a
crisis within three years--explaining the modest forecasting R2.


3. Understanding crisis predictability
       To summarize our results thus far, Tables 3 and 4 point to a fundamental non-linearity
in the data, in that financial crises are most likely to occur after periods of rapid growth of both
credit and asset prices. These findings support the Kindleberger-Minsky view, which stresses
the idea that debt-financed asset price booms portend future crises.
       Our findings raise several additional questions. First, how robust are the results in
Tables 3 and 4? What is the role of look-ahead bias? Are the results driven by the 2007­2008
global financial crisis? What happens if, for example, we end our analysis in 2000? Do the
results hold for other prominent crisis chronologies such as RR (2011) or JST (2017), or are
they specific to the BVX (2019) chronology? Do the results differ between developed and
developing countries? Are the results sensitive to the specific thresholds used for classifying
past credit and asset price growth as "high"?
       Second, do episodes of overheating in the markets for business and household credit
reflect a single underlying factor, or are these separate phenomena? Specifically, do episodes


                                                13
of business credit overheating and household credit overheating have independent forecasting
power for financial crises? What happens if both business and household credit markets are
overheating at the same time?
       Third, how much of the predictability is driven by global overheating in credit markets,
as opposed to local, country-level credit market overheating?
       Fourth, what are the implications of credit market overheating for future economic
growth? Do episodes of high past credit and asset growth predict low future real GDP growth?
How do these results depend on the forecast horizon?
       Fifth, while the results in Tables 3 and 4 suggest that past credit and asset price growth
have substantial predictive power for future financial crises, there are still large prediction
errors. Are there crises that are not preceded by rapid credit and asset price growth? What
happens when credit and prices grow rapidly, but there is no subsequent crisis? To what extent
do the answers to these questions depend on our measurement methodology? How likely do
crises need to become before warranting pre-emptive action by policymakers?
       In the remainder of the paper, we address these questions. This section assesses the
robustness of our main findings, explores the relationship between business and household
credit-market overheating, and examines the global component of credit-market overheating.
Section 4 asks whether R-zone events negatively forecast economic growth. Section 5
addresses prediction errors and assesses the implications for policymakers.

3.1.   Robustness
       Table 5 presents a series of robustness tests. Because we have found that both business
and household credit booms forecast crises, we perform separate robustness tests on each,
showing our results for the business sector in Panel A and the results for the household sector
in Panel B. In each case, we show the results from estimating Eq. (3) at the 3-year horizon.
       The first series of tests ask whether our assignment thresholds for high credit and high
price growth are problematic because they are based on in-sample quantiles. Since High-Debt-
Growthit, High-Price-Growthit, and R-zoneit depend on information that was not available at
time t, they might be mechanically correlated with future crises in a small sample, even if crises
are not truly predictable. To see the concern, suppose credit growth and crises are not truly
predictable, but that crises are contemporaneously associated with low credit growth.
Conditioning on the fact that credit growth in year t is high relative to other years--including
future years--in a small sample mechanically raises the likelihood that credit growth following
year t is low. Using indicators based on full-sample quantiles could then lead us to spuriously


                                               14
find a positive relationship between high past credit growth and future crises even if there is
no genuine predictability. While this concern has less bite because our assignment thresholds
are not country-specific (the quantiles are based on the full panel), the concern remains.
       We address this concern in two ways. First, in row (i) of Table 5, we use backward-
looking definitions of High-Debt-Growthit, High-Price-Growthit, and R-zoneit. Each year t
beginning in 1973, we compute the sample quantiles of 3-year credit and price growth using
only information up to year t. Country-years in year t are then assigned to credit growth
quintiles and price growth terciles based on these backward-looking cutoffs. The sum of
coefficients, which indicates the overall increase in the probability of a crisis in the R-zone, is
34.1% for the business sector, compared to 38.2% in our baseline analysis. For the household
sample, it is 23.8%, compared to 30.1% in our baseline analysis.
       Next, in row (ii), we use a leave-one-out, jackknife-type definition of these indicator
variables. For year t, we compute the sample distribution of credit and price growth leaving out
the three years prior to t and the four years after t. Country-years in year t are then assigned to
credit growth quintiles and price growth terciles based on these jackknife-type cutoffs. This
approach ensures that our indicator variables are not mechanically endogenous in specification
(3) as they may be when using full sample quantiles in small samples. Using these leave-one-
out definitions yields very similar results to our baseline approach, suggesting that any look-
ahead-bias is minimal.
       In rows (iii) and (iv), we explore the impact of ending the analysis in 2000, thereby
omitting the impact of the 2007­2008 global financial crisis which took place in many
countries that experienced business or household R-zones in the 2004­2007 period. Since we
are forecasting three years ahead, this means we now stop making forecasts in 1996. For the
business sector, using only pre-2000 data has almost no effect on the results. For the household
sector, predictability increases substantially when we restrict attention to the pre-2000 data.
       In the same vein, it is useful to assess out-of-sample forecasting power using predictions
that could have been made in real time (Welch and Goyal 2008). For our h-year panel
forecasting regressions of the form ,+ =  +   , + ,+ , we compute the out-of-
             2                                             2                                   2
sample R2 as   = 1 -  =,+ - ,+   /  =,+ - ,+  .

Here ,+ is the fitted value from a forecasting regression estimated using data up until time




                                                15
t and ,+ is the average of the dependent variable estimated up until time t.12 We find
meaningful out-of-sample R2 statistics. For the univariate regression that uses R-, to
                               2
forecast ,+1 to +3 , we obtain   = 4.2% which compares favorably to the in-sample
R2 of 2
        = 6.7%. For the univariate regression that uses R-, to forecast
                      2                          2
,+1 to +3 , we obtain   = 0.9% which compares to   = 6.8%. Finally, if we
estimate a bivariate regression that uses R-        
                                            , and R- , to forecast ,+1 to +3 ,
          2                          2
we obtain   = 4.5% which compares to   = 11.1%.
         In rows (v) and (vi) of Table 5, we use the JST (2017) and RR (2011) crisis indicators
in place of the BVX (2019) indicator. These datasets are smaller, so our sample size declines
somewhat, but the results are broadly similar to our baseline findings.
         Next, we use the BVX data to separately examine the likelihood of: a crash in bank
stock prices, defined as a more than 30% drop in bank stock prices, in row (vii); widespread
bank failures in row (viii); a banking panic in row (ix); and a bank equity crisis, defined as an
episode where bank stocks crash and there are widespread failures, in row (x). The main
question here is whether the R-zone indicator predicts each of these events. As shown in row
(vii), the R-zone indicator is a strong predictor of a future crash in bank stock prices, consistent
with Baron and Xiong's (2017) finding that rapid credit growth predicts low bank stock returns.
However, entering the R-zone is also a strong predictor of bank failures, banking panics, and
bank equity crises.
         Finally, in rows (xi) and (xii), we show the results separately for developed and
developing countries. The business R-zone reliably predicts financial crises in both developed
and developing countries. The household R-zone is a reliable predictor for developed countries,
but is less reliable in developing countries. However, we are reluctant to draw strong
conclusions about the role of household credit in developing countries since it is only based on
106 country-year observations.

3.2.     Business versus household credit market overheating
         Mian, Sufi, and Verner (2017) emphasize the importance of household credit growth in
driving boom-bust economic cycles and highlight the differences between the dynamic



12
  We use 20 ­ (h ­ 1) years of data to fit our initial h-year forecasting regressions. Thus, we fit our initial h-year
forecasting regression on data from 1953 to 1973 ­ h and we make our forecast in for 1973 for all h. We make
our last forecast in 2012. We do not include country fixed effects in these out-of-sample forecasting exercises
since the need to estimate country effects, which are treated as incidental parameters in our baseline regressions,
leads fixed effects estimators to have worse out-of-sample performance than pooled OLS estimators.


                                                         16
implications of past growth in household and business credit. 13 So far, we have treated episodes
of business and household credit overheating separately, presenting results for R-zone
indicators constructed for each sector. This raises several questions. Do episodes of overheating
in the markets for business and household credit reflect a single underlying credit market factor,
or are these, to some extent, separate phenomena? If these are in fact separate phenomena, are
business or household credit booms equally important for predicting future crises. And, what
happens if both business and household credit markets overheat at the same time?
         The correlation between the housing sector R-zone and the business sector R-zone is
surprisingly low at just 0.16. Of the 114 country-years in the household sector R-zone, only 19
of these are also in the business sector R-zone. This low correlation is driven by the modest
underlying correlation between asset prices and credit growth in the two sectors. The
correlation between real stock price growth and real home price growth is only 0.19 across
country-years. Similarly, the correlation between nonfinancial business credit growth and
household credit growth is only 0.26.
         In Table 6 we combine our overheating indicators for the business and household
sectors to predict financial crises over horizons from 1 to 4 years. We do this to test if our
indicators for the two sectors forecast crises independently of each other. We estimate
regressions of the form:
                                ()
      ,+1 to + =                     +  ()   - +  ()  -                                                      (4)
                           +  ()  - +  ()   -
                                              
                                               + ,+1 to + ,

for h = 1, 2, 3, and 4. The first two predictors, as before, are the business and household R-
zones. We also include - = - × - --i.e., an indicator that switches

on when both the business and household sectors are in their respective R-zones. Finally, we
include - = max{-     
                  ,  - } that switches on when either sector is in

the R-zone.
         Table 6 shows the results. We focus our discussion here on forecasting crises at a 3-
year horizon. Column (3.1) shows that when R-zoneBus and R-zoneHH are both included in the
crisis forecasting regression, they each retain predictive power, with R-zoneBus attracting a
coefficient of 28.7% and R-zoneHH attracting a coefficient of 24.8%. Column (3.2) shows that
in the small number of cases when the economy is both in the business and household R-zones

13
  Specifically, Mian, Sufi, and Verner (2017) find that an increase in household-credit-to-GDP is associated with
boom in real GDP over the following two years and a subsequent economic bust. By contrast, a similarly sized
increase in business-credit-to-GDP is associated with a smaller, but immediate decline in real GDP. However,
changes in business-credit-to-GDP are roughly twice as volatile as changes in household-credit-to-GDP.


                                                      17
the probability of a crisis occurring within the next 3 years rises by 68.6%, while column (3.3)
shows that the degree of predictability remains if we exclude the main effects of business and
household R-zones and only keep their interaction. Although this probability is extremely high,
a simultaneous R-zone in the business and household sectors occurs only 19 times in our data.
Most of these episodes are well known, including Japan in 1988­1989, Spain in 2005­2007,
and Iceland 2005­2007.

3.3.   Local versus global credit market overheating
       As argued in Schularick and Taylor (2012), Agrippino and Rey (2020), and Mian, Sufi,
and Verner (2017), credit cycles share an important global component. To assess the common
global component of credit-market overheating and its role in forecasting crises, we construct
global business R-zone and global household R-zone variables which measure the fraction of
sample countries that are in the R-zone in each year. In Figure 2 we plot these two series,
                                               
  - and  - , over time. Figure 2 shows that   -
has surged three times in recent decades: from 1983­1989, from 1997­1999, and most recently
                                                                      
from 2004­2007. By contrast, there are just two large surges in the  - : from
1984­1989 and then again from 1999­2007.
       In Table 7 we ask whether these signals of global credit-market overheating improve
our ability to predict crises. Using our country-year panel, we estimate regressions of the form:
                           ( )
       ,+1 to + =                +  ()    - + ()   -
                                                                                               (5)
                       +  ()    - + 
                                     ()
                                          -
                                            + ,+1 to +

for h = 1, 2, 3, and 4. As shown in Table 7, both the local and global R-zone variables
independently signal an increased likelihood of a financial crisis. For instance, in column (3.1),
the estimated coefficient on   - is 18.3% and that on   -
                                                          is
              
116%. Since  - ranges from 0 to 0.325, this suggests that a country-year like
Israel in 2001, which was the only one of the 33 sample countries in the business R-zone at the
time, was facing an 21.8% = 18.3% + (1/33) × 116% greater crisis likelihood than it would in
normal times. By contrast, a country-year like Denmark in 2007, which was in the business R-
zone when 32.5% of the countries in our sample were also in the business R-zone, was facing
a 56% = 18.3% + 32.5% ×116% greater crisis likelihood. Including these global variables in
our forecasting regressions substantially increases the predictability of crises. For example, the
R2 when forecasting crises at a 3-year horizon is 19.2% is column (3.3), which far exceeds the
goodness of fit measures reported in Tables 4, 5, and 6.



                                               18
4.       Credit-market overheating and future economic growth
         Economists have long understood that the ex post onset of a financial crisis is typically
associated with a sizable contraction in real economic activity (Kaminsky and Reinhart 1999,
Reinhart and Rogoff 2009a, and Cecchetti, Kohler, and Upper 2009). Going further, there is
strong evidence that crises typically lead to a permanent loss of future output--i.e., while
output growth usually returns to its pre-crisis trend, the level of output often never returns to
its pre-crisis trend line (Cerra and Saxena 2008). A related literature argues that a current
tightening of credit conditions--signaled by a rise in credit spreads or a tightening of lending
standards--negatively predicts real activity at short horizons (e.g., 1- to 4-quarters ahead). 14
         Recent research also shows that ex ante signals of credit market overheating--i.e.,
indicators of easy credit conditions, including rapid growth in outstanding credit, an erosion in
borrower credit quality, or narrow credit spreads--negatively forecast real economic growth at
intermediate horizons ranging from two to five years. For instance, López-Salido, Stein, and
Zakrajsek (2017) show that overheating in the business credit market in year t--proxied using
a low average quality of business borrowers and low credit spreads--predicts low GDP growth
in year t + 3 using U.S. data from 1929 to 2015. Mian, Sufi, and Verner (2019) find that rapid
credit growth--and especially household credit growth--predicts low real GDP growth over
the medium run in a panel of 30 countries from 1960 to 2012. Kirti (2020) argues that rapid
credit growth that is accompanied by an erosion in lending standards--i.e., by declining
borrower credit quality--predicts low GDP growth in an international panel. By contrast, when
rapid credit growth is accompanied by stable lending standards, he finds no predictable decline
in growth. Finally, Adrian, Grinber, Liang and Malik (2018) estimate quantile regressions
which suggest that easy financial conditions and rapid credit growth raise the risk of a large
decline in real growth over the next three years.
         Combining these two strands of research, it appears that easy credit conditions are
associated with higher economic growth in the near term, but lower growth at intermediate
horizons. In this section, we examine the implications of entering the R-zone for future
economic growth. Two hypotheses drive this analysis. First, because the R-zone predicts
financial crises, and financial crises are associated with output declines, at some horizon the R-
zone likely portends lower output growth. However, this inference is complicated by the fact


14
   See, for example, Bernanke (1990), Friedman and Kuttner (1992), Gertler and Lown (1999), Gilchrist, Yankov,
and Zakrajsek (2009), and Gilchrist and Zakrajsek (2012). Adrian, Boyarchenko, and Giannone (2019) show that,
in addition to this decline in the conditional mean of near-term growth, a current tightening of financial conditions
is associated with increases in the volatility and skewness of near-term growth.


                                                        19
that the R-zone is persistent and that, so long as a credit boom continues, economic growth may
remain elevated in the short-run. Second, the R-zone is a strong but imperfect predictor of crises
and may predict weak economic growth even when it is not followed by a crisis.
        We begin by assessing the association between R-zone events and the distribution of
future GDP growth. Figure 3 provides a first look at the data, plotting the distribution of
cumulative annualized real GDP growth at horizons of h = 1 to 4 years following a R-zone
event in either sector--i.e., conditional on  -
                                                
                                                 = max{ -     
                                                          ,  - } = 1.

For comparison, we also plot the corresponding distribution of real GDP growth conditional
on  -
      
       = 0. At horizons of h = 3 and h = 4 years, Figure 3 shows that being in the
R-zone is associated with a clear leftward shift in the distribution of future real GDP growth.
        Table 8 reports the probability of a severe economic contraction within the next h = 1
to 4 years as a function of past 3-year credit growth and price growth. We first construct a
severe contraction indicator, Contractit, that switches on if the log growth of real GDP is below
­2% in country i in year t (real growth of ­2% is just below the 5th percentile in our full sample).
We say that country i experiences a severe contraction within h = 3 years following year t if
real GDP contracts by 2% or more in either year t + 1, t + 2, or t + 3. As in Table 3, we group
country-years into bins based on terciles of past 3-year price growth and quintiles of past 3-
year credit growth. The matrices on the left-hand side report the sample probability of
experiencing a contraction within the next h years for each of the bins--i.e., we report
 ( )
 , = ,+1 to +  Tercile(3 log( )) = , Quintile(3 (/) ) = 

where  ,+1 to + = max {,+1 , ... , ,+ }. The matrices on the

right report pT ,Q - p2,3 for each bin, thus showing how these conditional probabilities differ
              (h)     (h)



from those in a median year when asset growth is in the second tercile and credit growth is in
the third quintile. Panel A uses bins based on equity price growth and business credit growth,
while Panel B uses bins based on house price growth and household credit growth.
        Panel A of Table 8 shows the results for the business sector. At a horizon of 1-year, we
          (1)
see that 1,5 = 27.5% of the country-years with the lowest past growth in equity prices and
the highest past growth in business credit experience a severe contraction in GDP in the
following year. This is not surprising since this subset of country-years contains many countries
that are already in the midst of a financial crisis. Furthermore, starting from this initial position
of low equity price growth and high past business credit growth, the probability of experiencing




                                                 20
a severe contraction does not rise meaningfully when we look at longer horizons, reaching
     (4)
1,5 =33.9% after four years.
           A far more remarkable pattern arises following business R-zone events--i.e., country-
years with the highest past growth in equity prices and highest growth in business credit. While
a severe economic contraction has never occurred in the first year following a business R-zone
event, the probability of a severe contraction rises dramatically with each passing year,
                           (4)
eventually reaching 3,5 = 40.0% after four years.
           Table 9 shows cumulative real GDP growth at horizons from 1 through 4 years as a
function of past asset price growth and past credit-to-GDP growth. In other words, we report
     ( )
, = log (,+ /, )Tercile(3 log( )) = , Quintile(3 (/) ) = .

Panel A shows the results for the business sector; Panel B shows the results for households. As
                                                                                                  ( )       ( )
in Table 8, we present averages as well as differences from the median bin, , - 2,3 . The
results reveal a striking pattern: subsequent growth is low when credit growth is high and when
asset price growth is either very high or very low. When credit growth and asset price growth
are both high, the slow subsequent economic growth is naturally interpreted as the result of a
future financial crisis and the ensuing decline in growth. When credit growth is high and asset
price growth is low, the slow growth is naturally interpreted as a consequence of a crisis that
is already underway.


5.         Crisis prediction and financial stability policy
           While the Red-zone indicator has substantial predictive power for the arrival of a crisis
within three years, there are still large prediction errors: the R-zone fails to signal some crises
and also generates false alarms. This raises the question: How strong must the predictability be
to warrant taking early policy actions to either avert or mitigate the severity of financial crises?
           In Section 5.1, we show that different ways of defining R-zone events are associated
with a natural statistical tradeoff between false negative errors (i.e., crises that are not preceded
by a R-zone event) and false positive errors (i.e., R-zone events that do not precede a financial
crisis). 15 We show that many of the crises not preceded by a R-zone event are "near misses" in
the sense that credit and asset price growth fall just short of our assignment thresholds. This
motivates us to define a Yellow-zone or "Y-zone" in which credit and asset price growth are



15
   False positives are analogous to Type I errors in hypothesis testing (falsely rejecting the null hypothesis when
it is true). False negatives are analogous to Type II errors (falsely accepting the null hypothesis when it is false).


                                                         21
elevated, but not as high as in the R-zone. The Y-zone provides an early warning signal for a
larger fraction of crises than the R-zone, although it produces more false alarms.
       In Section 5.2 we use our data to construct a "policy possibility frontier," which
provides a more formal summary of the statistical tradeoff faced by policymakers. In Section
5.3, we examine the crises that R-zone and Y-zone fail to signal and the economic outcomes
that follow the R-zone's false alarms. Finally, in Section 5.4 we develop a simple economic
framework to quantify how a policymaker tasked with promoting financial stability should
trade off these false positive and false negative errors--e.g., when setting her threshold for
acting to "lean against the wind" of credit-market overheating. Taking the policy possibility
frontier as given, the optimal choice depends on the relative costs of these two types of policy
errors. While neither the R-zone nor the Y-zone are perfect predictors, we argue there is a strong
quantitative case for taking early action.

5.1.   Assessing predictive efficacy
       Table 10 summarizes the classification errors that arise when we use the R-zone
indicator to predict crises. We start by analyzing the business R-zone. A simple representation
of the predictive efficacy of the R-zone indicator is shown in the following contingency table:

                                    Crisis within 3 years:         No crisis within 3-years:
                                       ,+1 to +3 = 1                   ,+1 to +3 = 0

       R-zone: - = 1                 True Positives (#TP)             False Positives (#FP)
   No R-zone: - = 0                 False Negatives (#FN)             True Negatives (#TN)


Thus far, we have emphasized the "precision" or positive predictive value (PPV) of the R-zone
indicator--i.e., the percentage of R-zone events that are followed by a crisis within three years,
computed as  = #/(# + #). As shown in column (1) of Panel A of Table 10,
there are 75 country-years in our sample that qualify as business R-zone events. Of these, 34
are followed by a crisis within three years, so  = 34/75 = 45.3%, which is the same
conditional probability that we previously reported in Table 3. And, conditional on a true
positive, Panel A of Table 10 shows that, on average, the business R-zone indicator first
switches on 2.9 years prior to the onset of the crisis, providing ample early warning.
       Instead of looking across the rows of the contingency table, statisticians often use two
measures of predictive efficacy that look at the columns of the contingency table. First, all else
equal, we would like an indicator with a high "sensitivity" or true positive rate (TPR): we want
 = #/(# + #), the percentage of crises preceded by a R-zone, to be large. At


                                               22
the same time, we also want an indicator with a high "specificity" or true negative rate (TNR):
we want  = #/(# + #) to be large. Indeed, a perfect binary predictor would
have  =  = 1.
        A subtlety arises when calculating TPR and TNR in our setting because R-zone events
often occur in streaks. We do not want a crisis that was preceded by a R-zone event in each of
the previous three years to count as three separate true positives. For example, Denmark was
in the business R-zone in 2005, 2006, and 2007 and experienced a crisis in 2008. Thus, we
compute the true positive rate, TPR, as the percentage of crisis-onset country-years that were
preceded by a R-zone event in any of the three prior years. Analogously, we compute the true
negative rate, TNR, as the percentage of non-crisis onset years that were preceded by zero R-
zone events in the prior three years. 16
        As shown in column (1) of Panel A, the true positive rate for the business R-zone
indicator is  = 20/50 = 40% because, of the 50 financial crises in our sample, 20 were
preceded by a business R-zone event in the prior three years. The true negative rate for the
business R-zone is  = 1,077/1,208 = 89.2% because, of the 1,208 non-crisis years in
our sample, 1,088 were not preceded by a business R-zone event in the prior three years.
        The remaining columns of Table 10 Panel A repeat these calculations for different
measures of the R-zone--a household R-zone event, an "either" R-zone event, or a "both" R-
zone event. As shown in column (2), the household R-zone is a more sensitive indicator of
future financial crises ( = 47.7%) than the business version, but is slightly less specific
( = 84.4%) and less precise ( = 36.8%). If we allow either household or business
R-zone events to signal a crisis in column (3), sensitivity rises ( = 64.0%), but specificity
( = 78.7%) and precision ( = 35.9%) fall. On the other hand, when we require both
the business and the household sector to be in the R-zone in column (4), sensitivity falls
significantly ( = 15.9%), but there are large improvements in specificity ( =
97.1%) and precision ( = 78.9%).
        This discussion illustrates the statistical tradeoff between false negative errors (crises
that are not preceded by a R-zone event) and false positive errors (R-zone events that do not
precede a financial crisis). The general principle is that using a less stringent set of criteria for
switching on the R-zone indicator of credit-market overheating reduces the number of false
negatives but raises the number of false positives. As a result, a more liberal definition of the


16
   More formally, when we compute TPR and TNR, the binary classifier in our contingency table is
max {- ,-1 , - ,-2 , - ,-3 } and the binary outcome is  - , .



                                                 23
R-zone results in greater test sensitivity (higher TPR), but this comes at the expense of lower
specificity (lower TNR) and, by extension, lower precision (lower PPV).
         To explore this tradeoff, in Panel B we loosen the criterion for switching on our credit-
market overheating indicator. We construct a new variable called the Yellow-zone given by
- = 1{3 (/) > 60th percentile} × 1{3 log( ) > 33.3th percentile}.
Thus, R-zone events are a subset of the Y-zone events, with the latter corresponding to the four
cells in the lower-right-hand corner of the matrices shown in Tables 3, 8, and 9. We construct
the Yellow-zone separately for the business sector (- ) and household sector ( -

 ). Comparing the results for the Yellow-zone in Panel B with those for the Red-zone

in Panel A, across all four columns we see that adopting these looser criteria for credit-market
overheating significantly raises the true positive rate (TPR) and, conditional on a true positive,
provides earlier warning that there is an incipient crisis. For example, - signals crises

about two years earlier than  - on average. This increased sensitivity comes at the cost

of a lower true negative rate (TNR) and a lower positive predictive value (PPR).

5.2.     Mapping the tradeoff between false positive and false negative errors
         In Figure 4 we systematically map out the empirical tradeoff between false positive and
false negative errors that policymakers face. To do so, we vary the cutoffs for labeling past
credit and asset price growth as "high." For each possible pair of cutoffs ( , ), we first
recompute  - = 1{3 (/ ) >  } × 1{3 log( ) >  }. Using each
candidate definition of R-zone, we next compute the true positive rate (TPR), the true negative
rate (TNR), and the positive predictive value (PPV). In Panel A, we first plot the outer boundary
of the the set of possible R-zone-style signals in (PPV, TPR) space. Specifically, for each value
of TPR, we compute the highest possible PPV among the set of R-zone-style signals that
achieve at least this specified level of TNR. Similarly, Panel B plots the outer boundary in
(TNR, TPR) space, tracing out a curve that we call the "policy possibility frontier." 17
         Panel A plots the highest PPV on the vertical axis (the percentage of R-zone events
succeeded by a crisis) that is attainable for a each level of TPR on the horizontal axis (the
percentage of crises preceded by an R-zone). Using our baseline definition of the business R-

17
   The plot of TNR against TPR is monotonically decreasing. To see why, note that the total number of observations
in each column of the contingency table is fixed. As we reduce  or  , loosening the criterion for the R-zone,
we move observations from the bottom to the top row. Thus, using a less stringent test must raise TPR and reduce
TPR, tracing out a decreasing curve. However, the plot of PPV versus TNR can be locally increasing, even though
it is globally decreasing. Consider a small reduction in either  or  . If this change only moves false negatives
to true positives, it will raise the PPV. By contrast, if it only moves true negatives to false positives, it will lower
the PPV. The total impact on PPV depends on the net of these two forces, which can either be positive or negative.


                                                          24
zone (setting  and  to 80th and 66th percentiles of the sample distribution), Panel A shows
that we detect TPR = 40% of crises and PPV = 45.3% of R-zones are followed by a crisis. If
we require less extreme credit or asset price growth before switching on the R-zone indicator,
this raises the true positive rate, but reduces the positive predictive value. For example, if we
set the cutoffs so low that TPR = 80% of crises are preceded by business R-zone events, only
PPV = 21.4% of R-zones events are followed by a crisis. On the other extreme, if we set the
cutoffs so high that TPR = 20%, then PPV = 80% of R-zone events are followed by a crisis.
         The middle figure in Panel A shows a similar tradeoff for the household sector. 18 The
right-most figure in Panel A shows the gains in the positive predictive value for a given true
positive rate that can be obtained by combining information from the business and household
sectors. In addition to only considering  - and  - as we vary the cutoffs

( , ), we now also consider  -
                               
                                = max{ -     
                                         ,  - } and  -

 =  - × - . The figure shows that using  -
                                          
                                           yields the
highest level of PPV when TPR is low. At the same time,  -
                                                           
                                                            performs best when
TPR is high. In other words, the figure shows that one can improve predictive efficacy by
combining information on the business and household sectors.
         Panel B shows our empirical policy possibility frontier, plotting the highest TNR (the
percentage of non-crises that are not preceded by a R-zone event) that is attainable for each
TPR. 19 As we loosen the criterion for entering the R-zone, reducing either  or  , this raises
the true positive rate (TPR), but reduces the true negative rate (TNR). Using our baseline
definition of the business R-zone, the left-most figure shows that TPR = 40% and TNR = 89.2%.
However, if we relax the cutoffs so TPR = 80%, then TNR = 52.2%. The middle figure repeats
this analysis for the household sector. The right-most figure shows that combining information
from the business and household sectors shifts the policy possibility frontier outwards.

5.3.     Economic outcomes following false negatives and false alarms
         Striking the appropriate tradeoff between false negatives and false positives hinges on
the real economic outcomes in each of these cases. To shed some preliminary light on these



18
   Since the production possibility frontier is the outer boundary of all feasible R-zone-like signals, our baseline
definition of R-zone need not lie on the frontier. It turns out that our baseline definition of the business R-zone lies
on the frontier, but our baseline version of the household R-zone lies just inside the frontier.
19
   Our policy possibility frontier curve in Panel B is similar to the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve
that is regularly used to assess the accuracy of a binary classification system. The ROC curve plots TPR on the
vertical axis versus 1 -  on the horizontal axis. The area under the ROC curve is the same as the area under
our policy possibility frontier.


                                                          25
costs, we explore the crises that the R-zone fails to signal--the false negatives--and the
economic outcomes that follow the false alarms that are generated by the R-zone indicator.
       We begin by examining the crises the Red-zone fails to signal. For each of the 50
country-years in our sample in which BVX (2020) say a crisis began (in which -
, = 1), Figure 5 plots the price growth and debt growth percentiles of the year closest
to the R-zone out of the three years preceding the crisis. Business and household R-zones are
shown using different markers. Subsequent 3-year real GDP growth following the onset of the
crisis is indicated using different colors. The top right area of the graph, shaded in red, shows
the R-zone events where price and credit growth are jointly elevated. As previously shown in
Table 10, we see that  = 32/50 = 64% of crises were either preceded by a business R-
zone or a household R-zone. Thus, the R-zone misses  = 18/50 = 36% of crises.
       Figure 5 shows that many of the Red-zone's "near misses" are associated with how we
have defined the R-zone. For example, if we were to instead use the Yellow-zone which is
shaded in yellow, adopting lower thresholds for past credit and asset price growth, we would
have caught nine additional crises, bringing the true positive rate to  = 41/50 = 82%.
With the exceptions of Spain in 1975 and Turkey-2001, subsequent GDP growth was very low
or even negative following these nine crises, suggesting that these false negatives may have
been costly and arguing in favor of adopting a less stringent test for responding to credit-market
overheating, all else equal.
       Even our expanded Y-zone indicator misses nine financial crises. Of the nine crises not
preceded by a Y-zone event, seven followed shortly on the heels of an earlier crises, including
Turkey in 1994, Japan in 1997 and 2001, three European countries that were involved in the
2011 Eurozone crisis (Austria, Denmark, and Portugal), and Portugal in 2014. It is perhaps not
surprising these "double-dip" crises were not preceded by elevated levels of credit and asset
price growth. It may then be worthwhile to look for a different set of indicators that can be used
to assess the risk of relapse following an initial crisis. We leave this topic to future research.
       Finally, in Table 11, we examine the economic outcomes following false negatives, the
R-zone events that were not followed by a crisis. To do so, we estimate regressions of the form:
                                   ( )
     log (,+ /, ) =                      +  ()  - , × ,+1 to +3                                 (9)
                               +  ()   -, × (1 - ,+1 to +3 ) + ,+1 to + ,

for h = 1, 2, 3, and 4. The  () coefficients trace out the change in the expected path of real
GDP growth conditional on a true positive, whereas the  () show the same change
conditional on a false positive. We find  () < 0, a result that is almost hardwired since we


                                                26
know that financial crises lead to large declines in real GDP. However, our main interest lies
with  () . For the business R-zone, we find that  () is positive, but economically small:
 (3) = 1.3% (t = 1.0). For the household R-zone,  () is negative, but small:  (3) =
-0.9% (t = -1.0). This analysis suggests the costs of false positives may be relatively small.

5.4.     Are crises sufficiently predictable to warrant early action by policymakers?
         Given the statistical tradeoff between false positives and false negatives, what should a
policymaker tasked with promoting financial stability do? In other words, given a policy
possibility frontier, what point on that frontier should a policymaker choose? Taking steps to
avert crises, the policymaker runs the risk of leaning against the wind based on false alarms.
The optimal threshold for taking early action depends on the cost of acting based on a false
alarm, compared to the cost of failing to act when the risk of a crisis is truly elevated.
         In this subsection, we develop a simple framework to formalize this tradeoff. 20 Using
the policy possibility frontier we estimated above, our analysis suggests policymakers should
only adopt a "do nothing" strategy--i.e., never taking preventative actions even when concerns
about credit-market overheating become acute--if they think the costs of false positives are
extremely large relative to the costs of false negatives.
         With probability  the risk of a crisis is high and with probability 1 -  the risk of a
crisis is low. The true level of crisis risk is not observed by the policymaker. However, the
policymaker has access to contiuum of informative, but imperfect binary statistical tests that
she can use to guide a binary policy action--e.g., tightening monetary policy, increasing
minimum bank capital requirements, or reducing maximum loan-to-value ratios--that may
reduce either the likelihood or severity of a crisis. We assume this preventative action yields
benefits if the risk of a crisis is truly high, but is costly if it is not.21
         If the policymaker chooses a statistical test with a true positive rate of    [0,1], the
test has a true negative rate given by   =  (  ). The plot of   =  (  )
versus   is the policy possibility frontier. We assume this frontier is downward sloping:
 ( ) < 0--i.e., the policymaker faces the usual statistical tradeoff between the true



20
   Our framework adapts the textbook approach for choosing the optimal threshhold in a binary classification
problem (see, e.g., Pepe 2003 or Baker and Kramer 2007) to a financial stability setting. Drehmann and Juselius
(2013) have also applied this textbook approach to the problem of deciding when to lean against the wind.
21
   For simplicity, we focus on the tradeoff faced by a policymaker who can only take a single binary preventative
action. In a more realistic setting, the policymaker might take a series of incremental policy actions in response to
the informative, but imperfect signals she receives about the evolving true level of financial instability risk. In this
richer dynamic setting, the tradeoffs are similar: the policymaker must trade off the costs of under-escalation if
she underestimates the true level of risk, as judged relative to the costs of over-escalation if she overestimates risk.


                                                          27
negative and true positive rates. We also assume  (0) = 1,  (1) = 0,                                            and
 (
    ) < 0. Finally, since these tests are based on informative signals, we have
 ( ) > 1 -   for all    (0,1). 22
         There are four possible outcomes:

         ·    True negative: If the risk of a crisis is truly low and the test says so, the policymaker
              does not take the preventative action and total real economic output is  > 0. If
              the policymaker chooses a test with a true positive rate given by   , the
              unconditional probability of a true negative is (1 - ) ×  (  ).
         ·    False positive: If the risk of a crisis is truly low but the test says risk is high, the
              policymaker takes the action, leading output to fall to  -  . The cost of this
              false alarm,  > 0, would be large if one thinks unnecessary actions to "lean
              against the wind" have a large social cost when the risk of a crisis is not truly high.
              The unconditional probability of a false positive is (1 - ) × (1 -  (  )).
         ·    True positive: If the is risk of a crisis is high and the test says so, the policymaker
              takes the action and real output is  > 0. The probability of a true positive is
               ×   .
         ·    False negative: If the risk of a crisis is truly elevated but the test says that risk is
              low, the policymaker fails to take the preventative action and output falls to  -
               . The cost of this false negative error,  > 0, would be large if one thinks that
              the preventative action yields large benefits when the risk of a crisis is truly
              elevated. The unconditional probability of a true positive is  ×   .
We assume the social payoff from output level  is () where  () > 0 and  ()  0. 23
         Putting everything together, the policymaker solves the following problem:

         max [0,1] { × [  × ( ) + (1 -   ) × ( -  )]                                                             (6)
                   +(1 - ) × [ ( ) × ( ) + (1 -  ( )) × ( -  )]}.

The first order condition implies that, at an interior optimum where    (0,1), we have:
                                       Slope of policy                    Slope of policy
       Slope of policy               indifference curves                indifference curves
     possibility frontier
          
                                  ( ) - ( -  )              ( )
                                                             
        (  )
                            =-                   =-
                                                              )
                                                                ,                                               (7)
                               1 -  ( ) - ( -  )    1 -    (



22
  The positive predictive value is the probability risk is truly high conditional on the test signaling high risk. We
have  (  ) = [  ] ÷   + (1 - )1 -  (  ) and one can show that   (  ) < 0.
23
  Instead of inducing more or less favorable realizations of future output, different combinations of the true binary
state--whether or not risk is truly high--and the binary policy action could lead to more of less favorable
probability distributions for the present value of future output. Specifically, the expectation of () conditional
on a true positive would exceed that conditional on a false negative; similarly, the expectation of () conditional
on a true negative would exceed that conditional on a false positive. This is the perhaps most natural way to think
about the choice confronting a policymaker who is using an early warning indicator to lean against the wind.


                                                        28
where   ( -  ,  ) and   ( -  ,  ). Assuming an interior solution, we have
                       
  / > 0,   / < 0, and   / > 0. If  () < 0, we also have
             
  / < 0 and   / > 0.
         Figure 6 illustrates this tradeoff graphically. The figure plots the policy possibility
frontier,   =  (  ), in (  ,   ) space alongside policymakers' indifference
                                                     
curves. The optimal choice of   occurs at the point   where the policy possibility frontier
is tangent to the indifference curves. Panel A illustrates this tradeoff for an initial position of
the policy possibility frontier. The flat, dashed red line shows a case where  / is low--
                                                                                         
i.e., where false alarms are quite costly relative to misses, leading to a low level of   . The
steep, solid red line shows a case where  / is high--i.e., where misses are quite costly
                                                      
relative to false alarms, leading to a high level of   . Panel B illustrates how the tradeoff
changes when crises become more predictable, leading to an outward shift in the policy
possibility frontier. When  / is low, the policymaker's indifference curves are relatively
flat. As a result, an outward shift in the policy possibility frontier raises the optimal level
 
  . 24
         If crises are completely unpredictable (i.e., if  (  ) = 1 -   ), the optimum
must be at a corner where policy is not state contingent. Specifically, if  or  / are small
                                                
enough, the policymaker never takes the action ( = 0); otherwise, she always take the
        
action ( = 1). As crises become more predictable, the policy possibility frontier shifts out
and these corner solutions only remain optimal if the her indifference curves are extremely flat
                                               
(implying   = 0) or extremely steep (implying   = 1). In other words, an increase is
the predictability of financial crises should lead a policymaker to adopt state-contingent
policies to lean against the wind.
                               
         The optimal level of   depends on the specific action under consideration and on
prevailing economic conditions since these shape the costs of false negatives and the costs of
false positives. 25 For example, a policymaker might decide to take some mild preventative
actions (where  / is larger) based on a looser criterion such as the Y-zone, and only take
stronger actions (where  / is smaller) based on a more stringent criterion like the R-zone.


                                                                                     
24
   An outward shift in the policy possibility frontier has an ambiguous impact on       . Such a shift must flatten
the frontier for smaller   and steepen the frontier for larger   . Thus, there is some cutoff   (0,1) such
                                                                                             
that an outward shift in the frontier raises     whenever       <  and lowers         when        > .
25
   Suppose the economy is near full employment and inflation is near target. Then, moderately tightening monetary
policy or moderately raising equity capital requirements for banks in response to concerns about credit-market
                                                                                 
overheating might be a case where  / is large, calling for a high value of          . However, the calculus would
                                                                                                 
arguably shift if unemployment is currently elevated: this would tend to raise  and reduce          .


                                                       29
         For our purposes, the main question is whether crises are sufficiently predictable--
using past credit growth and past asset price growth alone--to justify taking early action in
response to rising financial stability concerns. Although the exact form of such an early policy
intervention is beyond the scope of this paper--e.g., whether the policymaker should tighten
monetary policy, increase minimum bank capital requirements, or reduce maximum loan-to-
value ratios--we can address the simpler question of whether, based on our evidence, a
policymaker might reasonably argue that there are grounds for never taking any preventative
                                   
actions--i.e., for always setting   = 0.
         To address this question, we assume the unconditional probability of an incipient crisis
is  = 4%, consistent with the annual probability of the onset of a crisis reported in Table 1.
Second, we assume the policymaker is risk neutral, implying  ( )/ ( ) = 1. This
assumption is conservative. It would be more reasonable to assume the policymaker is risk
averse and  <  , implying  ( )/ ( ) > 1 and, thus, pushing towards a higher value for
 
  in Equation (7).
         Finally, we write  / = ( / ) × ( / ), where  is the fraction of the
costs of a financial crisis  that can be mitigated by taking early preventative action and
 is the fraction of non-crisis output  that is lost when the policymaker takes actions in
response to a false alarm. Note that  / is the ratio of two macroeconomic "treatment
effects." Unfortunately, we lack rigourous, model-free estimates of  / for different policy
actions. However, the literature does provide guidance about the magnitude of  / --i.e.,
the cost of a crisis as a percentage of pre-crisis GDP. Beginning with Cerra and Saxena (2008),
most studies find that  / is quite large because financial crises typically lead to a
permanent loss of future output. Specifically, while output growth usually returns to its pre-
crisis trend following a crisis, the level of output does not return to its pre-crisis trendline. Basel
Committee on Banking Supersion (2010) undertakes a meta-analysis of studies that estimate
the discounted present value of crisis-induced real output losses as a percentage of pre-crisis
GDP. Averaging across studies that allow for crises to have a permanent effect on GDP, they
estimate the present value of output losses equal 145% of annual pre-crisis GDP. We assume
that  / = 1.5 for concreteness. 26




26
  See Table A1.1 in BCBS (2010). BCBS (2010) suggests that these estimates are quite conservative since they
are usually obtained by assuming that the appropriate real discount rate for computing the present value of crisis-
induced real output losses exceeds the steady-state growth rate of real output by a hefty 5 percentage points.


                                                       30
         Using these parameters and the estimated policy possibility frontier from the right-most
column of Table 4 Panel B which combines information from the business and household
                                      
sectors, Figure 7 shows the solution   as we vary  / . We report the solution to: 27

                                    ( )          0.04             
          (  )
               = -                ×     ×  ×  =-      × 1 × 1.5 ×  .                                        (8)
                              1 -   ( )          0.96             

For example, if a forceful early action to lean against the wind--e.g., significantly raising bank
capital requirements in response to credit-market overheating--would lower the expected
severity of an incipient crisis by 30%, but would reduce the level of GDP by 1 percentage point
for two years if there is no crisis, we would have  / = 30%/2% = 15, implying an
                        
optimal sensitivity of   = 68%. Figure 7 also shows the positive predicted value--the
fraction of R-zone signals that are followed by a crisis within three years--that corresponds to
this optimal true positive rate. Specifically, if  / = 15, Figure 7 indicates that
policymakers should take early action once the probability of a crisis arriving within three years
rises above 31%. Based on the results for our original R-zone definitions in Table 10, Figure 7
suggests a policymaker should be willing to take actions with  / = 15 once the economy
enters either the business or the household R-zone which yields  = 64% and  = 36%.
         Figure 7 further suggests a "do nothing" strategy can only be justified for very small
                                                                     
values of  / . Based on our estimates, policymakers should only set    0.1 if they
believe  / is less 1.1, a number that seems almost implausibly small.28 For instance, a
policymaker would need to believe the action to lean against the wind discussed above, which
we assume would reduce GDP by 1 percentage point for two years if there is no crisis, would
only reduce the expected severity of an incipient crisis by 2.2%. In other words, policymakers
should only adopt a "do nothing" strategy if they hold fairly extreme views about the costs of
failing to respond to financial stability threats as compared to the costs of false alarms.

6. Conclusion
         Using two simple variables, past credit growth and past asset price growth, we construct
a danger zone, the R-zone, in which the probability of a financial crisis over the next three years

27                
    To estimate      (  ), we first estimate  (  ) parametrically using nonlinear least squares. We assume
that  (  ) = 1 - ((-1 (  ) - )/) where () is the standard normal cumulative distribution
function. We obtain,  = 0.95 and  = 0.85 with 2 = 99.96%. Using these estimates, we then obtain
      (  ) = -(1/) × [((-1 (  ) - )/)] ÷ [(-1 (  )].

                                                                        
28
   Taken literally, our estimates suggest policymakers should only set      = 0 if they believe  /  0.01.
                                                                           
Instead, of emphasizing this corner, we emphasize a near corner solution,      0.1, because (i) there is far more
                         (0) than the level of   (  ) for   near zero and (ii) we assume many of those who
uncertainty about 
generally oppose leaning against the wind do not believe policymakers should never lean against the wind.


                                                      31
is roughly 40%. In 2006, the U.S. and many other advanced economies were deep inside that
danger zone, a clear harbinger of the global financial crisis that would erupt in 2007 and 2008.
        Does our finding that the conditional probability of a crisis occasionally rises above
40% warrant the conclusion that crises are predictable? A champion of unpredictability might
say no. After all, even starting in the R-zone, which only occurs in 6% and 10% of all country-
years for the business and household sectors, respectively, it is far from certain that a crisis will
occur. In this regard, two points are in order. First, since financial crises typically lead to
permanent reductions in real economic output (Cerra and Saxena 2008), a 40% conditional
probability might be more than enough to warrant some precautionary macro-financial policies,
such as tightening monetary policy or raising bank capital requirements. Second, we reached
these conclusions with two just country-level variables--past credit growth and asset price
growth--because we are using a large historical dataset. Even simply adding the global
versions of our R-zone indicators sharply increases predictability. And, several other variables
appear to have incremental forecasting power for crises, including credit spreads and the
leverage of financial institutions (Richter, Schularick and Wachtel 2020). A policymaker with
access to such data would presumably have a better estimate of the likelihood of a crisis.
        Our conclusion, then, is that financial crises are sufficiently predictable that early action
in response to credit market overheating can generate substantial benefits. Our evidence
supports the view that the economic system is vulnerable to predictable boom-bust cycles
driven by credit expansion and asset price growth. This view, and the recent theoretical models
that formalize it, suggest that policymakers should consider prophylactic policy interventions
that lean against the wind. Indeed, the post-global financial crisis era has witnessed the advent
of several macroprudential tools that have recently been used in precisely this manner,
including the introduction of time-varying bank capital requirements under Basel III, and the
increased use of time-varying maximum loan-to-value standards. 29 A little more policing, and
a little less firefighting, can help foster financial stability.




29
  While there is a growing consensus that policymakers should use these new macroprudential tools to lean
against the wind, disagreement remains about whether monetary policy should be tightened in response to credit
market overheating. See Stein (2013, 2014), Adrian and Liang (2018), and Gourio, Sim, and Kashyap (2018) for
arguments that monetary policy should be used in this way. See Svensson (2017) for the opposite view.


                                                     32
References

Adrian, Tobias, Nina Boyarchenko, and Domenico Giannone 2019, Vulnerable growth,
       American Economic Review 109, 1263-1289.
Adrian, Tobias, Federico Grinberg, Nellie Liang, and Sheheryar Malik, 2018, The term
       structure of growth-at-risk, Working paper.
Adrian, Tobias and Nellie Liang, 2018, Monetary policy, financial conditions, and financial
       stability, International Journal of Central Banking 14, 73-131,
Agrippino, Silvia Miranda and Helene Rey, 2020, U.S. monetary policy and the global
       financial cycle, The Review of Economic Studies, (forthcoming).
Baker, Stuart G. and Barnett S. Kramer, 2007, Peirce, Youden, and receiver operating
       characteristic curves, The American Statistician 61(4), 343-346.
Baron, Matthew, Emil Verner, and Wei Xiong, 2020, Bank equity and banking crises, Working
       paper.
Baron, Matthew, and Wei Xiong, 2017, Credit expansion and neglected crash risk, Quarterly
       Journal of Economics 132, 713-764.
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, 2010, An assessment of the long-term impact of
       stronger capital and liquidity requirements, Bank for International Settlements, Basel,
       Switzerland.
Bernanke, Ben S., 1990, On the predictive power of interest rates and interest rate spreads,
      New England Economic Review Nov/Dec, 51-68.
Bernanke, Ben S., and Gertler, Mark, 2000, Monetary policy and asset price volatility. NBER
      Working Paper Series No. 7559.
Bordalo, Pedro, Nicola Gennaioli, and Andrei Shleifer, 2018, Diagnostic expectations and
       credit cycles, Journal of Finance 73, 199-227.
Bordalo, Pedro, Nicola Gennaioli, Andrei Shleifer, and Stephen J. Terry, 2019, Real credit
       cycles, Working paper.
Borio, Claudio. 2014. The financial cycle and macroeconomics: What have we learnt? Journal
       of Banking & Finance 45, 182-198.
Borio, Claudio, and Mathias Drehmann, 2009, Assessing the risk of banking crises ­ Revisited,
       BIS Quarterly Review, March, 29-46.
Borio, Claudio and Philip Lowe, 2002, Asset prices, financial and monetary stability: exploring
       the nexus, BIS Working paper Series, No. 114, July.
Cecchetti, Stephen G., Marion Kohler, and Christian Upper, 2009, Financial crises and
      economic activity, BIS Working paper.
Cerra, Valerie and Sweta Chaman Saxena, 2008, Growth dynamics: The myth of economic
       recovery, American Economic Review 98, 439-457.
Chari, Varadarajan and Patrick Kehoe, 2003, Hot Money, Journal of Political Economy 111,
       1262-1292.
Cole, Harold and Kehoe, Timothy, 2000, Self-Fulfilling Debt Crises, Review of Economic
       Studies 67, 91-116.



                                              33
Drehmann, Mathias and Mikael Juselius, 2014, Evaluating early warning indicators of banking
      crises: Satisfying policy requirements, International Journal of Forecasting 30(3), 759-
      780
Driscoll, John C. and Aart C. Kraay, 1998, Consistent covariance matrix estimation with
       spatially dependent panel data, Review of Economics and Statistics 80, 549-560.
Eggertsson, Gautiand, and Paul Krugman 2012, Debt, deleveraging, and the liquidity trap: A
       Fisher-Minsky-Koo approach, Quarterly Journal of Economics 127, 1469-1513.
Friedman, Benjamin M. and Kenneth Kuttner, 1992, Money, income, prices, and interest rates,
      American Economic Review 82, 472-492.
Geithner, Timothy F. Stress Test: Reflections on Financial Crises. Penguin Random House.
       (New York) 2014.
Gennaioli, Nicola and Andrei Shleifer. A Crisis of Beliefs: Investor Psychology and Financial
      Fragility. Princeton University Press. (Princeton) 2018.
Gertler, Mark, and Cara S. Lown, 1999, The Information in the high-yield bond spread for the
        business cycle: Evidence and some implications, Oxford Review of Economic Policy
        15, 132-150.
Gilchrist, Simon, Vladimir Yankov, and Egon Zakrajsek, 2009, Credit market shocks and
       economic fluctuations: Evidence from corporate bond and stock markets, Journal of
       Monetary Economics 56, 471-493.
Gilchrist, Simon, and Egon Zakrajsek, 2012, Credit spreads and business cycle fluctuations,
       American Economic Review 102, 1692-1749.
Gorton, Gary B. Misunderstanding Financial Crises: Why We Don't See Them Coming.
       Oxford University Press. (Oxford) 2012.
Gourio, Francois, Jae Sim, and Anil K. Kashyap, 2018, The trade offs in leaning against the
       wind, IMF Economic Review 66, 70-115.
Greenwood, Robin, Samuel G. Hanson, 2013, Issuer quality and corporate bond returns,
      Review of Financial Studies 26, 1483-1525.
Greenwood, Robin, Samuel G. Hanson, and Lawrence J. Jin, 2019, Reflexivity in credit
      markets, NBER Working Paper Series, No. 25747.
Guerrieri, Veronica, and Guido Lorenzoni, 2017, Credit crises, precautionary savings, and the
       liquidity trap, Quarterly Journal of Economics 132, 1427-1467.
Hall, Robert E., 2011, The high sensitivity of economic activity to financial frictions, The
       Economic Journal 121, 351-378.
Jordà, Òscar, 2005, Estimation and hnference of impulse responses by local projections,
       American Economc Review 95, 161-182.
Jordà, Òscar, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor, 2015, Leveraged bubbles, Journal of
       Monetary Economics 76, 1-20.
Jordà, Òscar, Moritz Shularick, and Alan M. Taylor, 2017, Macrofinancial history and the new
        business cycle facts, NBER Macroeconomics Annual 31, 213-263.
Kaminsky, Graciela L, and Carmen M. Reinhart, 1999, The twin crises: The cause of banking
      and balance-of-payments problems, American Economic Review 89, 473-500.




                                             34
Kiefer, Nicholas M. and Timothy J. Vogelsang, 2005, A new asymptotic theory for
       heteroskedasticity-autocorrelation robust tests, Econometric Theory 21(6), 1130-1164.
Kindleberger, Charles P. Manias, Panics and Crashes. Basic Books, (New York) 1978.
Kirti, Divya, 2020, Lending standards and output growth, IMF Working paper No. 18/23.
Korinek, Anton, and Alp Simsek, 2016, Liquidity trap and excessive leverage, American
      Economic Review 106, 699-738.
Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Tyler Muir, 2018, Credit spreads and the severity of financial
       crises, Working paper.
Lopez-Salidó, David, Jeremy Stein, and Egon Zakrajsek, 2017, Credit-market sentiment and
      the business cycle, Quarterly Journal of Economics 132, 1373-1426.
Mbaye, Samba, Marialuz Moreno-Badia, and Kyungla Chae, 2018, Global debt database:
      Methodology and sources, IMF Working Paper No. 18/111.
Mian, Atif R, Amir Sufi, and Emil Verner 2017, Household debt and business cycles
      worldwide, Quarterly Journal of Economics 132, 1755-1817.
Minsky, Hyman. Stabilizing an Unstable Economy. Yale University Press (New Haven) 1986.
Newey, Whitney K., and Kenneth D. West, 1987, A simple, positive semi-definite,
      heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation consistent covariance matrix, Econometrica 55,
      703-708.
Pepe, Margaret S. The statistical evaluation of medical tests for classification and prediction.
       Oxford University Press. (Oxford, UK). 2003.
Reinhart, Carmen M. and Kenneth S. Rogoff (2009), The Aftermath of Financial Crises,
       American Economic Review 99, 466-472.
Reinhart, Carmen M, and Kenneth Rogoff, 2011, From financial crash to debt crisis, American
       Economic Review 101, 1676-1706.
Richter, Björn, Moritz Schularick, and Paul Wachterl, 2020, When to lean against the wind,
       Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking (forthcoming).
Schularick, Moritz and Alan M. Taylor, 2012, Credit booms gone bust, American Economic
       Review 102, 1029-1061.
Stein, Jeremy C., 2013, Overheating in credit markets: Origins, measurement, and policy
        Responses. Remarks at the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, February 7, 2013,
        https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/stein20130207a.htm.
Stein, Jeremy C., 2014, Incorporating financial stability considerations into a monetary policy
        framework, Remarks at the International Research Forum on Monetary Policy, March
        21, 2014, https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/stein20140321a.htm.
Svensson, Lars E.O., 2017, Cost-benefit analysis of leaning against the wind, Journal of
      Monetary Economics 90, 193-213.




                                              35
Table 1: Summary Statistics

This table presents summary statistics for our main variables in %. Our sample is an
unbalanced panel from 42 countries from 1950 to 2016. 3 denotes changes over three
years. Outstanding debt covers loans and debt securities as retrieved from the IMF's
Global Debt Database, and supplemented with data from BIS's total credit statistics
and loans data from MacroHistory.net. Equity price indices are retrieved primarily
from Global Financial Data, supplemented with data from Bloomberg, the IMF and
MacroHistory.net. House price indices are retrieved from the BIS's Selected property price
series, and supplemented with data from OECD and MacroHistory.net. An overview of
datasources for outstanding debt and price indices is available in Table A3, A4 and A5.
Financial crisis indicators are retrieved from Baron, Verner and Xiong (2019) (BVX),
Jord´a, Schularick and Taylor (2017) and Reinhart and Rogoff (2011), and data on real
GDP and inflation is retrieved from the World Bank's World Development Indicators and
the IMF's International Financial Statistics, respectively, both supplemented with data
from MacroHistory.net. Inflation data for Argentina is retrieved from Banco Central de
la Rep´ublica Argentina.


                                          N          Mean     SD
          Financial Crisis Indicators:
 Baron, Verner and Xiong (2019) (%)      1281         3.98   19.56
    Schularick and Taylor (2012) (%)      909         2.64   16.04
     Reinhart and Rogoff (2009) (%)      1109         3.61   18.65

        Crashes, Failures and Panics:
             Bank Equity Crash (%)       1280         8.52   27.92
                  Bank Failures (%)      1281         3.51   18.42
                           Panics (%)    1281         3.04   17.19

                             GDP:
                1 log real GDP (%)       1281         3.28    3.21

                                                                             Quantiles
                        Debt Growth:                                 Q20     Q40 Q60       Q80
      3 Business Debt / GDP (%)          1258         3.86   20.74   -2.75   1.03   3.99   8.99
      3 Household Debt / GDP (%)         1107         3.58    5.74   -0.26   1.63   3.94   7.60
              3 log real Debt (%)        1281         5.97    5.62    1.75   4.35   6.81   9.75

                       Price Growth:                                    Q33.3         Q66.7
       3 log real Equity Index (%)       1258         8.65   48.80      -8.52         26.56
   3 log real House Price Index (%)      1107         6.47   17.89      -0.35         12.67




                                                36
     Table 2: Linear Regression
     This table presents the results of the regression model:
                                                                           (h)
                                                     Crisisi,t+1 to t+h = i       +  (h) 3 Xit +     i,t+1 to t+h

     where h identifies our prediction horizon and Crisisi,t+1 to t+h is an indicator variable, which takes the value of 1 if a crisis has occurred in
                                                    (h)
     country i between year t + 1 and t + h. i captures country fixed effects, and 3 Xt measures 3-year normalized debt growth. We use 4
     different measures of debt: 1. Total private debt to GDP, 2. Business debt to GDP, 3. Household debt to GDP and 4. Real log debt.
     t-statistics are reported in the brackets and based on Driscoll and Kraay (1998) standard errors with lags of 0, 3, 5 and 6 years for prediction
     horizons 1, 2, 3 and 4 years, respectively. *, ** and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively, using Kiefer and Vogelsang
     (2005) corrected p-values. Reported coefficients and R2 's are in percent.


                                                                                               Dependent Variable

                                                       Crisis within 1 year                    Crisis within 2 year                 Crisis within 3 year
                                                  (1.1) (1.2) (1.3) (1.4)              (2.1)      (2.2)    (2.3)    (2.4)   (3.1)      (3.2)    (3.3)    (3.4)
37




             3 (DebtP riv / GDP) (Normalized)     2.6*                                4.0***                                5.3**
                                                  [1.7]                                [2.9]                                [2.6]

             3 (DebtBus / GDP) (Normalized)                2.0                                    2.8**                                3.4*
                                                          [1.5]                                   [2.6]                                [2.1]

             3 (DebtHH / GDP) (Normalized)                        2.8**                                   6.1***                               9.2***
                                                                  [2.2]                                    [2.9]                                [3.4]

            3 log(DebtP riv /CPI) (Normalized)                             1.3                                       2.3                                  3.5
                                                                          [1.2]                                     [1.6]                                [1.7]


                                    R2 (within)    1.5     0.9     1.7     0.4          1.9        0.9      4.4      0.6     2.5       1.0      7.3      1.0
                                             N    1,281   1,258   1,107   1,281        1,281      1,258    1,107    1,281   1,281     1,258    1,107    1,281
Table 3: Crisis Probabilities by Price and Debt Growth Quantiles
Panel A presents the empirical distribution of country-years across equity price growth terciles
and business debt growth quintiles. Panel B presents the probability of a crisis within 1 to 4 years
for the intersections of the equity price terciles and business debt quintiles. It also presents the
difference in future crisis probability between each group and the median group, which is defined
as the intersection of the second price tercile and the third debt growth quintile. Panel C presents
the empirical distribution of country-years across house price growth terciles and household
debt growth quintiles. Panel D presents the probability of a crisis within 1 to 4 years for the
intersections of house price terciles and household debt quintiles, along with the differences to the
median group. Debt is normalized by GDP for both sectors, and growth is measured over 3 years.
p-values are based on Driscoll and Kraay (1998) standard errors with lags of 0, 3, 5 and 6 years
for prediction horizons 1, 2, 3 and 4 years, respectively, and corrected according to Kiefer and
Vogelsang (2005). *, ** and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively.

Panel A: Distribution of Observations (%) by Growth in Business Debt and Equity Prices
                                            Debt Quintile
                     Price Tercile      1    2   3     4     5
                                 1     5.6 6.5 5.8 6.8 8.7
                                 2     6.8 7.6 7.0 6.7 5.3
                                 3     7.6 6.0 7.2 6.6 6.0

Panel B: Crisis Probabilities (%) by Growth in Business Debt and Equity Prices

  1-year horizon
                            Crisis Frequency                         Diff. from Median
                              Debt Quintile                             Debt Quintile
Price Tercile        1       2      3     4        5         1      2       3      4         5
            1       1.4     2.4    0.0   3.5      6.4       -3.1   -2.1 -4.5 -1.0           1.9
            2       2.4     3.2    4.5   3.6     11.9       -2.2   -1.4    0.0   -1.0       7.4
            3       2.1     1.3    2.2   3.6     13.3       -2.5   -3.2    -2.3  -0.9         8.8

  2-year horizon
                            Crisis Frequency                         Diff. from Median
                              Debt Quintile                             Debt Quintile
Price Tercile        1       2      3     4       5          1      2        3     4         5
            1       1.4     4.9    2.7   4.7     14.7       -5.4   -1.9    -4.1  -2.1       7.9
            2       2.4     4.2    6.8   7.1     16.4       -4.5   -2.6    0.0    0.3       9.6
            3       8.3     5.3    8.9   8.4     26.7       1.5    -1.5     2.1   1.6       19.8

  3-year horizon
                            Crisis Frequency                          Diff. from Median
                              Debt Quintile                             Debt Quintile
Price Tercile         1      2      3     4       5          1       2        3     4     5
            1        4.2    4.9    4.1   7.1     19.3       -3.7   -3.1     -3.8  -0.9  11.3
            2        3.5    5.3    8.0   9.5     19.4       -4.4   -2.7     0.0    1.6  11.4
            3       11.5    9.3 11.1 19.3        45.3       3.5     1.4      3.2  11.3 37.4

  4-year horizon
                            Crisis Frequency                          Diff. from Median
                             Debt Quintile                              Debt Quintile
Price Tercile         1     2       3     4       5          1       2        3     4     5
            1        5.6   13.4 4.1      8.2     20.2       -4.6   3.2      -6.1  -2.0  10.0
            2        4.7   6.3 10.2 17.9         23.9       -5.5   -3.9      0.0   7.6  13.7
            3       12.5   12.0 13.3 26.5        48.0       2.3     1.8      3.1  16.3 37.8
                                                 38
Panel C: Distribution of Observations (%) by Growth in Household Debt and House
Prices
                                         Debt Quintile
                   Price Tercile     1    2    3    4    5
                               1   10.5 7.5 5.7 5.5 4.2
                               2    6.2 6.8 8.1 6.7 5.5
                               3    3.3 5.7 6.2 7.8 10.3

Panel D: Crisis Probabilities (%) by Growth in Household Debt and House Prices

 1-year horizon
                         Crisis Frequency                    Diff. from Median
                           Debt Quintile                        Debt Quintile
Price Tercile      1      2     3      4      5     1       2        3      4      5
            1     2.6    2.4 3.2      3.3   10.9   -0.7    -0.9    -0.2   -0.1    7.5
            2     2.9    0.0 3.3      2.7    1.6   -0.4   -3.3      0.0   -0.6    -1.7
            3     2.7    3.2 0.0      4.7   14.0   -0.6    -0.2 -3.3       1.3   10.7

 2-year horizon
                         Crisis Frequency                    Diff. from Median
                           Debt Quintile                       Debt Quintile
Price Tercile      1      2     3      4      5     1       2        3     4        5
            1     6.0    3.6 7.9      4.9   21.7   2.7     0.3      4.6   1.6    18.4
            2     5.8    2.7 3.3      6.8    8.2   2.5    -0.7      0.0   3.4      4.9
            3     2.7    3.2 1.4 10.5       26.3   -0.6   -0.2     -1.9   7.1     23.0

 3-year horizon
                         Crisis Frequency                    Diff. from Median
                           Debt Quintile                       Debt Quintile
Price Tercile      1      2     3     4      5       1      2        3     4        5
            1     9.5    4.8 11.1 8.2       28.3   6.1     1.5      7.8   4.9     24.9
            2     7.2    4.0 3.3 16.2       13.1    3.9    0.7      0.0  12.9      9.8
            3     2.7    3.2 1.4 17.4       36.8   -0.6   -0.2     -1.9 14.1     33.5

 4-year horizon
                         Crisis Frequency                    Diff. from Median
                           Debt Quintile                       Debt Quintile
Price Tercile      1      2     3     4      5      1       2        3      4       5
            1     10.3   8.4 14.3 11.5      30.4   3.7     1.8      7.6    4.8    23.8
            2     8.7    4.0 6.7 20.3       23.0   2.0    -2.7      0.0  13.6     16.3
            3     5.4    4.8 5.8 20.9       41.2   -1.3   -1.9     -0.9   14.3   34.6




                                             39
     Table 4: Crisis Prediction with Debt Growth and Real Asset Appreciation by Sector
     This table presents the results of the regression model:
                                                                  (h)
                                          Crisisi,t+1 to t+h = ai       +  (h) × High Debt Growthit +  (h) × High Price Growthit +  (h) × R-Zoneit +         i,t+1 to t+h

     where Crisisi,t+1 to t+h is an indicator variable, which takes the value of 1 if a crisis has occurred in country i between year t + 1 and t + h. High Debt Growthit  1{3 (Debt/GDP )it >
     80th percentile} is an indicator variable which takes the value of 1 if 3-year debt growth is the in the highest quintile, while High Price Growthit  1{3 log(P riceit ) > 66.7th percentile}
     is an indicator variable which takes the value of 1 if 3-year real price growth is in its highest tercile. The R-Zone variable is the intersection of high price growth and high debt growth:
     R-Zoneit  High Debt Growthit × High Price Growthit . We run the regression on both the business sector, using business debt and equity prices to define the indicators (Panel A),
     and the household sector, using household debt and house prices to define the indicators (Panel B). The row: Sum of coefficients captures the aggregate effect of all indicators in the
     regression. t-statistics are reported in the brackets and based on Driscoll and Kraay (1998) standard errors with lags of 0, 3, 5 and 6 years for prediction horizons 1, 2, 3 and 4 years,
     respectively. *, ** and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively, using Kiefer and Vogelsang (2005) corrected p-values. Reported coefficients and R2 's are in
     percent.

       Panel A: Business Sector

                                                       Crisis within 1 year                    Crisis within 2 years                  Crisis within 3 years                         Crisis within 4 years
                                                  (1.1) (1.2) (1.3)       (1.4)        (2.1)       (2.2)    (2.3)    (2.4)    (3.1)      (3.2)    (3.3)     (3.4)           (4.1)      (4.2)    (4.3)     (4.4)
      High Debt GrowthBus. ( (h) )                6.9**           5.3**               11.6***              9.5**             16.8***             11.5**                     15.6**              10.3*
                                                  [2.3]           [2.1]                [3.0]               [2.5]              [3.3]               [2.7]                      [2.7]              [2.2]

      High Price GrowthBus. ( (h) )                        0.4     -0.4                             4.8      3.8                         10.5      7.4                                 10.7      7.6
                                                          [0.1]   [-0.2]                           [0.9]    [0.8]                        [1.4]    [1.1]                                [1.5]    [1.2]
40




      R-ZoneBus. ( (h) )                                           5.3        9.0                            7.8    17.9*                        19.4**    33.7***                             19.4**    33.0**
                                                                  [0.8]      [1.1]                          [1.3]   [2.1]                         [2.8]     [3.3]                               [2.6]     [3.1]

      Sum of coefficients ( (h) +  (h) +  (h) )    6.9     0.4    10.2       9.0       11.6        4.8     21.1     17.9      16.8      10.5      38.2      33.7             15.6       10.7     37.3    33.0
      R2 (within)                                  1.6     0.0     1.9       1.1        2.5        0.7      3.6      2.3       3.8       2.4       7.8       6.1             2.8         2.1      6.2     4.8
      N                                           1,258   1,258   1,258     1,258      1,258      1,258    1,258    1,258     1,258     1,258     1,258     1,258           1,258      1,258    1,258    1,258

       Panel B: Household Sector

                                                       Crisis within 1 year                    Crisis within 2 years                  Crisis within 3 years                         Crisis within 4 years
                                                  (1.1) (1.2) (1.3)       (1.4)        (2.1)       (2.2)    (2.3)    (2.4)    (3.1)      (3.2)    (3.3)     (3.4)           (4.1)      (4.2)    (4.3)     (4.4)
      High Debt GrowthHH ( (h) )                  7.3**            2.4                 15.1**              7.3**             20.5***              9.1**                 23.7***                14.2**
                                                  [2.2]           [1.6]                 [2.8]              [2.2]              [3.3]               [2.3]                  [3.9]                  [2.5]

      High Price GrowthHH ( (h) )                         3.6*     0.4                              6.0      0.4                          8.1       0.0                                 8.5      0.8
                                                          [1.7]   [0.3]                            [1.4]    [0.2]                        [1.5]    [0.00]                               [1.5]    [0.2]

      R-ZoneHH ( (h) )                                            8.9*      11.2**                         14.1**   20.5**                       20.9***   28.6***                              17.1*   29.6***
                                                                  [1.8]      [2.2]                          [2.4]    [2.7]                        [3.2]     [3.4]                               [2.0]    [4.1]

      Sum of coefficients ( (h) +  (h) +  (h) )    7.3     3.6    11.7      11.2       15.1        6.0     21.8     20.5      20.5       8.1      30.1      28.6             23.7       8.5     32.1     29.6
      R2 (within)                                  1.8     0.7     2.8       2.7        4.1        1.0      5.5      4.9       5.6       1.4       7.6       7.0             6.2        1.3      7.4      6.2
      N                                           1,107   1,107   1,107     1,107      1,107      1,107    1,107    1,107     1,107     1,107     1,107     1,107           1,107      1,107    1,107    1,107
     Table 5: Robustness Table
     This table presents different specifications of our main crisis prediction at 3-year horizon. Panel A and B present the results of the regression specification
     detailed in Table 4, for the business sector and household sector, respectively:

                               Crisisi,t+1 to t+3 = ai +  × High Debt Growthit +  × High Price Growthit +  × R-Zoneit +         i,t+1 to t+3

     The specifications are:

           Baseline Sample: R-Zone indicators are calculated using quantiles based on the entire sample, and crisis definition is that of BVX.
       (i) Rolling Sample: The R-Zone indicators in each year t are based on a rolling sample using only data before year t + 1. I. e. the R-Zone indicator in 1980
           is based on data from 1950-1980. We require at least 20 years of data, meaning the prediction model is based on data after 1970. Crisis definition is that
           of Baron, Verner and Xiong (2019).
      (ii) Leaveout Sample: The R-Zone indicators in each year t are based on a sample where data from year t - 3 to t + 4 is excluded. I. e. the R-Zone indicator
           in 1980 is based on data from 1950-2016 excluding 1977-1984. Crisis definition is that of Baron, Verner and Xiong (2019).
      (iii) Pre-2000 Sample : We use the R-Zone indicators from our full baseline sample, and estimate the prediction model only on data before 2000.
      (iv) Pre-2000 Sample, Pre-2000 cutoff : We estimate the R-Zone indicators and the prediction model using only data before 2000.
41




      (v) Jord´
              a, Schularick and Taylor: We use our baseline sample, but use the crisis definition of Jord´
                                                                                                         a, Schularick and Taylor's MacroHistory data base.
      (vi) Reinhart and Rogoff: We use our baseline sample, but use the crisis definition of Reinhart and Rogoff (2011).
     (vii) Bank Equity Crash: We use our baseline sample, but use the bank equity crash indicator of Baron, Verner and Xiong (2019) to define our dependent
           variable. This indicator takes the value of 1 if bank equity has fallen by 30% or more within a year.
     (viii) Bank Failures: We use our baseline sample, but use the bank failure indicator of Baron, Verner and Xiong (2019) to define our dependent variable. The
            bank failure indicator takes the value of 1 when there is narrative evidence of widespread bank failures.
      (ix) Panics: We use our baseline sample, but use the panic indicator of Baron, Verner and Xiong (2019) to define our dependent variable. The panic indicator
           takes the value of 1 when there is narrative evidence of a sudden and severe outflows of short-term funding.
      (x) Crisis (Bank Equity): We use our baseline sample and use an alternative crisis indicator to define our dependent variable. The indicator takes the value
          of 1 if both the bank equity crash indicator and the bank failure indicator takes the value of 1.
      (xi) Developed Countries: We include only countries defined as high-income by the World Bank in 1995 (Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark,
           Finland, France, Germany, Hong Kong, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Korea, Luxembourg, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal,
           Singapore, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom, United States).
     (xii) Developing Countries: We include only countries defined as low- or medium-income by the World Bank in 1995 (Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia,
           Czech Republic, Greece, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Mexico, Peru, Russia, South Africa, Thailand and Turkey).


     t-statistics are based on Driscoll and Kraay (1998) with 5 lags. *, ** and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively, using Kiefer and
     Vogelsang (2005) corrected p-values. Reported coefficients and R2 's are in percent.
      Panel A: Business Sample Robustness Table


                                                                                                         Multiple Regression                                              Univariate

                                                                       Debt Growth       Price Growth              R-Zone                                          R-Zone
                                                    N    #Countries          [t]                [t]                    [t]         Sum of coef.    2
                                                                                                                                                  Rwithin           [t]                 2
                                                                                                                                                                                       Rwithin

              Baseline Sample                     1258           42   11.5   [ 2.7**]     7.4   [ 1.1]          19.4   [ 2.8**]            38.2       7.8   33.7    [ 3.3***]              6.1
        (i)   Rolling Sample                      1003           42    9.3   [ 2.2*]      8.2   [ 1.1]          16.6   [ 2.6**]            34.1       7.2   29.2    [ 3.4***]              5.8
       (ii)   Leaveout Sample                     1258           42   11.8   [ 2.9**]     7.7   [ 1.1]          16.4   [ 2.3**]            35.8       7.5   30.6    [ 2.9**]               5.6
      (iii)   Pre-2000 Sample                      677           24   15.1   [ 3.8***]   -1.8   [-0.9]          23.2   [ 2.2*]             36.5       8.8   34.0    [ 2.8**]               6.4
      (iv)    Pre-2000 Sample, Pre-2000 cutoffs    677           24    8.4   [ 2.7**]    -1.1   [-0.5]          11.1   [ 1.8]              18.4       3.9   17.0    [ 2.1*]                2.9
       (v)    Jord`
                  a, Schularick and Taylor         893           17    4.5   [ 0.8]       7.2   [ 0.9]          13.0   [ 1.6]              24.7       4.4   22.2    [ 1.9*]                3.2
      (vi)    Reinhart and Rogoff (2011)          1013           36   14.4   [ 1.6]       5.1   [ 0.9]          12.9   [ 1.4]              32.4       6.5   28.6    [ 3.1***]              4.7
     (vii)    Bank Equity Crash                   1255           42   16.9   [ 3.3***]   18.5   [ 2.1*]         14.8   [ 2.3**]            50.3       9.1   41.7    [ 7.1***]              5.2
     (viii)   Bank Failures                       1258           42   11.2   [ 2.5**]     4.3   [ 1.0]          16.0   [ 2.1*]             31.4       5.9   27.7    [ 3.1***]              4.5
      (ix)    Panics                              1258           42    5.1   [ 1.4]       8.0   [ 1.2]          21.6   [ 3.0**]            34.7       8.4   31.5    [ 3.2***]              6.9
       (x)    Crisis (Bank Equity)                1258           42    7.8   [ 1.7]       3.9   [ 0.9]          15.4   [ 2.0*]             27.1       4.9   24.2    [ 2.8**]               4.0
      (xi)    Developed Countries                 1057           26   12.6   [ 2.6**]     8.2   [ 1.0]          17.0   [ 2.2*]             37.9       8.2   32.9    [ 3.0**]               6.0
     (xii)    Developing Countries                 201           16    3.1   [ 0.3]       3.2   [ 1.0]          34.5   [ 4.3***]           40.8       6.7   39.0    [ 4.6***]              6.5
42




      Panel B: Household Sample Robustness Table


                                                                                                      Multiple Regression                                                 Univariate

                                                                       Debt Growth       Price Growth              R-Zone                                          R-Zone
                                                    N    #Countries          [t]                [t]                    [t]         Sum of coef.    2
                                                                                                                                                  Rwithin           [t]                 2
                                                                                                                                                                                       Rwithin

              Baseline Sample                     1107           40    9.1   [ 2.3**]     0.0   [ 0.0]          20.9   [ 3.2***]           30.1       7.6   28.6    [ 3.4***]              7.0
        (i)   Rolling Sample                       876           40    1.5   [ 0.5]      -1.2   [-0.4]          23.5   [ 3.6***]           23.8       6.0   23.6    [ 3.0**]               5.9
       (ii)   Leaveout Sample                     1107           40   11.1   [ 2.3**]    -1.7   [-0.7]          18.4   [ 2.7**]            27.7       8.1   26.3    [ 3.0**]               7.1
      (iii)   Pre-2000 Sample                      625           21   -0.1   [ 0.0]      -2.0   [-0.6]          47.4   [ 6.6***]           45.3      14.1   45.9    [ 5.6***]             14.0
      (iv)    Pre-2000 Sample, Pre-2000 cutoffs    625           21   -2.8   [-1.0]      -2.9   [-1.0]          35.9   [ 3.3***]           30.2      10.5   31.4    [ 2.8**]              10.3
       (v)    Jord`
                  a, Schularick and Taylor         867           17    7.1   [ 2.4**]     4.6   [ 1.6]          20.4   [ 3.3***]           32.1      10.7   30.1    [ 3.8***]             10.0
      (vi)    Reinhart and Rogoff (2011)           896           31    7.6   [ 2.4**]     1.0   [ 0.4]          11.0   [ 1.8]              19.6       3.5   18.4    [ 2.9**]               3.1
     (vii)    Bank Equity Crash                   1107           40   14.7   [ 3.5***]    3.1   [ 0.8]          18.5   [ 2.8**]            36.3       6.3   33.2    [ 4.1***]              5.4
     (viii)   Bank Failures                       1107           40    8.0   [ 2.1*]     -2.5   [-1.1]          22.2   [ 3.3***]           27.7       7.5   27.0    [ 3.3***]              6.8
      (ix)    Panics                              1107           40    7.2   [ 2.6**]     2.5   [ 0.7]          16.8   [ 3.1***]           26.5       7.4   24.8    [ 3.4***]              6.9
       (x)    Crisis (Bank Equity)                1107           40    9.5   [ 2.4**]    -1.3   [-0.6]          18.6   [ 3.7***]           26.8       7.9   25.5    [ 3.6***]              7.0
      (xi)    Developed Countries                 1001           26    5.3   [ 1.2]      -1.1   [-0.3]          26.1   [ 4.4***]           30.3       8.1   29.8    [ 3.7***]              7.9
     (xii)    Developing Countries                 106           14   39.2   [ 1.9]      10.0   [ 3.1**]       -21.9   [-1.3]              27.3      14.9    2.0    [ 0.1]                 0.0
     Table 6: Crisis Prediction with data from both Households and Businesses
     The table presents the results of the regression model:
                                                                           (h)
                                                Crisisi,t+1 to t+h = ai          +  Bus(h) × R-ZoneBus
                                                                                                   it  +  HH (h) × R-ZoneHH
                                                                                                                         it

                                                                                 +  Both(h) × R-ZoneBus.
                                                                                                    it   × R-ZoneHH
                                                                                                                 it

                                                                                 +  Either(h) × max{R-ZoneBus.
                                                                                                          it   , R-ZoneHH
                                                                                                                       it } +               i,t+1 to t+h


     where R-ZoneBus it  = 1{3 (DebtBus /GDP )it > 80th percentile} × 1{3 log(P riceEq.it ) > 66.7
                                                                                                    th
                                                                                                       percentile} is an indicator variable capturing episodes of high growth
                                                        HH               HH
     in business debt and equity prices, while R-Zoneit = 1{3 (Debt /GDP )it > 80 percentile} × 1{3 log(P riceHH
                                                                                          th
                                                                                                                             it ) > 66.7
                                                                                                                                         th
                                                                                                                                            percentile} is an indicator variable
     capturing episodes of high growth in household debt and house prices.
     t-statistics are reported in the brackets and based on Driscoll and Kraay (1998) with lags of 0, 3, 5 and 6 years for prediction horizons 1, 2, 3 and 4 years, respectively.
     *, ** and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively, using Kiefer and Vogelsang (2005) corrected p-values. Reported coefficients and R2 's
     are in percent.

                                                                                                                  Dependent Variable
43




                                                   Crisis within 1 year                   Crisis within 2 years                  Crisis within 3 years                      Crisis within 4 years
                                                (1.1) (1.2) (1.3) (1.4)           (2.1)      (2.2)     (2.3)    (2.4)    (3.1)      (3.2)     (3.3)    (3.4)        (4.1)      (4.2)     (4.3)    (4.4)

                         R-ZoneBus ( Bus(h) )    5.9     3.5                      14.0*       6.6                       28.7***     22.2*                          28.1***     23.2
                                                [0.9]   [0.6]                     [1.9]      [1.0]                       [3.2]      [2.0]                           [2.7]      [1.7]

                         R-ZoneHH ( HH (h) ) 10.4** 9.2**                         18.6** 14.8**                         24.8*** 21.6***                            26.2*** 23.6***
                                              [2.3] [2.3]                          [2.7]  [2.3]                          [3.5]   [2.7]                              [4.5]   [3.3]

            R-ZoneBus ×R-ZoneHH ( Both(h) )              9.2    20.8                        28.6*** 48.2***                         24.8      65.4***                          19.0    62.4***
                                                        [1.1]   [1.6]                        [3.3]   [5.3]                          [1.7]      [8.0]                           [1.2]    [8.7]

     max{R-ZoneBus. ,R-ZoneHH } ( Either(h) )                           9.7*                                   17.1**                                   28.1***                                  28.9***
                                                                        [1.7]                                   [2.5]                                    [3.4]                                    [3.5]


                                 R2 (within) 3.1    3.3   1.7   2.6                6.2        7.3      5.0      4.4       11.1       11.7       6.7         8.7      9.6        9.9      5.1       7.6
                                Observations 1,084 1,084 1,084 1,281              1,084      1,084    1,084    1,281     1,084      1,084      1,084       1,281    1,084      1,084    1,084     1,281
     Table 7: Crisis Prediction with Global R-Zones
     The table presents the results of the regression model:
                           (h)
     Crisisi,t+1 to t+h = ai     +  Bus(h) × Local R-ZoneBus
                                                         it  +  Bus(h) × Global R-ZoneBus
                                                                                      t   +  HH (h) × Local R-ZoneHH
                                                                                                                  it +  HH (h) × Global R-ZoneHH
                                                                                                                                              t  +           i,t+1 to t+h


     where Local R-ZoneBus
                         it  = 1{3 (DebtBus /GDP )it > 80th percentile} × 1{3 log(P riceEq.it ) > 66.7
                                                                                                      th
                                                                                                         percentile} is an indicator variable capturing episodes of high
                                                                   HH                HH
     growth in business debt and equity prices, while Local R-Zoneit = 1{3 (Debt /GDP )it > 80th percentile} × 1{3 log(P riceHH          it ) > 66.7
                                                                                                                                                     th
                                                                                                                                                        percentile} is an
                                                                                                               Bus
     indicator variable capturing episodes of high growth in household debt and house prices. Global R-Zonet        measures the fraction of countries in the business
     R-Zone at a given point in time, while Global R-ZoneHHt   measures the fraction of countries in the household R-Zone at a given point in time. t-statistics are
     reported in the brackets and based on Driscoll and Kraay (1998) with lags of 0, 3, 5 and 6 years for prediction horizons 1, 2, 3 and 4 years, respectively. *, **
     and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively, using Kiefer and Vogelsang (2005) corrected p-values. Reported coefficients and R2 's are
     in percent.


                                                                                               Dependent Variable

                                               Crisis within 1 year       Crisis within 2 years           Crisis within 3 years             Crisis within 4 years
                                              (1.1) (1.2) (1.3)          (2.1)     (2.2)    (2.3)       (3.1)      (3.2)     (3.3)        (4.1)      (4.2)     (4.3)
44




              Local R-ZoneBus ( Bus(h) )       1.6              -0.4      5.8                4.5       18.3**                16.0         18.8*                 17.2
                                              [0.5]            [-0.2]    [1.2]              [1.0]       [2.4]                [1.9]        [2.2]                 [1.8]

             Global R-ZoneBus ( Bus(h) )      55.8*            48.6     91.2***            56.5*      116.0***              77.0*       107.3***                36.4
                                              [1.8]            [1.4]     [4.1]             [1.9]        [4.7]               [1.8]         [5.6]                 [1.3]

              Local R-ZoneHH ( HH (h) )               6.4**    6.4**              10.0**   9.6**                 14.3***    13.1**                 11.4***    10.6***
                                                      [2.2]    [2.2]               [2.7]   [2.6]                  [3.1]      [2.9]                  [3.4]      [3.2]

             Global R-ZoneHH ( HH (h) )                26       6.1               56.2**   31.5*                 76.6***    39.4**                 97.3***    75.8***
                                                      [1.4]    [0.9]               [2.7]   [1.9]                  [4.9]      [2.4]                  [7.3]      [4.9]


                                R2 (within)    6.0     4.9      7.3       9.3      10.4     12.6        14.3       14.5      19.2          10.7       16.1      18.2
                               Observations   1,258   1,107    1,084     1,258    1,107    1,084       1,258      1,107     1,084         1,258      1,107     1,084
     Table 8: Probability of Experiencing severe Economic Decline by Price and Debt Growth Quantiles
     Panel A presents the probability of experiencing year-on-year real (log) GDP growth of -2% or less within 1 to 4 years, with country-year observations assigned to 1
     of 15 groups based on 3-year growth in business debt to GDP and real equity price growth. The panel also presents the difference in the probability of experiencing
     severe economic decline between each group and the median group (the intersection of the second price tercile and the third debt growth quintile). Panel B presents
     the probabilities when the debt and price growth are measured with household debt and house prices. p-values are based on Driscoll and Kraay (1998) standard
     errors with lags of 0, 3, 5 and 6 years for prediction horizons 1, 2, 3 and 4 years, respectively, and corrected according to Kiefer and Vogelsang (2005).

       Panel A: Probability of Severe Economic Decline by Business Debt Growth and Equity Price Growth      Panel B: Probability of Severe Economic Decline by Household Debt Growth and House Price Growth
       1-year horizon                                                                                       1-year horizon
                            Economic Decline Frequency                      Diff. from Median                                    Economic Decline Frequency                     Diff. from Median
                                   Debt Quintile                              Debt Quintile                                             Debt Quintile                             Debt Quintile
       Price Tercile     1      2        3         4    5         1     2            3        4       5     Price Tercile     1      2        3        4      5       1      2           3        4     5
                   1    9.9    4.9      2.7      10.6 27.5     8.7     3.7          1.6     9.5     26.4                1    2.6    4.8      4.8      6.6   19.6    -0.7    1.5         1.4      3.2   16.2
                   2    1.2    1.1      1.1       2.4  4.5       0.0   -0.1         0.0      1.2      3.3               2    4.3    1.3      3.3      5.4    6.6     1.0   -2.0         0.0      2.1     3.2
                   3    0.0    0.0      0.0       0.0  0.0      -1.1   -1.1        -1.1     -1.1     -1.1               3    2.7    3.2      1.4      2.3   2.6     -0.6   -0.2        -1.9     -1.0    -0.7

       2-year horizon                                                                                       2-year horizon
                             Economic Decline Frequency                     Diff. from Median                                     Economic Decline Frequency                    Diff. from Median
                                    Debt Quintile                             Debt Quintile                                              Debt Quintile                            Debt Quintile
       Price Tercile      1      2        3         4     5     1       2            3        4        5    Price Tercile     1       2        3        4      5     1      2            3       4        5
45




                   1    11.3    4.9      5.5      14.1 31.2    6.7     0.3          0.9     9.6     26.6                1    4.3     4.8      9.5      8.2   26.1   -1.2   -0.7         4.0     2.6    20.5
                   2     2.4    3.2      4.5       8.3   9.0   -2.2    -1.4         0.0     3.8       4.4               2    10.1    2.7      5.6      8.1    8.2   4.6    -2.9        0.0      2.6      2.6
                   3     3.1    5.3      3.3       7.2  14.7   -1.4    0.8         -1.2     2.7      10.1               3    5.4     4.8      2.9      5.8   13.2   -0.2   -0.8        -2.7     0.3      7.6

       3-year horizon                                                                                       3-year horizon
                             Economic Decline Frequency                     Diff. from Median                                     Economic Decline Frequency                    Diff. from Median
                                    Debt Quintile                             Debt Quintile                                              Debt Quintile                            Debt Quintile
       Price Tercile      1      2        3         4    5      1        2           3        4        5    Price Tercile     1       2        3         4    5      1      2            3       4        5
                   1    14.1    6.1      8.2      16.5 33.9    8.4      0.4         2.5     10.8    28.3                1    6.9     4.8     14.3 13.1 30.4         0.2    -1.8         7.6     6.4    23.8
                   2     2.4    3.2      5.7       9.5  11.9   -3.3    -2.5         0.0      3.8      6.3               2    14.5    4.0      6.7       9.5  11.5   7.8    -2.7        0.0      2.8      4.8
                   3    11.5 16.0        8.9      13.3 28.0    5.8     10.3         3.2     7.6      22.3               3    8.1     6.3      2.9      10.5 24.6    1.4    -0.3        -3.8     3.8     17.9

       4-year horizon                                                                                       4-year horizon
                             Economic Decline Frequency                      Diff. from Median                                    Economic Decline Frequency                    Diff. from Median
                                    Debt Quintile                              Debt Quintile                                             Debt Quintile                            Debt Quintile
       Price Tercile      1      2        3        4    5       1        2            3        4       5    Price Tercile     1       2        3        4    5       1      2            3       4        5
                   1    14.1    7.3      8.2      17.6 33.9    7.3      0.5          1.4     10.8   27.1                1    10.3    6.0     14.3 16.4 32.6         3.7    -0.6         7.6     9.7    25.9
                   2     3.5    6.3      6.8      13.1 11.9    -3.3     -0.5         0.0      6.3     5.1               2    15.9    6.7      6.7      12.2 14.8    9.3    0.0          0.0     5.5      8.1
                   3    22.9 22.7 13.3 20.5 40.0               16.1    15.8          6.5     13.7    33.2               3    13.5    6.3      2.9      20.9 30.7    6.8    -0.3        -3.8   14.3      24.0
     Table 9: Cumulative GDP growth by Price and Debt Growth Quantiles
     Panel A presents the cumulative real (log) GDP growth from 1 to 4 years, with country-year observations assigned to 1 of 15 groups based on 3-year growth in
     business debt to GDP and real equity price growth. The panel also presents the difference in GDP growth between each group and the median group (the intersection
     of the second price tercile and the third debt growth quintile). Panel B presents corresponding results when the debt and price growth are measured with household
     debt and house prices. p-values are based on Driscoll and Kraay (1998) standard errors with lags of 0, 3, 5 and 6 years for prediction horizons 1, 2, 3 and 4 years,
     respectively, and corrected according to Kiefer and Vogelsang (2005).

       Panel A: Future GDP growth by Business Debt Growth and Equity Price Growth                        Panel B: Future GDP growth by Household Debt Growth and House Price Growth
       1-year horizon                                                                                    1-year horizon
                              Cumulative GDP growth                      Diff. from Median                                      Cumulative GDP growth                     Diff. from Median
                                    Debt Quintile                          Debt Quintile                                              Debt Quintile                         Debt Quintile
       Price Tercile     1       2        3        4   5       1       2          3       4        5     Price Tercile     1       2        3        4   5       1      2           3       4         5
                   1    1.9     2.8      2.7      2.3 0.7   -2.3    -1.4 -1.4 -1.9              -3.4                 1    2.4     3.2      3.0      2.7 1.2   -0.9     -0.1       -0.3    -0.6    -2.1
                   2    3.3     3.2      4.2      4.1 2.8    -0.9    -1.0        0.0     -0.1    -1.4                2    3.0     3.5      3.3      2.9 2.4     -0.3   0.2         0.0    -0.4     -0.9
                   3    4.2     4.0      4.4      4.4 4.2     0.0     -0.2       0.2     0.2      0.0                3    3.0     4.3      4.2      3.6 2.8     -0.3   1.0        0.9      0.3      -0.5

       2-year horizon                                                                                    2-year horizon
                              Cumulative GDP growth                     Diff. from Median                                       Cumulative GDP growth                     Diff. from Median
                                    Debt Quintile                         Debt Quintile                                               Debt Quintile                         Debt Quintile
       Price Tercile     1       2        3        4   5       1      2           3       4         5    Price Tercile     1       2        3        4   5       1      2           3      4         5
46




                   1    5.3     6.1      6.1      5.4 3.1   -2.5    -1.7        -1.7   -2.4     -4.7                 1    5.5     6.7      6.2      6.0 2.4   -1.3     0.0        -0.5    -0.8    -4.4
                   2    6.2     6.8      7.8      7.6 5.3    -1.6    -1.0        0.0    -0.2     -2.5                2    5.8     6.9      6.8      5.7 4.9    -1.0    0.1        0.0     -1.1     -1.9
                   3    7.8     7.0      7.8      7.9 6.6     0.0    -0.8        0.0     0.1      -1.2               3    6.0     9.0      8.1      6.1 4.5     -0.8   2.2         1.4    -0.6    -2.3

       3-year horizon                                                                                    3-year horizon
                             Cumulative GDP growth                      Diff. from Median                                       Cumulative GDP growth                     Diff. from Median
                                   Debt Quintile                          Debt Quintile                                              Debt Quintile                          Debt Quintile
       Price Tercile      1     2        3        4   5       1       2           3      4         5     Price Tercile     1      2        3        4   5       1       2          3       4        5
                   1     8.3   9.6      9.5      8.2 5.8    -3.2     -1.9       -2.0   -3.3     -5.7                 1    8.6    10.4     9.3      9.2 4.0     -1.6    0.2        -0.9    -1.0    -6.1
                   2     9.5  10.7 11.5 10.4         8.7     -2.0    -0.8        0.0    -1.1     -2.8                2    8.7    10.3 10.2         8.4 7.2    -1.5     0.1        0.0     -1.8    -3.0
                   3    10.9   9.4     11.1 10.9     8.7     -0.6    -2.1       -0.4    -0.7     -2.9                3    9.4    13.7 11.9         8.4 5.8     -0.8    3.6        1.7     -1.8    -4.4

       4-year horizon                                                                                    4-year horizon
                             Cumulative GDP growth                      Diff. from Median                                      Cumulative GDP growth                      Diff. from Median
                                 Debt Quintile                            Debt Quintile                                            Debt Quintile                            Debt Quintile
       Price Tercile     1     2       3       4    5         1       2           3       4       5      Price Tercile     1     2       3       4    5         1       2          3        4        5
                   1    11.6 12.5 12.8 11.2        8.5      -3.6    -2.7        -2.4    -4.0    -6.7                 1    11.6 13.9 12.2 12.2        6.2       -1.8    0.6        -1.2     -1.1    -7.1
                   2    12.5 13.9 15.2 13.6 12.5             -2.7    -1.3        0.0     -1.6    -2.8                2    11.8 13.7 13.4 11.1        9.0      -1.6     0.3        0.0      -2.3    -4.3
                   3    13.5 12.6 14.5 13.3 10.8             -1.7    -2.6       -0.7     -2.0   -4.5                 3    12.5 18.5 15.5 10.6        7.1       -0.8    5.2        2.2     -2.8    -6.2
Table 10: Number of Crises Preceded by R-Zone
Panel A presents the percentage of R-Zones succeeded by a financial crisis within 3 years (PPV)
and the percentage of financial crises preceded R-Zones within 3 years (TPR), along with the
numbers used for these metrics along with the percentage of non-crisis years not preceeded by an
R-Zone within 3 years (TNR). We look at both our R-Zone specifications:

 Business:    R-ZoneBus
                    it  = 1{3 (DebtBus /GDP )it > 80th percentile} × 1{3 log(P riceEq.
                                                                                   it ) > 66.7
                                                                                              th
                                                                                                 percentile}
Household:    R-ZoneHH
                    it = 1{3 (DebtHH /GDP )it > 80th percentile} × 1{3 log(P riceHH
                                                                                 it ) > 66.7
                                                                                            th
                                                                                               percentile}

We also count the number of occurrences when we combine the indicators to either require both
sectors to be in the R-Zone, or either sector to be in the R-Zone:

     Both:    R-ZoneBoth
                    it    R-ZoneBus
                                it  × R-ZoneHH
                                            it

    Either:   R-ZoneEither
                    it      max{R-ZoneBus        HH
                                      it , R-Zoneit }

Panel B does the same for the Y-Zone where the indicator variables are based on the 60th percentile
of debt growth and the 33.3th percentile of price growth.


Panel A: R-Zone
                                                                       Type
                                                        Business   Household   Either   Both
               #R-Zone Events followed by a Crisis            34          42       61     15
                                   #R-Zone Events             75         114      170     19
          %R-Zone Events followed by a Crisis (PPV)         45.3        36.8     35.9   78.9

                         #Crises Preceded By R-Zone           20          21       32      7
                                             #Crises          50          44       50     44
               % of Crises preceded by R-Zone (TPR)         40.0        47.7     64.0   15.9

               #Non-crises not Preceded By R-Zone          1077          897     969    1010
                                        #Non-Crises        1208         1063    1231    1040
      % of Non-Crises not preceded by R-Zone (TNR)         89.2         84.4    78.7    97.1

                                       Time to Crisis        2.9         3.7      3.6    3.0



Panel B: Y-Zone
                                                                       Type
                                                        Business   Household   Either   Both
               #Y-Zone Events followed by a Crisis            71          77      103     45
                                   #Y-Zone Events            309         335      515    129
          %Y-Zone Events followed by a Crisis (PPV)         23.0        23.0     20.0   34.9

                         #Crises Preceded By Y-Zone           33          32       41     22
                                             #Crises          50          44       50     44
               % of Crises preceded by Y-Zone (TPR)         66.0        72.7     82.0   50.0

               #Non-crises not Preceded By Y-Zone           680          610     506     812
                                        #Non-Crises        1208         1063    1231    1040
      % of Non-Crises not preceded by Y-Zone (TNR)         56.3         57.4    41.1    78.1

                                       Time to Crisis        3.9         5.9      6.3    3.5


                                                47
     Table 11: GDP growth following True and False Positives
     This table presents the results of the regression model:
                                                     (h)
                       log(GDPi,t+h /GDPi,t ) = ai         +  T P (h) × R-Zoneit × Crisisi,t+1 to t+3 +  F P (h) × R-Zoneit × (1 - Crisisi,t+1 to t+3 ) +    i,t+1 to t+h


     where log(GDPi,t+h /GDPi,t ) is the log GDP growth in country i from year t to t + h, R-Zoneit = 1{3 (Debt/GDP )it > 80th percentile} ×
     1{3 log(P riceit ) > 66.7t h percentile} is an indicator variable capturing episodes of high debt and price growth, and Crisisi,t+1 to t+3 is an indicator variable
     taking the value of 1 if there is a crisis within the next 3 years. We run the regression on both the business sector, using business debt and equity prices to
     define the R-Zone indicator (Panel A), and the household sector, using household debt and house prices to define the R-Zone indicator (Panel B). t-statistics are
     reported in the brackets and are based on Driscoll and Kraay (1998) with lags of 0, 3, 5 and 6 years for prediction horizons 1, 2, 3 and 4 years, respectively. *, **
     and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively, using Kiefer and Vogelsang (2005) corrected p-values. Reported coefficients and R2 's are in percent.

     Panel A: Cumulative GDP growth following false and true positives in the business R-Zone

                                                                                                      Dependent Variable
                                                     1-year log GDP growth         2-year log GDP growth        3-year log GDP growth      4-year log GDP growth
                                                                (1)                           (2)                          (3)                        (4)
                        True Positives ( T P (h) )                0.7                         -1.4                     -4.7                        -8.6
                                                                 [1.1]                       [-1.1]                     [-3.3]                      [-5.3]
48




                       False Positives ( F P (h) )               1.1                           1.1                          1.3                      2.1
                                                                 [2.0]                       [ 1.0]                        [ 1.0]                   [ 1.5]

                                     R2 (within)                  0.5                         0.4                           1.4                      3.1
                                                N                1258                        1258                          1258                      1258


     Panel B: Cumulative GDP growth following false and true positives in the household R-Zone

                                                                                                      Dependent Variable
                                                     1-year log GDP growth         2-year log GDP growth        3-year log GDP growth      4-year log GDP growth
                                                                (1)                           (2)                          (3)                        (4)
                        True Positives ( T P (h) )                -0.3                     -3.0                        -6.7                       -10.1
                                                                 [-0.5]                     [-3.0]                      [-6.0]                     [-6.9]
                       False Positives ( F P (h) )                 0.1                        -0.3                          -0.9                     -1.5
                                                                 [ 0.4]                      [-0.4]                        [-1.0]                   [-1.3]

                                     R2 (within)                  0.1                         1.5                           4.2                      6.5
                                                N                1107                        1107                          1107                      1107
     Figure 1: Event history
     Panel A plots R-Zone events measured with business debt growth and equity prices a long with the advent of financial crises as defined by Baron,
     Verner and Xiong (2019). Pable B presents a similar plot with R-Zone events defined from household debt growth and house prices.

     Panel A: Business R-Zone


                       United States                                                    q       q                                 q                United States
                     United Kingdom                                 q                              q                               q               United Kingdom
                                                                                         Turkey    q q                 q                           Turkey
                                                                                              Thailand           q                                 Thailand
                         Switzerland                                                            q                                   q              Switzerland
                                            Sweden                                                 q                                q              Sweden
                              Spain                                     q                                                           q q            Spain
                                                                                                                            South Africa           South Africa
                                                                                             Singapore                                             Singapore
                                                                                                             Russia                q               Russia
                                                                         Portugal                                                  q   q   q       Portugal
                                                                                                                      Peru                         Peru
                                                                   Norway                   q                                      q               Norway
                                                                                        New Zealand                                                New Zealand
                                                                                         Netherlands                               q               Netherlands
49




                                                                                                   Mexico                                          Mexico
                                                                                                                    Malaysia                       Malaysia
                                                                                                             Luxembourg    q                       Luxembourg
                                                   Korea                                                      q                                    Korea
                              Japan                                                                q          q   q                                Japan
                                Italy                                                                 q                    q           q       q   Italy
                                                                                                    Israel                                         Israel
                                                                                                                       Ireland    q    q           Ireland
                                                                                                                 Indonesia                         Indonesia
                                                                                                                  India                            India
                                                                                                                      Iceland      q               Iceland
                                                                                                 Hungary                           q               Hungary
                                                                                          Hong Kong      q                                         Hong Kong
                                                                                                  Greece                           q q             Greece
                           Germany                                                                                                 q               Germany
                                          France                                                                                   q               France
                            Finland                                                                q                                               Finland
                            Denmark                                                                 q                              q   q           Denmark
                                                                                                 Czech Republic                                    Czech Republic
                                                                                                           Colombia                                Colombia
                                                                                                                Chile                              Chile
                                             Canada                                 q                                                              Canada
                                                                                                        Brazil                                     Brazil
                            Belgium                                                                                                q   q           Belgium
                                                                                                        Austria                    q   q           Austria
                              Australia                                                          q                                                 Australia
                                                                                                  Argentina           q                            Argentina
                 1940                        1960                             1980                                   2000


                                                           q   BVX (2019) Crisis        J-Zone (Bus.)
     Panel B: Household R-Zone


                    United States                                                q        q                                q                United States
                  United Kingdom                              q                             q                               q               United Kingdom
                                                                                       Thailand           q                                 Thailand
                      Switzerland                                                         q                                  q              Switzerland
                         Sweden                                                             q                                q              Sweden
                                                         Spain q                                                             q q            Spain
                                                                                                                     South Africa           South Africa
                                                                                                    Singapore                               Singapore
                                                                                                           Russia           q               Russia
                                                                                   Portugal                                 q   q   q       Portugal
                                                                                                               Peru                         Peru
                                                             Norway                  q                                      q               Norway
                                                                                 New Zealand                                                New Zealand
                                                                                  Netherlands                               q               Netherlands
                                                                                                                     Mexico                 Mexico
                                                                                                                     Malaysia               Malaysia
                                                               Korea                                      q                                 Korea
                           Japan                                                           q              q     q                           Japan
                             Italy                                                              q                           q   q       q   Italy
                                                                                                 Israel                                     Israel
                                                                                                             Ireland       q    q           Ireland
50




                                                                                                          Indonesia                         Indonesia
                                                                                                                            India           India
                                                                                                         Iceland            q               Iceland
                                                                                   Hong Kong              q                                 Hong Kong
                                                                                                     Greece                 q q             Greece
                                          Germany                                                                           q               Germany
                                       France                                                                               q               France
                         Finland                                                           q                                                Finland
                         Denmark                                                                q                        q q                Denmark
                                                                                                               Czech Republic               Czech Republic
                                                                                                Colombia                                    Colombia
                                                                                                                 Chile                      Chile
                                     Canada                                  q                                                              Canada
                                                                                                               Brazil                       Brazil
                         Belgium                                                                                            q   q           Belgium
                                                                                                          Austria           q   q           Austria
                           Australia                                                     q                                                  Australia
               1940                           1960                      1980                                  2000


                                                     q   BVX (2019) Crisis       J-Zone (HH.)
Figure 2: Fraction of Countries in R-Zone
The figure depicts the fraction of countries in the R-Zone at a given time, for each type of R-Zone.




                           40
% of countries in J-Zone




                           30




                           20




                           10




                            0

                                1960          1980                         2000



                                              Business   Household




                                                 51
Figure 3: GDP growth following R-Zone Events
The Empirical distribution of (annualized) GDP growth over horizons 1 to 4 years following R-Zone
event (either business or household) vs. the country-years not in the R-Zone.


                                                    1
               0.3



               0.2



               0.1



               0.0

                                                    2
               0.3



               0.2



               0.1



               0.0
     density




                                                    3
               0.3



               0.2



               0.1



               0.0

                                                    4
               0.3



               0.2



               0.1



               0.0
                       -5               0                5             10              15
                                            Ann. GDP growth

                                  Sample        Not J-Zone    J-Zone
                                               52
     Figure 4: Empirical Policy Possibility Frontier
     Panel A presents the optimal combinations of precision (the percentage of R-Zones succeeded by a crisis) and sensitivity (percentage of crises preceded by a
     R-Zone) attainable by varying the thresholds for entering the R-Zone. Panel B presents the optimal combinations of specificity (the percentage of non-crises
     years not preceded by a R-Zone) and sensitivity (percentage of crises preceded by a R-Zone) attainable by varying the thresholds for entering the R-Zone.

     Panel A: Precision (PPV) vs. Sensitivity (TPR)
                                                                                Business                                                Household                                        All
                % of R-Zones succeeded by a Crisis (PPV)




                                                                 100                                           100                                                        100




                                                                  75                                            75                                                         75
                                                                                                                                                                                                          R-Zone
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Business
                                                                  50                                            50                                                         50
                                                                                Red Zone                                                                                                                    Household
                                                                                                                                           Red Zone                                                         Either
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Both
                                                                  25                       Yellow Zone          25                                    Yellow Zone          25
53




                                                                   0                                            0                                                           0

                                                                       0   25      50        75          100         0          25         50         75            100         0   25   50    75   100
                                                                                                                         % of Crises preceeded by R-Zones (TPR)

     Panel B: Specificity (TNR) vs. Sensitivity (TPR)
                % of Non-Crises not preceeded by R-Zones (TNR)




                                                                                Business                                                Household                                        All

                                                                 100                                           100                                                        100

                                                                                Red Zone
                                                                                                                                           Red Zone

                                                                  75                                            75                                                         75
                                                                                                                                                                                                          R-Zone
                                                                                           Yellow Zone                                                Yellow Zone
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Business
                                                                  50                                            50                                                         50
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Household
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Either
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Both
                                                                  25                                            25                                                         25




                                                                   0                                            0                                                           0

                                                                       0   25      50        75          100         0          25         50         75            100         0   25   50    75   100
                                                                                                                         % of Crises preceeded by R-Zones (TPR)
Figure 5: Financial Crises In and Out of the R-Zone
The figure presents all crises and their severity plotted against the debt and price growth
percentiles of the year closest to the R-Zone in the 3 years leading up to the cri-
sis.   The R-Zone is shaded area in the top right of the figure, and we measure how
close we are for each country-year-sector using the Euclidian distance of percentiles:
   max(0.8 - debt growth percentile, 0)2 + max(2/3 - price growth percentile, 0)2 .      We mea-
sure the severity of a crisis as the 3-year real (log) GDP growth from the year of the crisis.



                          1.00                                                                                                q
                                                                                                           q
                                                                 United Kingdom-1973                                q q
                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                        Austria-2008 q                   q
                                                                                                                         q
                                       Germany-2008 q                                                       q
                                                                                        Belgium-2008        q
                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                          q
                                                                          Argentina-2000     q              q                       Sector
                                                                                                                q
                          0.67
Price Growth Percentile




                                                                                                                                     q   Business
                                                     Turkey-1994 q
                                                                                 Spain-1975 q
                                                                                   Belgium-2011                                          Household
                                                                                             Netherlands-2008
                                                                 Austria-2011
                                                                                                                                    GDP growth
                                                                             Turkey-2001 q
                                                            United States-1984 q     Italy-2011                                      q   (-inf,-5]
                                                                                                                                     q   [-5,0)

                          0.33                                                                                                       q   [0,5)

                                                                                  Japan-1997 q                                       q   [5,inf)
                                                                                                        q
                                                                                         Portugal-2014 Denmark-2011

                                                    Japan-2001                                            Portugal-2011   q




                          0.00

                                 0.0          0.2                 0.4                  0.6                0.8                 1.0
                                                                 Debt Growth Percentile




                                                                            54
Figure 6: Policy Production Frontier
This figure plots the policy production frontier, T N R = TT N R (T P R ) in (T P R , T N R ) space
alongside policymakers' linear indifference curves, which take the form:

                                                              p u (Y ¯L ) cF N
               Indifference-CurveT N R (T P R ) = Const -            ¯H ) cF P × T P R
                                                            1 - p u (Y

At the optimal value of T P R , the slope of the policy production frontier is equal to the
slope of the indifference curve. Panel A illustrates these tradeoffs for an initial position
of the policy production frontier. The flat, solid red curve shows a case where CF N /CF P
                                      
is low, leading to a low level of T    P R.   The steep, dashed red curve shows a case where
                                               
CF N /CF P is high, leading to a high level of T P R . Panel B illustrates how the tradeoff changes
when crises become more predictable, leading to an outward shift in the policy production frontier.

Panel A: Baseline position of the policy production frontier

                  100

                   90

                   80

                   70

                   60

                   50

                   40

                   30

                   20

                   10

                    0
                        0   10   20   30    40    50   60      70   80    90   100



Panel B: Outward shift in the policy production frontier

                  100

                   90

                   80

                   70

                   60

                   50

                   40

                   30

                   20

                   10

                    0
                        0   10   20   30    40    50   60      70   80    90   100


                                                 55
Figure 7: Model Calibration
                                                                          
This figure shows the model solution for optimal test sensitivity (T       P R ) as we vary cF P /cF N .
Recall that cF P /cF N is the ratio of two macroeconomic treatment effects. Specifically, conditional
on the risk of a crisis truly being high, cF N is the expected percentage increase in the present value
of future real output given a policy action to lean against the wind relative to the baseline level
of output absent that policy action. Similarly, cF P gives the expected percentage decline in the
present value of real output from taking the same policy action when risk is truly low. We assume
p=4%, u (Y  ¯B )/u (Y¯G ) = 1, CCrisis /YG = 1.5. Thus, for each value of cF P /cF N , we report the
solution to:
           Slope of policy        Slope of policy indifference curves
         production frontier
                                  p       ¯B ) CCrisis
                                       u (Y              CF N    0.04             CF N
          TT N R (T P R ) = -        ×    ¯   ×        ×      =-      × 1 × 1.5 ×
                                1 - p u (YG )   YG       CF P    0.96             CF P
To estimate TT N R (T P R ) , we first estimate TT P R (T P R ) parametrically using nonlinear least
squares, generating a smoothed version of our empirical policy production frontier. We use the
empirical frontier from the right-most column of Table 4 Panel B which combines information
from the business and household sectors. (Recall that our raw empirical policy production frontier
plots the true negative rate -- the fraction of non-crisis years that are not preceded by a R -
zone event in the prior three years -- as a function of the true positive rate -- the fraction of
crisis years are preceded by a R -zone event in the prior three years.) Concretely, we assume
that TT P R (T P R ) = 1 -  -1 (T P R ) - a /b where  (·) is the standard normal cumulative
distribution function. Doing so, we obtain, a = 0.95 and b = 0.85 with R2 = 99.96% . We
then obtain TT N R (T P R ) = - (1/b) ×  -1 (T P R ) - a /b ÷  -1 (T P R ) . Using this
                                                      
estimate of TT N R (T P R ) , we report the solution T P R as we vary cF P /cF N from 0 to 75. We also
                                              
report the positive predicted value P P V (T P R ) -- the fraction of R -zone events that are followed
by the onset of a crisis within three years -- corresponding to the optimal test sensitivity. To do so,
we first using nonlinear least squares to fit a truncated 4th order polynomial to the empirical plot
                                                                           2              3              4
of PPV versus TPR : P P V (T P R ) = min{1, a + b · (T P R ) + c · (T P R ) + d · (T P R ) + e · (T P R ) }
               2
which gives R = 99.92%.

                100
                 90
                 80
                 70
                 60
                 50
                 40
                 30
                 20
                 10
                   0
                       0   5   10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70




                                                       56
Internet Appendix - Not for inclusion in paper.




                            57
Table A1: Equity Sample Overview
This table presents an overview of the equity indices used in our analysis. The data
is retrieved from 4 sources: Global Financial Data (GFD), the International Monetary
Funds (IMF) International Financial Statistics, Bloomberg and the Jord´
                                                                      a, Schularick and
Taylor MacroHistory database (JST).
          Country         Years      Source   Equity Index

                                                                                     
        Argentina     1950-2018        GFD    Buenos Aires SE General Index (IVBNG)
         Australia    1950-2018        GFD    Australia ASX All-Ordinaries (w/GFD extension)
           Austria    1950-2018        GFD    Austria Wiener Boersekammer Share Index (WBKI)
          Belgium     1950-2018        GFD    Brussels All-Share Price Index (w/GFD extension)
                                                                                                           
             Brazil   1950-2018        GFD    GFD Indices Brazil Bolsa de Valores de Sao Paulo (Bovespa)
           Canada     1950-2018        GFD    Canada S&P/TSX 300 Composite (w/GFD extension)
             Chile    1975-2001        GFD    Santiago SE Indice de Precios Selectivos Acciones
             Chile    1999-2018        IMF    Selective Price Index (IPSA)
         Colombia     2001-2018        IMF    Index of prices on the Bogot´a Stock Exchange
   Czech Republic     1997-2018        IMF    PX-50 index
         Denmark      1950-2018        GFD    OMX Copenhagen All-Share Price Index
           Finland    1950-2018        GFD    OMX Helsinki All-Share Price Index
            France    1950-1989         JST   Stock prices (nominal index)
            France    1987-2018        GFD    Paris CAC-40 Index
         Germany      1950-1961         JST   Stock prices (nominal index)
         Germany      1959-2018        GFD    Germany DAX Price Index
            Greece    1952-2018        GFD    Athens SE General Index (w/GFD extension)
       Hong Kong      1964-2018        GFD    Hong Kong Hang Seng Composite Index (w/GFD Extension)
          Hungary     1994-2018        GFD    Vienna OETEB Hungary Traded Index (Forint)
           Iceland    2002-2018        IMF    Index of the 15 largest and most traded Icelandic companies of the OMX
             India    1950-2018        GFD    Bombay SE Sensitive Index (w/GFD extension)
         Indonesia    1977-2018        GFD    Jakarta SE Composite Index
           Ireland    1950-2018        GFD    Ireland ISEQ Overall Price Index (w/GFD extension)
             Israel   1991-2019   Bloomberg   TA-125 (last price)
              Italy   1950-2018        GFD    Banca Commerciale Italiana Index (w/GFD extension)
            Japan     1950-1986         JST   Stock prices (nominal index)
            Japan     1984-2017        GFD    Japan Nikkei 500 Index
             Korea    1962-2018        GFD    Korea SE Stock Price Index (KOSPI)
      Luxembourg      1999-2019   Bloomberg   LUXXX Index (last price)
          Malaysia    1973-2018        GFD    Malaysia KLSE Composite
           Mexico     1950-2018        GFD    Mexico SE Indice de Precios y Cotizaciones (IPC)
      Netherlands     1950-2018        GFD    Netherlands All-Share Price Index (w/GFD extension)
     New Zealand      1950-2018        GFD    New Zealand SE All-Share Capital Index
           Norway     1950-1971         JST   Stock prices (nominal index)
           Norway     1969-2018        GFD    Oslo SE All-Share Index
              Peru    1988-2016        IMF    Share price index of the Lima Stock Exchange (industrials and mining)
          Portugal    1950-2018        GFD    Oporto PSI-20 Index
            Russia    1993-2018        GFD    Russia Moscow Index (MOEX) Composite
        Singapore     1961-2018        GFD    Singapore FTSE Straits-Times Index
     South Africa     1960-2018        IMF    All ordinary shares listed on Security Exchange South Africa
             Spain    1950-1989         JST   Stock prices (nominal index)
             Spain    1987-2018        GFD    Madrid SE IBEX-35
           Sweden     1950-2018        GFD    Sweden OMX Affarsvarldens General Index
       Switzerland    1950-2018        GFD    Switzerland Price Index (w/GFD extension)
          Thailand    1975-2018        GFD    Thailand SET General Index
           Turkey     1986-2018        GFD    Istanbul SE IMKB-100 Price Index
  United Kingdom      1950-2018        GFD    UK FTSE All-Share Index (w/GFD extension)
    United States     1950-2018        GFD    S&P 500/Cowles Composite Price Index (w/GFD extension)
   Return index




                                                         58
Table A2: Household Sample Overview
This table presents an overview of the house price indices used in our analysis. The
data is retrieved from 3 sources: Bank of International Settlements' (BIS) Property Price
Statistics, the OECD's Household Prices database and the Jord´  a, Schularick and Taylor
MacroHistory database (JST).
          Country         Years   Source   Variable

         Australia    1950-1972     JST    House prices (hpnom) normalized    by consumer price index (cpi)
         Australia    1970-2018     BIS    Real residential property prices
           Austria    2000-2018     BIS    Real residential property prices
          Belgium     1950-1972     JST    House prices (hpnom) normalized    by consumer price index (cpi)
          Belgium     1970-2018     BIS    Real residential property prices
             Brazil   2001-2018     BIS    Real residential property prices
           Canada     1950-1972     JST    House prices (hpnom) normalized    by consumer price index (cpi)
           Canada     1970-2018     BIS    Real residential property prices
             Chile    2002-2018     BIS    Real residential property prices
         Colombia     1988-2018     BIS    Real residential property prices
   Czech Republic     2008-2018     BIS    Real residential property prices
         Denmark      1950-1972     JST    House prices (hpnom) normalized    by consumer price index (cpi)
         Denmark      1970-2018     BIS    Real residential property prices
           Finland    1950-1972     JST    House prices (hpnom) normalized    by consumer price index (cpi)
           Finland    1970-2018     BIS    Real residential property prices
            France    1950-1972     JST    House prices (hpnom) normalized    by consumer price index (cpi)
            France    1970-2018     BIS    Real residential property prices
         Germany      1950-1972     JST    House prices (hpnom) normalized    by consumer price index (cpi)
         Germany      1970-2018     BIS    Real residential property prices
            Greece    1997-2017   OECD     Real residential property prices
       Hong Kong      1979-2018     BIS    Real residential property prices
          Hungary     2007-2018     BIS    Real residential property prices
           Iceland    2000-2018     BIS    Real residential property prices
             India    2009-2018     BIS    Real residential property prices
         Indonesia    2002-2018     BIS    Real residential property prices
           Ireland    1970-2018     BIS    Real residential property prices
             Israel   1994-2018     BIS    Real residential property prices
              Italy   1950-2018     BIS    Real residential property prices
            Japan     1950-1957     JST    House prices (hpnom) normalized    by consumer price index (cpi)
            Japan     1955-2018     BIS    Real residential property prices
             Korea    1975-2018     BIS    Real residential property prices
      Luxembourg      2007-2018     BIS    Real residential property prices
          Malaysia    1988-2018     BIS    Real residential property prices
           Mexico     2005-2018     BIS    Real residential property prices
      Netherlands     1950-1972     JST    House prices (hpnom) normalized    by consumer price index (cpi)
      Netherlands     1970-2018     BIS    Real residential property prices
     New Zealand      1970-2018     BIS    Real residential property prices
           Norway     1950-1972     JST    House prices (hpnom) normalized    by consumer price index (cpi)
           Norway     1970-2018     BIS    Real residential property prices
              Peru    1998-2018     BIS    Real residential property prices
          Portugal    1988-2017   OECD     Real residential property prices
            Russia    2001-2018     BIS    Real residential property prices
        Singapore     1998-2018     BIS    Real residential property prices
     South Africa     1966-2018     BIS    Real residential property prices
             Spain    1971-2018     BIS    Real residential property prices
           Sweden     1950-1972     JST    House prices (hpnom) normalized    by consumer price index (cpi)
           Sweden     1970-2018     BIS    Real residential property prices
       Switzerland    1950-1972     JST    House prices (hpnom) normalized    by consumer price index (cpi)
       Switzerland    1970-2018     BIS    Real residential property prices
          Thailand    1991-2018     BIS    Real residential property prices
           Turkey     2010-2018     BIS    Real residential property prices
  United Kingdom      1950-1970     JST    House prices (hpnom) normalized    by consumer price index (cpi)
  United Kingdom      1968-2018     BIS    Real residential property prices
    United States     1950-1972     JST    House prices (hpnom) normalized    by consumer price index (cpi)
    United States     1970-2018     BIS    Real residential property prices

                                                      59
Table A3: Debt Sample Overview

This table presents an overview of the sources for business debt (Panel A) and household
debt (Panel B) used in our analysis. The data is retrieved from 3 sources: the Interna-
tional Monetary Funds (IMF) Global Debt Database, the Jord´      a, Schularick and Taylor
MacroHistory database (JST) and the Bank of International Settlements' (BIS) Total
credit statistics.

 Panel A: Business Debt Sources
          Country          Years   Source   Variable

       Argentina       1994-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities by non-financial corporations   (nfc ls data)
        Australia      1950-1979     JST    Total loans to business (tbus)
        Australia      1977-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities by non-financial corporations   (nfc ls data)
          Austria      1995-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities by non-financial corporations   (nfc ls data)
          Belgium      1950-1982     JST    Total loans to business (tbus)
         Belgium       1980-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities by non-financial corporations   (nfc ls data)
             Brazil    1994-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities by non-financial corporations   (nfc ls data)
          Canada       1961-1971     JST    Total loans to business (tbus)
          Canada       1969-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities by non-financial corporations   (nfc   ls   data)
              Chile    2002-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities by non-financial corporations   (nfc   ls   data)
        Colombia       1996-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities by non-financial corporations   (nfc   ls   data)
  Czech Republic       1995-2016     IMF    Loans and debt securities by non-financial corporations   (nfc   ls   data)
        Denmark        1951-1996     JST    Total loans to business (tbus)
        Denmark        1994-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities by non-financial corporations   (nfc ls data)
          Finland      1950-1972     JST    Total loans to business (tbus)
          Finland      1970-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities by non-financial corporations   (nfc ls data)
            France     1958-1979     JST    Total loans to business (tbus)
            France     1977-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities by non-financial corporations   (nfc ls data)
        Germany        1950-1972     JST    Total loans to business (tbus)
        Germany        1970-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities by non-financial corporations   (nfc   ls   data)
            Greece     1994-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities by non-financial corporations   (nfc   ls   data)
      Hong Kong        1990-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities by non-financial corporations   (nfc   ls   data)
         Hungary       1969-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities by non-financial corporations   (nfc   ls   data)
           Iceland     1970-2016     IMF    Loans and debt securities by non-financial corporations   (nfc   ls   data)
              India    1998-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities by non-financial corporations   (nfc   ls   data)
        Indonesia      2001-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities by non-financial corporations   (nfc   ls   data)
           Ireland     2002-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities by non-financial corporations   (nfc   ls   data)
             Israel    1992-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities by non-financial corporations   (nfc   ls   data)
               Italy   1950-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities by non-financial corporations   (nfc   ls   data)
             Japan     1950-1966     JST    Total loans to business (tbus)
             Japan     1964-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities by non-financial corporations   (nfc   ls   data)
             Korea     1962-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities by non-financial corporations   (nfc   ls   data)
     Luxembourg        2002-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities by non-financial corporations   (nfc   ls   data)
         Malaysia      2006-2016     IMF    Loans and debt securities by non-financial corporations   (nfc   ls   data)
           Mexico      1994-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities by non-financial corporations   (nfc   ls   data)
     Netherlands       1990-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities by non-financial corporations   (nfc   ls   data)
    New Zealand        1990-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities by non-financial corporations   (nfc   ls   data)
          Norway       1975-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities by non-financial corporations   (nfc   ls   data)
               Peru    2001-2016     IMF    Loans and debt securities by non-financial corporations   (nfc   ls   data)
         Portugal      1979-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities by non-financial corporations   (nfc   ls   data)
            Russia     1998-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities by non-financial corporations   (nfc   ls   data)
       Singapore       1991-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities by non-financial corporations   (nfc   ls   data)
    South Africa       2008-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities by non-financial corporations   (nfc   ls   data)
             Spain     1950-1982     JST    Total loans to business (tbus)
             Spain     1980-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities by non-financial corporations   (nfc ls data)
           Sweden      1961-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities by non-financial corporations   (nfc ls data)
      Switzerland      1950-2001     JST    Total loans to business (tbus)
      Switzerland      1999-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities by non-financial corporations   (nfc ls data)
         Thailand      1991-2017      BIS   Credit to Non-financial corporations from all sectors
           Turkey      1986-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities by non-financial corporations   (nfc ls data)
 United Kingdom        1950-1968     JST    Total loans to business (tbus)
 United Kingdom        1966-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities by non-financial corporations   (nfc ls data)
   United States       1950-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities by non-financial corporations   (nfc ls data)




                                                       60
Panel B: Household Debt Sources
          Country          Years   Source   Variable

       Argentina       1994-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities   by households (hh ls data)
        Australia      1950-1979     JST    Total loans to households   (thh)
        Australia      1977-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities   by households (hh ls data)
          Austria      1995-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities   by households (hh ls data)
          Belgium      1950-1982     JST    Total loans to households   (thh)
         Belgium       1980-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities   by households (hh ls data)
             Brazil    1994-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities   by households (hh ls data)
          Canada       1956-1971     JST    Total loans to households   (thh)
          Canada       1969-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities   by households (hh ls data)
              Chile    2002-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities   by households (hh ls data)
        Colombia       1996-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities   by households (hh ls data)
  Czech Republic       1995-2016     IMF    Loans and debt securities   by households (hh ls data)
        Denmark        1951-1996     JST    Total loans to households   (thh)
        Denmark        1994-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities   by households (hh ls data)
          Finland      1950-1972     JST    Total loans to households   (thh)
          Finland      1970-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities   by households (hh ls data)
            France     1958-1979     JST    Total loans to households   (thh)
            France     1977-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities   by households (hh ls data)
        Germany        1950-1972     JST    Total loans to households   (thh)
        Germany        1970-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities   by households (hh ls data)
            Greece     1994-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities   by households (hh ls data)
      Hong Kong        1990-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities   by households (hh ls data)
         Hungary       1964-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities   by households (hh ls data)
           Iceland     1970-2016     IMF    Loans and debt securities   by households (hh ls data)
              India    1998-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities   by households (hh ls data)
        Indonesia      2001-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities   by households (hh ls data)
           Ireland     2002-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities   by households (hh ls data)
             Israel    1992-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities   by households (hh ls data)
               Italy   1950-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities   by households (hh ls data)
             Japan     1950-1966     JST    Total loans to households   (thh)
             Japan     1964-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities   by households (hh ls data)
             Korea     1962-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities   by households (hh ls data)
     Luxembourg        2002-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities   by households (hh ls data)
         Malaysia      2006-2016     IMF    Loans and debt securities   by households (hh ls data)
           Mexico      1994-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities   by households (hh ls data)
     Netherlands       1990-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities   by households (hh ls data)
    New Zealand        1990-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities   by households (hh ls data)
          Norway       1975-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities   by households (hh ls data)
               Peru    2001-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities   by households (hh ls data)
         Portugal      1979-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities   by households (hh ls data)
            Russia     1998-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities   by households (hh ls data)
       Singapore       1991-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities   by households (hh ls data)
    South Africa       2008-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities   by households (hh ls data)
             Spain     1950-1982     JST    Total loans to households   (thh)
             Spain     1980-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities   by households (hh ls data)
           Sweden      1950-1940     JST    Total loans to households   (thh)
           Sweden      1950-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities   by households (hh ls data)
      Switzerland      1950-2001     JST    Total loans to households   (thh)
      Switzerland      1999-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities   by households (hh ls data)
         Thailand      1991-2017      BIS   Credit to Households and    NPISHs from all sectors
           Turkey      1986-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities   by households (hh ls data)
 United Kingdom        1950-1968     JST    Total loans to households   (thh)
 United Kingdom        1966-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities   by households (hh ls data)
   United States       1950-2017     IMF    Loans and debt securities   by households (hh ls data)




                                               61
