                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  MANAGING HOUSEHOLDS' EXPECTATIONS WITH UNCONVENTIONAL POLICIES

                                     Francesco D'Acunto
                                        Daniel Hoang
                                       Michael Weber

                                      Working Paper 27399
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27399


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2020




Parts of the results in this paper have previously circulated under the title "The Effect of
Unconventional Fiscal Policy on Consumption Expenditure." This research was conducted with
restricted access to Gesellschaft für Konsumforschung (GfK) data. The views expressed here are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of GfK. We thank the project
coordinator at GfK, Rolf Buerkl, for help with the data and insightful comments. We also thank
Sumit Agarwal, Rudi Bachmann, Oli Coibion, Giancarlo Corsetti, Andreas Fuster, Dimitris
Georgarakos, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Refet Guerkaynak, Luigi Guiso, Valerie Ramey, Tarun
Ramodarai, Chris Roth, Eric Sims, Andrea Tambalotti, Giorgio Topa, Nathanael Vellekoop,
Mirko Wiederholt, Johannes Wohlfart, Basit Zafar, and seminar and conference participants at
various institutions. Weber gratefully acknowledges financial support from the University of
Chicago, the Fama Research Fund, and the Fama-Miller Center. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Francesco D'Acunto, Daniel Hoang, and Michael Weber. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Managing Households' Expectations with Unconventional Policies
Francesco D'Acunto, Daniel Hoang, and Michael Weber
NBER Working Paper No. 27399
June 2020
JEL No. D12,D84,D91,E21,E31,E52,E65

                                         ABSTRACT

With a binding effective lower bound on interest rates and large government deficits,
conventional policies are unviable and policymakers resort to unconventional policies, which
target households' expectations directly. Using unique micro data and a difference-in-differences
strategy, we assess the effectiveness of unconventional fiscal policy and forward guidance, both
of which aim to stimulate consumption via raising households' inflation expectations. All
households' inflation expectations and spending plans react to unconventional fiscal policy.
Instead, households, contrary to experts, do not react to forward guidance. We argue that policies
aiming to affect households directly are ineffective if (non-expert) households do not understand
them.

Francesco D'Acunto                              Michael Weber
Boston College                                  Booth School of Business
Carroll School of Management                    University of Chicago
dacuntof@bc.edu                                 5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
                                                Chicago, IL 60637
Daniel Hoang                                    and NBER
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology               michael.weber@chicagobooth.edu
Kaiserstr. 12
76128 Karlsruhe
Germany
daniel.hoang@kit.edu
    "[...] inflation will start rising and the usual pattern of central bank reaction would dictate
a resolute firming of the stance. Its promise not to follow that usual pattern of reaction will
be painful to fulfill, when that time comes, because the central bank will have to watch inflation
rising while remaining atypically passive. But that promise has a value today, as it generates
optimistic expectations, supports spending and thus facilitates the central bank's job at present."

                                             Peter Praet (2013): Forward guidance and the ECB.

    "This [VAT] tax-induced inflation would give households an incentive to spend sooner rather
than waiting until prices are substantially higher."

           Martin Feldstein (2002): Discretionary fiscal policy in a low interest rate environment.


Stimulating households' consumption is one of the most powerful transmission channels of fiscal
and monetary policies, because consumption is the largest component of GDP (Agarwal and Qian
(2014); Beraja, Fuster, Hurst, and Vavra (2019)). Conventional monetary policy often works
through a refinancing channel lowering households' monthly mortgage payments and increasing
disposable income (Agarwal et al. (2019); Abel and Fuster (2019)). But even when central banks
can still lower nominal policy rates, this refinancing channel can be clogged up because many
households do not actively refinance and banks fail to renegotiate (Andersen, Campbell, Nielsen,
and Ramadorai (2020); Adelino, Gerardi, and Willen (2013)). When nominal interest rates fall
below the reversal rate, inflated central-bank balance sheets limit the scope of quantitative
easing (Di Maggio, Kermani, and Palmer (2020)), and high debt-to-GDP ratios limit the fiscal
space, stimulating consumption requires policies that manage households' expectations directly
and not through financial intermediaries and firms (Roth and Wohlfart (2019); Agarwal et al.
(2020)).
    Macroeconomists have recently proposed two such policies--unconventional fiscal policy
(Correia et al. (2013)) and forward guidance (Eggertsson and Woodford (2003)). Theoretically
and in the eyes of policy-makers, both policies should stimulate aggregate demand through
raising households' inflation expectations, which, based on the consumer Euler equation, should
reduce incentives to save. The empirical effectiveness of forward guidance, though, is highly
debated (e.g., see Del Negro et al. (2015)), and the empirical effectiveness of unconventional fiscal
policy has been barely discussed in the literature (see D'Acunto, Hoang, and Weber (2018)).
    In this paper, we investigate the conditions under which policymakers can successfully
manage households' inflation expectations and thus influence their consumption, saving, and
borrowing decisions directly without the need of transmission through financial intermediaries.
We compare the effectiveness of unconventional fiscal policy--the pre-announcement of higher


                                                  1
future consumption taxes--to forward guidance--the explicit guidance by central banks about
the future path of monetary policy rates. Unconventional fiscal policy trivially communicates
to households higher future prices for consumption goods, which makes the intertemporal
substitution channel the Euler equation predicts vivid and easy to grasp. Forward guidance,
instead, can only be effective if households understand that keeping policy rates low for longer
than a conventional policy function prescribes will generate future inflation, and hence that
spending should be front loaded. Both policies should generate higher inflation expectations
and hence higher immediate spending, but the extent to which non-expert households grasp
these predictions likely differs across unconventional policies.1

                         Figure 1: Inflation Expectations & Durable Purchases

                            0.5                                                               0.5


                            0.4                                                               0.4


                            0.3                                                               0.3


                            0.2                                                               0.2


                            0.1                                                               0.1


                             0                                                                 0
                                5


                                          5


                                                  6


                                                           6


                                                                    6


                                                                             6


                                                                                     7




                                                                                                  3


                                                                                                            3


                                                                                                                     3


                                                                                                                              4


                                                                                                                                       4


                                                                                                                                                4
                             /0


                                       /0


                                               /0


                                                        /0


                                                                 /0


                                                                          /0


                                                                                  /0




                                                                                               /1


                                                                                                         /1


                                                                                                                  /1


                                                                                                                           /1


                                                                                                                                    /1


                                                                                                                                             /1
                            09


                                      12


                                              03


                                                       06


                                                                09


                                                                         12


                                                                                 03




                                                                                              05


                                                                                                        08


                                                                                                                 11


                                                                                                                          02


                                                                                                                                   05


                                                                                                                                            08




                             0.5                                                               0.5


                             0.4                                                               0.4


                             0.3                                                               0.3


                             0.2                                                               0.2


                             0.1                                                               0.1


                                  0                                                                 0
                                  5


                                           5


                                                   6


                                                            6


                                                                     6


                                                                              6


                                                                                      7




                                                                                                    3


                                                                                                             3


                                                                                                                      3


                                                                                                                               4


                                                                                                                                        4


                                                                                                                                                 4
                                /0


                                         /0


                                                 /0


                                                          /0


                                                                   /0


                                                                            /0


                                                                                    /0




                                                                                                  /1


                                                                                                           /1


                                                                                                                    /1


                                                                                                                             /1


                                                                                                                                      /1


                                                                                                                                               /1
                              09


                                       12


                                               03


                                                        06


                                                                 09


                                                                          12


                                                                                  03




                                                                                                05


                                                                                                         08


                                                                                                                  11


                                                                                                                           02


                                                                                                                                    05


                                                                                                                                             08




      This figure plots the share of German consumers that expect higher inflation in the next 12 months compared
      to the previous 12 months in the top panels and the share of German consumers that think it is a good time
      to purchase larger ticket items in the bottom panels. We use the confidential micro data underlying the GfK
      Consumer Climate MAXX survey to construct these variables. In the left panels, the vertical line signals
      the unconventional fiscal policy announcement (November 2005). In the right panels, the two vertical lines
      signal the forward-guidance announcements by the president of the European Central Bank, Mario Draghi
      (July 2013 and January 2014).




     To compare the effects of unconventional fiscal policy and forward guidance empirically, we
use unique individual-level data on a large representative population across several European
   1
     Policymakers discuss explicitly the direct transmission channel of forward guidance through households'
expectations. For instance, Benoit Coeure, former member of the Executive Board of the ECB, described the
expected effects of forward guidance announcements as follows: "[T]he benefits of higher inflation expectations
(are) in terms of front-loaded spending."



                                                                                          2
countries and propose a difference-in-differences design. Figure 1 plots the average inflation
expectations (top panels) and propensity to purchase durable goods (bottom panels) based on
the raw household-level data around an unconventional fiscal policy announcement (left panels)
and two forward guidance announcements (right panels).2
       Although theoretically both policies should raise households' inflation expectations and
spending on impact, only unconventional fiscal policy announcements produce these outcomes
in the raw data. Forward guidance announcements do not appear to manage expectations
or spending plans.3 As we show below, they do not reduce the cross-sectional dispersion of
inflation expectations either, although theory predicts this reduction, because households receive
a common signal about future inflation (Coibion et al. (2019)).4
       To the best of our knowledge, no fiscal authorities around the world have yet implemented
measures of unconventional fiscal policy in times of low interest rates. Generic consumption-tax
changes do not qualify (D'Acunto et al. (2018)). First, the policy announcement should be
unexpected. Moreover, the announcement should happen well before the implementation of
the tax increase, so that households have the time to re-optimize their medium- and long-run
consumption and saving plans. Also, the announcement should not trigger a change in nominal
interest rates, so that higher inflation expectations result in lower real interest rates, reduce
households' saving motives, and increase their consumption via intertemporal substitution.
       Although it was not originally labeled as unconventional fiscal policy, we consider the
unexpected announcement of a VAT increase in Germany in November 2005, to be implemented
in January 2007. Two features make this pre-announcement uniquely suited. First, the European
Union (EU) largely imposed this policy on the German administration to avoid an infringement
procedure for the breach of the Maastricht Treaty, which imposes an arbitrary cap of government
deficit to gross GDP of 3%.5 The VAT-increase announcement was unexpected and due to
inherited fiscal deficits (Romer and Romer (2010) and Alesina, Favero, and Giavazzi (2015)).6
Second, Germany has no monetary sovereignty as a member of the European Monetary Union
(EMU). The ECB explicitly excluded any increase in nominal interest rates to counteract the
   2
     We discuss the policy announcements in detail below.
   3
     Households do not even react to forward guidance with a delay: No indirect effects arise through financial
markets reducing long-term rates and households increase their propensity to take out debt and increase spending.
   4
     Unfortunately, we do not observe the full distribution of inflation expectations within individual respondents
in our data.
   5
     A recent debate suggests that the 3% threshold was chosen by bureaucrats without any specific motivation.
See, e.g., https://www.faz.net/aktuell/wirtschaft/wirtschaftswissen/3-prozent-defizitgrenze-wie-das-maastricht-
kriterium-im-louvre-entstand-12591473.html.
   6
     In appendix section A.2 we discuss this point and the institutional setting in detail.




                                                        3
price pressure from a higher VAT in Germany.7
     The German setting is viable to our comparative analysis, because the same population also
faced two forward-guidance announcements by former ECB President Mario Draghi. Draghi
announced the introduction of forward guidance as a policy tool in the Euro Area on July 4
2013 and "firmly reiterate(d)" it on January 9 2014.8
     The raw-data time-series evidence in Figure 1 is vivid, but hinders us from any conclusions
about whether any of the two policies has successfully managed households' expectations:
Any unobserved shocks contemporaneous to the announcements could explain the dynamics
of expectations and spending plans.
     To tackle this identification challenge, we propose an identification strategy in the spirit
of Poterba (1996). We consider consumers in other EU countries not exposed directly to the
German VAT shock and/or to the ECB measures of forward guidance as counterfactual for the
behavior of Germans had the policy announcements not happened.
     Our micro data allow matching German and foreign consumers based on demographics,
which is important because different demographics react differently to changes in inflation
expectations (Bachmann et al. (2015)). Moreover, in our data we observe directly a set of
determinants of spending plans that are often unobserved in administrative data, such as
households' income expectations, financial outlook, employment status, and housing choices.
     We match German and foreign consumers based on observables and propose a difference-
in-differences empirical strategy. Because we have access to micro data from the harmonized
European Commission (EC) consumer survey program for Germany, France, the UK,9 and
Sweden, for the forward guidance announcements, we use counterfactual households in the UK
and Sweden who were not exposed directly to these announcements because their countries did
not belong to the Euro Area. For unconventional fiscal policy, we consider French households
as counterfactual, who were subject to the same nominal interest rates as Germans.
     German and foreign consumers are likely to differ along several dimensions.                                   Our
identification design allows us to absorb systematic time-invariant differences between Germany
and other countries, such as differences in legal systems and cultural attitudes. Moreover, we
lever the demographic information in our micro data to focus on matched German and foreign
    7
      Then ECB board member Axel Weber stated that "We know what the effects of the VAT increase are; as is
the case for oil prices, we do not consider one-off effects" (Weber (2006)). See appendix section A.3 for a detailed
discussion.
    8
      "The Governing Council has taken the unprecedented step of giving forward guidance in a rather more specific
way than it ever has done in the past. In my statement, I said "The Governing Council expects the key ..." - i.e.
all interest rates - "... ECB interest rates to remain at present or lower levels for an extended period of time." It is
the first time that the Governing Council has said something like this." See: "Introductory statement to the press
conference (with Q&A)" available at https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pressconf/2013/html/is130704.en.html.
    9
      For the periods we study, the UK was part of the EU.



                                                           4
consumer pairs based on a large set of characteristics, such as age, income, and education.
Systematic and time-varying differences in the demographic composition of German and foreign
consumers thus cannot drive our results.
    The main concern with our strategy is the possibility that unobserved time-varying
country-level shocks concurrent to the policy announcements explain the systematic differences
in expectations across countries over time. The main assumption our strategy requires is that
inflation expectations and spending plans would have followed the same trend as those of
foreigners had the announcements not happened. Although this assumption is untestable, we can
compare the average expectations of Germans and foreigners around the policy announcements,
and we can test the null hypothesis that foreign consumers' expectations did not change around
the shock. We find that the expectations and spending plans of non-Germans did not change
around the announcements. Moreover, we cannot reject either economically or statistically that
Germans' and foreigners' expectations and spending plans followed parallel trends before the
announcements. In terms of internal validity, we also show that Germans' inflation expectations
and other economic expectations, such as income expectations, followed parallel trends before
the announcements.
    Using our difference-in-differences strategy, we confirm the results in Figure 1.        The
unconventional fiscal policy announcement resulted in a large increase in German households'
willingness to purchase durable goods throughout 2006, the period after the announcement and
before the increase. A back-of-the-envelope calculation suggests the announcement resulted
in 10.3% higher real durable consumption growth throughout 2006. The forward-guidance
announcements, instead, had no detectable effects on expectations or readiness to spend on
durables.
    Whereas both forms of unconventional policy should operate through the consumer Euler
equation, households' reactions might differ for several reasons. For instance, households might
find forward guidance announcements not credible because this policy is not time consistent,
whereas unconventional fiscal policy can be time consistent. Yet, Andrade and Ferroni (2019)
show that both the stock market and inflation swap rates reacted positively to the forward
guidance announcements; moreover, professional forecasters updated their GDP outlook and
inflation expectations upward subsequent to the announcement. These reactions constitute
evidence that experts found the forward guidance announcements we study time consistent and
credible. The results also directly rule out that market participants and professional forecasters
interpreted the announcements as a signal of worse future economic conditions, so-called Delphic
forward guidance (Campbell et al. (2012)). Andrade and Ferroni (2019) instead conclude that
"Odyssean shocks became predominant over the post-2012 period during which policy rates


                                                5
went to zero" and argue that the announcements we study in this paper resulted in some of the
largest market-based shocks during the sample they study.10
       Reaction to these two policies might also differ based on households' sophistication in
economic matters: The implications of unconventional fiscal policy for future price changes
are trivial--prices will increase at a specified date in the future--whereas grasping the
implications of forward guidance for future price changes requires sophistication in economic
matters. This interpretation is consistent with earlier evidence that the accuracy of households'
expectations and their understanding of conventional measures of fiscal and monetary policy
varies systematically with households' sophistication.11
       Consistent with earlier research,12 the unconditional association between inflation expec-
tations and consumption plans is higher for sophisticated consumers. At the same time, all
consumers in our sample reacted similarly to the VAT announcement irrespective of their
sophistication, which corroborates the conjecture that households do not need a high level of
sophistication to understand the implications of unconventional fiscal policy.
       To further corroborate this heterogeneity test, we also consider a dimension under which
households should react differently, irrespective of their sophistication--the likelihood of binding
financial constraints. Even if all households understood the implications of unconventional fiscal
policy, households with less resources to spend on impact should display a muted reaction. And,
indeed, Germans who were more likely to face financial or liquidity constraints increased their
spending by about 25% less than unconstrained Germans around the unconventional fiscal policy
announcements.13 The muted response for constrained households also alleviates concerns that
any other concurrent shock drives the homogeneous response by household demographics.
       We then move on to consider the same heterogeneity tests for forward guidance
announcements. Because financial market participants and professional forecasters reacted to
such announcements, one might wonder whether sophisticated households reacted too. We find
that the lack of reaction was homogeneous across demographics, both at announcement as well as
in the medium run, which suggests that only agents with extremely high levels of sophistication,
  10
      The literature labels the conventional form of forward guidance that is introduced by Eggertsson and Woodford
(2003) as Odyssean because it involves a central bank commitment to keep interest rates low in the future even
though the conventional reaction function would predict an increase in rates.
   11
      See, e.g., Agarwal et al. (2009); D'Acunto, Malmendier, Ospina, and Weber (2019); D'Acunto, Malmendier,
and Weber (2018); D'Acunto, Hoang, Paloviita, and Weber (2020)).
   12
      For instance, see Bachmann et al. (2015); Burke and Ozdagli (2014); Armantier, Bruine de Bruin, Topa,
Klaauw, and Zafar (2015); Cashin (2016); Ichiue and Nishiguchi (2015); Crump, Eusepi, Tambalotti, and Topa
(2015); Vellekoop and Wiederholt (2017); Christelis, Georgarakos, Jappelli, and van Rooij (2016); and the evidence
from historical data in Romer and Romer (2013); Eggertsson (2008); Jalil and Rua (2016).
   13
      We consider three proxies for financial and liquidity constraints--a qualitative answer about binding financial
constraints, income levels, and homeownership, which as we discuss below is a strong proxy for household wealth
in Germany.



                                                         6
such as experts, react to forward guidance. Moreover, neither constrained nor unconstrained
households reacted, which suggests that a potential lack of resources to spend around the forward
guidance announcements which occurred on the height of the European sovereign debt crisis
cannot explain the ineffectiveness of forward guidance. Moreover, we also do not detect any
delayed reaction on the part of households suggesting that an indirect transmission through
financial markets did not occur. For example, forward guidance announcements might reduce
long term borrowing rates, increase households' willingness to take out loans which is ultimately
reflected in larger durable purchases. Finally, income perceptions and expectations did not
react around the forward guidance announcements which makes an indirect transmission of
forward guidance through income expectations that is central in modern heterogeneous agent
New Keynesian models (HANK) unlikely (Slacalek et al. (2020)).
    Taken together, our results show substantial differences in households' reactions to
unconventional policies that operate theoretically through the same channels. Unconventional
fiscal policy, whose implications for expectations and choice are easy to grasp, triggers similar
reactions across sophisticated and unsophisticated households.      Instead, households do not
react to forward guidance, whose implications are harder to grasp, even though experts found
these announcements credible and reacted. These empirical results are consistent with recent
theoretical work in macroeconomics suggesting that limited cognitive abilities might help explain
the forward guidance puzzle (see, e.g., Farhi and Werning (2018), Gabaix (2016), Woodford
(2018), Angeletos and Lian (2017), and Ilut and Valchev (2017)).
    Our analysis contains some caveats.       The data consist of repeated cross sections of
consumers. We cannot exploit within-household variation in inflation expectations to control
for time-invariant unobserved heterogeneity at the household level. Also, the survey elicits
consumers' willingness to purchase durable goods but we do not observe actual purchases.
Kreiner, Lassen, and Leth-Petersen (2013) exploit a setting in which survey-based and
administrative data about the same variables are available to assess the accuracy of survey-based
answers. For the case of reported expenditure, they find that measures based on surveys exhibit
a high correlation with measures based on actual administrative data (see also Coibion et al.
(2020a) for evidence in the US). Although our data do not allow implementing the tests in
Kreiner, Lassen, and Leth-Petersen (2013), we show that the average survey-based willingness
to spend closely tracks the average realized durable consumption expenditure in Germany based
on administrative data, which is consistent with evidence in Bachmann, Berg, and Sims (2015)
for the US (see Figure A.1 in the online appendix).
    Note also that the survey we use elicits only qualitative measures of inflation expectations.
Using our qualitative measure, we show in Figure A.2 in the online appendix that households'


                                               7
inflation expectations track closely lagged actual realized inflation--the measure captures
meaningful variation in inflation expectations by households.        Instead, research that uses
quantitative measures of expectations finds an upward bias in average inflation expectations
relative to ex-post realized inflation, and substantial dispersion of the levels of inflation
expectations across households (Armantier et al. (2015), D'Acunto et al. (2018)).             This
discrepancy is consistent with households having correct directional expectations regarding
inflation--which we capture with our qualitative measure--but incorrect perceptions regarding
the level of inflation (see Vellekoop and Wiederholt (2017)). We discuss these points in more
detail in section I.


A.    Related Literature

Our paper builds on the recent revival of research on households' subjective expectations.
Bernanke (2007) motivates this agenda arguing inflation expectations drive consumers'
consumption, saving, and borrowing decisions, workers' wage bargaining with firms as well
as managers' price-setting decisions, and the effectiveness of fiscal and monetary policy, among
other outcomes. Malmendier and Nagel (2009) find lifetime experiences matter for inflation
expectations and mortgage choices, Kuchler and Zafar (2018) show individuals extrapolate from
their experiences to aggregate house price expectations, D'Acunto et al. (2019) and Cavallo
et al. (2017) show individuals extrapolate from their shopping bundles to aggregate inflation and
D'Acunto et al. (2019a,b, 2020) find large heterogeneity in the forecast accuracy for inflation
and in the reaction of agents' choices to changes in interest rates and inflation expectations
by cognitive abilities.   We depart from this literature by not focusing on the description
of which features explain households' expectations but on how policy makers might manage
household expectations directly and target households, instead of financial institutions, as agents
of transmission of fiscal and monetary policy.
     On the methodological side, our paper belongs to a growing strand of the empirical macro-
finance literature that uses micro data to obtain causal identification either through natural
experiments (Fuchs-Schuendeln and Hassan (2016); Bailey, D´
                                                          avila, Kuchler, and Stroebel (2019);
D'Acunto, Prokopczuk, and Weber (2018); D'Acunto (2014)) or through information treatments
in controlled environments (Coibion, Gorodnichenko, and Weber (2019); D'Acunto (2018); Roth
and Wohlfart (2019); Andre, Pizzinelli, Roth, and Wohlfart (2019); Coibion, Gorodnichenko,
and Weber (2020b); Coibion et al. (2020)). We contribute to this area by proposing a difference-
in-differences strategy based on unexpected policy announcements, paired with household-level
matching, to allow comparison of the expectations and plans of observationally indistinguishable
households.

                                                 8
                                                  I    Data

A.      Data Sources

We use the confidential micro data underlying the GfK Consumer Climate MAXX survey. GfK
conducts the survey on behalf of the Directorate General for Economic and Financial Affairs
(DG ECFIN) of the European Commission. We use similar data from the harmonized surveys
of DG ECFIN for several other European countries.14 GfK asks a representative repeated cross
section of 2,000 German households questions about general and personal economic conditions,
inflation expectations, and willingness to spend on consumption goods at the monthly frequency.
We obtained access to the micro data for the period starting in January 2000 and ending in
February 2016. The online appendix contains the original survey and a translation to English.
       We use the answers to the following two questions in the survey to construct the main
variables in our baseline analysis:

Question 8 Given the current economic situation, do you think it's a good time to buy
                 larger items such as furniture, electronic items, etc.?
Households could answer, "It's neither a good nor a bad time," "No, it's a bad time," or "Yes,
it's a good time."

Question 3 How will consumer prices evolve during the next twelve months compared to
                 the previous twelve months?
Households could answer, "Prices will increase more," "Prices will increase by the same," "Prices
will increase less," "Prices will stay the same," or "Prices will decrease." We create a dummy
variable that equals 1 when households answered, "Prices will increase more," to get a measure
of higher expected inflation.
       We also use questions regarding expectations about general economic variables, personal
income or unemployment, and a rich set of socio-demographics.


B.      Descriptive Statistics

Table 1 contains descriptive statistics. On average, 22% of individuals said it was a good time
to buy durables, 22% said it was a bad time, and the others are indifferent. Thirteen percent of
individuals expected higher inflation in the following 12 months. More than 80% of respondents
thought prices in the previous 12 months increased substantially, somewhat, or slightly, with
equal proportions for each answer. Only 15% thought prices remained the same, and essentially
nobody thought prices decreased.
 14
      We discuss the data for other European countries in more detail in the online appendix.


                                                        9
       The sample is roughly balanced between women and men. Most respondents completed high
school, but had no college education.15 The mean household's size was 2.5, and the majority of
households lived in cities with fewer than 50,000 inhabitants.
       Panel C of Table 1 reports statistics for individuals' personal expectations. Most individuals
thought their financial situation had not changed in the previous 12 months, and they expected
the same for the future. Moreover, most individuals barely saved, and expected a constant or
slightly increasing unemployment rate.


B.1      Inflation Expectations and Actual Inflation

In quantitative surveys, respondents often report extreme levels of expected inflation. For
instance, in the Michigan Survey of Consumers (MSC), 3% of households expect deflation of up
to 50%, and 17% expect an increase in inflation by more than 9% per year. A recent literature
also discusses an effect of questions' wording on answers (see Armantier et al. (2013)). Assessing
whether our qualitative elicitation of inflation expectations captures meaningful variation in
ex-post realized inflation rates is thus crucial to corroborate the validity of our data. Appendix
figure A.2 shows that our average survey answers are highly correlated with subsequent realized
inflation, which is prima facie evidence that our measures of inflation expectations capture
meaningful variation in subsequent realized inflation.
       In fact, our qualitative measures might be more appropriate than quantitative measures
in our repeated cross sections setting. Consider the following example of two households, A
and B. Household A perceives an existing inflation rate of 2%. Household B perceives a 20%
inflation rate. Now, suppose that household A expects inflation to increase from 2% to 3%,
and hence thinks it is a good time to purchase durables. Household B instead expects inflation
to decrease from 20% to 15%, and hence wants to postpone durable purchases. If we ran a
cross-sectional regression of the reported willingness to purchase durable goods on quantitative
inflation expectations, and we could not observe within-household inflation expectations over
time, we would estimate a negative relationship between inflation expectations and spending,
even though the true underlying relationship is positive.16 Our qualitative measures avoid this
problem.
       Moreover, one might wonder whether retailers increased prices before the VAT increase
was implemented, which is what New Keynesian models with monopolistic competition
  15
     Most respondents completed either Hauptschule or Realschule, and only 8% of respondents had a college
degree.
  16
     The example is motivated by Vellekoop and Wiederholt (2017) who find large dispersion in individual level
inflation expectations but also find that individual fixed effects capture most of the variation in the panel.




                                                     10
and price-adjustment frictions would predict (Gorodnichenko and Weber (2016)).17 In this
case, realized inflation might have increased in Germany well before the VAT increase was
implemented in January 2007. In Appendix Figure A.3, though, we show that inflation did
not increase throughout 2006 and only started to increase in the first half of 2007, and not
immediately at implementation in January 2007. One reason for this delayed pass through
might be the concern of customer antogonization (Anderson and Simester (2010)). In fact,
anecdotal evidence suggests that retailers delayed price increases because they feared a stark
drop in demand.18 For instance, Media Markt and Saturn, two of the largest German retail
chains for consumer electronics, advertised extensively their plans to help prospective customers
by lowering prices by 19%, instead of increasing prices by the higher VAT amount. By early
2008, all the categories underlying the German CPI had fully adjusted their prices.19 We discuss
these institutional details in more detail in online appendix section A.2.


                                   II     Empirical Strategy

We move on to discuss the institutional setting of the policy announcements and our empirical
strategy.


A.      Institutional Setting 1: Unconventional Fiscal Policy

The ideal experiment to test for the effects of unconventional fiscal policy on households'
readiness to spend would require an unexpected pre-announced increase in future consumption
taxes that is not counterbalanced by an increase in nominal interest rates.
       We isolated one such policy announcement in Germany. In November 2005, the newly
formed government unexpectedly announced a 3-percentage-point increase in the VAT, effective
in January 2007. The narrative record, which we discuss in detail in the online appendix,
suggests the increase was legislated to comply with EU law. In each year between 2001 and
2004, Germany posted a deficit-to-GDP ratio above 3%. In 2003, the EU opened a procedure
against Germany for infringement of the 3% deficit-to-GDP rule in the Maastricht Treaty. The
German government proposed plans to reduce the ratio to 2.9% in 2005, but these plans were
not followed and the deficit-to-GDP ratio was forecasted to be 3.3% at the end of 2005. In
November 2005, the EU announced it would fine Germany if immediate actions were not taken
to reduce the ratio. A few days later, the newly established right-left coalition announced a
  17
     We thank Tarun Ramadorai for suggesting this point.
  18
     See:           http://www.handelsblatt.com/politik/deutschland/staatsdefizit-unter-drei-prozent-deutsches-
defizitverfahren-wird-eingestellt/2754740.html.
  19
     See: https://www.destatis.de/DE/Publikationen/WirtschaftStatistik/Preise/MwSterhoehungJan2007.pdf.



                                                      11
3-percentage-point increase in VAT, from 16% to 19%, to be implemented after 14 months, in
January 2007. Based on the taxonomy of Romer and Romer (2010), this increase was due to an
"inherited budget deficit," and it is indeed classified as such in Alesina et al. (2019).
      For our purposes, the fundamental feature of this policy announcement is that Germany
has had no monetary sovereignty since joining the EMU. The ECB did not tighten monetary
policy to counteract the increase in inflation expectations in Germany, as we document in the
online appendix with explicit quotes of former ECB President, Jean-Claude Trichet, and other
members of the ECB Governing Council. For this reason, under a Fisher equation logic, a
change in consumers' inflation expectations should have translated one-to-one into a change in
perceived interest rates, and hence should have decreased the propensity to save and increased
spending on impact based on the consumer Euler equation.


B.     Institutional Setting 2: Forward Guidance

Moving on to forward guidance announcements, we consider the first two announcements by the
ECB. During the introductory remarks to the press conference on 4 July 2013, President Mario
Draghi used an explicit forward guidance announcement as a policy tool for the first time: "The
Governing Council expects the key ECB interest rates to remain at present or lower levels for an
extended period of time."20 On 9 January 2014, Mr. Draghi reinforced the stance in a second
forward guidance announcement: "Accordingly, we firmly reiterate our forward guidance that
we continue to expect the key ECB interest rates to remain at present or lower levels for an
extended period of time."21
      Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the ECB at that time, explained in an article
that "longer-term interest rates determine the borrowing conditions that are most relevant for
a large component of aggregate spending: first and foremost, durable consumption." He moved
on to argue that by committing to a future path of short-term interest rates the ECB would
be able to stimulate durable spending.22 He also explained that "inflation will start rising and
the usual pattern of central bank reaction would dictate a resolute firming of the stance. Its
promise not to follow that usual pattern of reaction will be painful to fulfill, when that time
comes, because the central bank will have to watch inflation rising while remaining atypically
passive. But that promise has a value today, as it generates optimistic expectations, supports
spending and thus facilitates the central bank's job at present." Mr. Praet was clear about the
ECB's expectation that forward guidance announcements should have led households to move
 20
    See: https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pressconf/2013/html/is130704.en.html.
 21
    See: https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pressconf/2014/html/is140109.en.html.
 22
    See https://voxeu.org/article/forward-guidance-and-ecb.




                                                   12
spending forward due to higher inflation in the future and hence higher inflation expectations
on impact.
       Time inconsistency, as Mr. Praet also emphasizes in the quote, is a potential concern with
this form of forward guidance. Central Banks have incentives to deviate from the policy once
the liquidity trap is over to avoid generating inflation. Agents in the economy might realize this
credibility problem and might not react to the policy announcement for this reason.
       For the announcements we consider, though, Andrade and Ferroni (2019) document that
financial markets, inflation swaps, and professional forecasters all reacted on impact, which
is direct evidence that they all found the announcements credible. Because experts found
these measures credible, the possibility that non-expert consumers did not change their inflation
expectations because of lack of credibility is unlikely.23


C.      Difference-in-Differences Strategy

Assessing the effects of the policy announcements on German consumers alone would have no
causal implications, because all German households were exposed to the same announcements,
and hence any shock contemporary to the announcements could have caused the detected
reactions. For identification purposes, we need a group of households not affected by the
shock, but who behaved similar to German households before the shock so that they can be
a plausible counterfactual for the behavior of Germans absent the shock. To this aim, we
propose a difference-in-differences empirical strategy in the spirit of Poterba (1996) and Besley
and Rosen (1999).
       To implement such a counterfactual, we obtained access to the confidential micro data for
the same EU harmonized consumer sentiment survey for three additional countries (France,
Sweden, and the UK) through national statistical offices and GfK subsidiaries. We use the
households in these three countries to construct our control groups for the counterfactual
behavior of German consumers, had they not been exposed to the policy announcements.
       Our difference-in-differences approach compares German consumers' readiness to purchase
durables with the readiness of matched consumers in other European countries, whose observable
characteristics are similar to German consumers, before and after the policy announcements.
  23
     This form of forward guidance announcement, which publicly commits the ECB to future action, falls under
the "Odyssean" category based on the taxonomy of Campbell, Evans, Fisher, and Justiniano (2012). Andrade
and Ferroni (2019) argue that"Odyssean shocks became predominant over the post-2012 period during which
policy rates went to zero (in July 2012) and the Governing Council started to give explicit guidance on future
rates (in July 2013)." Irrespective of whether our forward-guidance announcements were Delphic or Odyssean
in nature, theory predicts a higher willingness to purchase durable goods after the announcements in either
case. Odyssean announcements should cause higher inflation expectations and higher spending through the Euler
equation. Under Delphic announcements, lower long-term rates should stimulate spending directly, independent
of inflation expectations.


                                                     13
Because the micro-level cross-sectional estimation allows us to absorb any time-invariant country
characteristic through country fixed effects, no systematic differences across German and other
European consumers can drive our results.
     We estimate the average treatment effect of each policy announcement on consumers'
readiness to purchase durables as follows:


           (DurGerman,     post   - DurGerman,    pre )   - (Durf oreign,   post   - Durf oreign,   pre ),   (1)


where DurGerman,   post   is Germans' average readiness to purchase durable goods after each policy
announcement; DurGerman,          pre   is Germans' average readiness to purchase durable goods before
each policy announcement; and Durf oreign,          post   and Durf oreign,    pre   are the analogous averages
for foreign households not exposed to the announcements.


D.    Identifying Assumptions

The parallel-trends assumption is a necessary condition for identification. In our case, it states
that our control group behaved similarly to German households both before and after the shock,
had the shock not happened. We cannot test whether the parallel-trends assumption held after
the shock, because we miss the counterfactual of no shock in Germany. We therefore test for the
presence of differential pre-trends before the shock. In the presence of parallel pre-trends, our
identifying assumption is that foreign households behaved like German households would have
behaved absent the policy announcements over the same period of time.
     Figure 2 and Figure 3 provide graphical evidence that we fail to detect violations of
parallel pre-trends. Based on the top left panels of the two figures, the trends in inflation
expectations and purchasing propensities are parallel for German and foreign consumers before
the announcement of the VAT increase (November 2005). Starting in January 2006, both
the German consumers' inflation expectations and willingness to buy durable goods started
to increase substantially. At the same time, the trends for foreign consumers did not move
compared to the pre-shock period.
     When we consider the top right panels of both Figure 2 and Figure 3, we find that even
in the case of the forward guidance policy announcements the trends in inflation expectations
and purchasing propensities were parallel for German and foreign consumers. Contrary to the
VAT announcement, we find no noticeable divergence in inflation expectations and purchasing
propensities around the forward guidance announcements.
     The bottom panels of Figure 2 and Figure 3 repeat the parallel-trends test on a subset of
foreign countries. For the unconventional fiscal policy announcement, we only consider French


                                                          14
consumers. French consumers were not subject to the increase in German VAT but were facing
the same nominal interest rates set by the ECB. The similarity of pre-shock trends is even more
pronounced when we only use French households as control group (see bottom left panels of
Figure 2 and Figure 3).
       For the forward guidance announcements, we restrict the control group to consumers from
the UK and Sweden (see bottom right panels of Figure 2 and Figure 3), who were not part of the
EMU and hence not affected by the ECB forward guidance announcements. Again, we confirm
these groups of consumers display parallel trends in the pre-announcement periods in terms of
both individual inflation expectations and readiness to purchase durable goods.
       We also verify that consumers in all countries display a positive association between
inflation expectations and willingness to purchase durable goods, as the consumer Euler equation
prescribes. We perform this test in columns (6)-(8) in Table 3. In column (5), we report
the corresponding baseline effect for German households, excluding the forward guidance and
unconventional fiscal policy periods. Foreign households react to their inflation expectations in
a similar fashion as German households, which alleviates concerns about the external validity of
our strategy. We discuss in more detail the empirical models we estimate, the association between
inflation expectations and consumption propensities, and the heterogeneity across demographic
groups in section V.


E.     Matching Foreign and German Households

To account for the heterogeneity in responsiveness to inflation expectations (Jappelli and
Pistaferri (2014); see also section V), we match German households with similar foreign
households to construct our identification sample. We first match each German household
in each month with a household in another country interviewed in the same month displaying
similar demographic characteristics. Our samples are repeated cross sections, and hence we
perform a second level of matching, which pairs up similar households interviewed before and
after the shock separately within the German and the foreign survey waves.
       We use a nearest-neighbor algorithm to match households based on propensity scores.24
We estimate propensity scores with a logit regression of the treatment indicator on gender, age,
education, income, and social status, which are the demographic characteristics that are elicited
homogeneously across EU countries by the survey.
       The matching exercise is meaningful only if matched German and foreign households lie
  24
    All the results are virtually identical if we perform the monthly matching using a group of control households
for each German household, and we minimize the difference in observables of the German household and the
group of foreign households.




                                                       15
in the common support of the distributions of the propensity scores. We verify this condition
in Figure 4, which plots the distributions for the treatment group for the VAT period in panel
A (red, top half of panel A) and the control group (blue, bottom half of panel A) and for the
forward guidance period in panel B.
     To assess the performance of the matching procedure, we compare average household
characteristics across German and foreign households both before and after matching. Table 2
assesses the balancing of the variables we use in the matching process. Panel A refers to the
unconventional fiscal policy period and Panel B to the forward guidance period.
     In each panel of Table 2, columns (1)-(3) report the sample average of the variables we use
to compute the propensity score in the unmatched samples of German and foreign households.
T-statistics for two-sided t-tests for whether the estimated means are equal reject the null at
all plausible levels of significance, for both policy events. This result confirms that, without the
matching step, German and foreign households differ systematically.
     In columns (4)-(6), we report the same statistics for the treated and control observations
of the matched samples, which we use in our difference-in-differences analysis. In this case, the
differences in the estimated means across groups are economically and statistically negligible,
which suggests the matching procedure effectively provides us with two similar groups of German
and foreign households.


       III     Policy Announcements, Expectations, and Choice

In this section, we study the effect of policy announcements on inflation expectations,
consumption plan reactions, as well as the heterogeneity of reactions across demographics.


A.    The Effects of Unconventional Fiscal Policy

We first consider the effects of unconventional fiscal policy announcements on consumers'
inflation expectations and willingness to purchase durable goods.
     Figure 1 in the introduction shows a large increase in the share of individuals who
expect higher inflation over the following 12 months. In fact, the share quadruples after the
announcement (left panel, vertical line) and stays high for the 13 months until the actual
VAT increase implementation in January 2007. After the increase, expectations revert to their
pre-announcement level.
     We run a set of cross-sectional regressions on the matched sample before and after the VAT
announcement to estimate the average treatment effect of the VAT shock in equation (1). We
set the reference month to June 2005, and we change the end month m across regressions. All


                                                16
the results are similar if we use any other month before the announcement of the VAT increase
in November 2005.
     We estimate the following specification:


              Duri,     06/2005m    =  + m × V AT shocki + Xi,            06/2005m    ×  + i,               (2)


where Duri,      06/2005m    is the difference in the willingness to spend on durable goods between
month m and June 2005, V AT shocki is an indicator equal to 1 if the household was exposed
to the VAT shock, m captures the effect of the VAT shock on household i's willingness to buy
durables in month m, and Xi,06/2005m is the difference in a set of observables between month
m and the baseline month. The observables include the matching variables we use to construct
household pairs, as well as income expectations. The results are virtually identical if we change
the set of observables, or we exclude them altogether.
     The left panel of Figure 5 plots the estimated coefficient ^m (solid line) of equation (2) for
each month m from July 2005 to December 2007, as well as the 95% confidence intervals (dashed
line). We find no differences in the readiness to spend on durable goods between German and
matched households before the announcement of the VAT increase. Starting in December 2005,
German households' willingness to spend increased relative to matched households: German
households were 3.8 percentage points (s.e. 1.5 percentage points) more likely to declare it
was a good time to purchase durable goods after the announcement compared to before, and
compared to matched foreign households. The effect increased in magnitude throughout 2006
and peaked at 34 percentage points in November 2006. The average treatment effect dropped
to zero in January 2007 once the VAT increased and higher inflation materialized.25
     The left panel of Figure 5 shows the VAT shock had a strong and positive effect on Germans'
willingness to spend, even after controlling for the purchasing propensities of similar households
not exposed to the shock in the difference-in-differences setting. The average treatment effect
increased over time. This finding is consistent with Crossley et al. (2014), who argue that
intertemporal arbitrage should increase over time and be highest right before the tax increase,
because of irreversibility, uncertainty, and storage costs.


B.    The (Non-)Effects of Forward Guidance

In the second step, we study whether the two ECB forward-guidance announcement we observe
in our sample period affected consumers' willingness to spend on durable goods.
  25
     Results are virtually identically if we match on income expectations for the next 12 months, in addition to
gender, age, education, income, and social status.




                                                      17
       The right panel of Figure 5 plots the estimated coefficient ^m (solid line) of equation (2)
for each month m from April 2013 to June 2014, as well as the 95% confidence intervals (dashed
line). We find no difference in the readiness to spend on durable goods between German and
matched households before the first forward guidance announcement in July 2013. Germans'
propensity to spend did not change after the first forward guidance announcement relative to
before and relative to matched foreign households. Even around the second announcement in
January 2014, the announcement has no effect on the willingness to spend.
       The propensity to spend did not move well after the second announcement either, and
hence forward guidance announcements not only had no effect on impact, but did not have
any delayed indirect effects through financial intermediaries, such as due to an effect of lower
long-term interest rates on credit-financed consumption.


C.      Dispersion of Inflation Expectations

Our baseline analysis focuses on the first moment of inflation expectations, but the policy
announcements might also imply an indirect effect on the second moment of expectations and
reduce the dispersion of expectations across individuals.26 Indeed, Coibion et al. (2019) show
if priors are symmetrically distributed around the signal, the average expectations of a pool
of Bayesian agents would not change after a shock. Rather, expectations uncertainty might
change if agents update their beliefs. This seems plausible especially for the forward guidance
announcements, which do not provide a quantitative level for future inflation but give all agents
a clear common signal about the direction of the increase. In Coibion et al. (2019), providing
common signals such as information treatments about macroeconomic variables reduces the
dispersion of expectations.
       Unfortunately, our survey does not include direct elicitation of the full distribution of
individual beliefs about inflation, and hence we cannot measure the second moment of inflation
expectations at the individual level. We can still assess, though, a potential effect of the two
unconventional policies on the cross-sectional dispersion of expectations in the population.
       In Figure 10, we plot the average monthly coefficient of variation of inflation expectations
around the unconventional policy announcements. We compute the coefficient of variation as the
ratio between the monthly cross sectional standard deviation and the monthly average inflation
expectations in the German sample.27
       The left panel of Figure 10 refers to unconventional fiscal policy. We detect a notable drop
  26
   We thank Tarun Ramadorai for suggesting this point.
  27
   We scale the standard deviation by the average inflation expectations because the standard deviation increases
mechanically when average inflation expectations increase.




                                                       18
in the coefficient of variation starting in January 2006 through the end of 2006. Although the
normalization by average inflation expectations drives, at least in part, this drop, because we
know from above that average inflation expectations increase over this period, the evidence
is at least inconsistent with a substantial increase in the cross-sectional variation of inflation
expectations during the period between policy announcement and implementation of the VAT
increase.
     The right panel of Figure 10 considers the two forward guidance announcements. Similar
to the first moment, we fail to detect a drop in the dispersion of expectations around these
announcements.


            IV    Who Reacts to the Unconventional Policies?

Earlier research has identified several individual-level characteristics that are relevant for
households' understanding and reaction to economic policies. Examples of such characteristics
include cognitive abilities--low-IQ men are less responsive to economic policies than high-IQ men
(D'Acunto, Hoang, Paloviita, and Weber (2019a,b, 2020)); gender--women have systematically
higher inflation expectations than men (D'Acunto, Malmendier, and Weber (2018); D'Acunto,
Malmendier, Ospina, and Weber (2019)); and socio-economic status--low-status individuals
have systematically higher and more uncertain inflation expectations than high-status
individuals (Kuhnen and Miu (2017)).
     For the case of unconventional fiscal policy, the announcement communicates trivially that
consumer prices will increase by a pre-specified amount at a known future date. Consumers
should easily understand that delaying their spending until after the price increase will be
costly.
     Moreover, because this message is easy to convey and explain, the media might cover and
discuss it in more detail than other news about economic policy. Not only specialized media,
but also mainstream media and tabloids are likely to cover and discuss the implications of this
type of announcement. For instance, a few weeks before the VAT increase, the largest German
tabloid, Bild-Zeitung, titled: "Achtung, Mehrwertsteuer-Fallen", which translates to "Attention,
Value-Added Tax Traps." Anecdotally, the German media discussed the implications of such
measure throughout the pre-implementation period.         Due to the breadth and persistence
of media coverage, all consumers, and not only those consuming specialized media, might
have been exposed to the announcement and its implications in several occasions during the




                                               19
pre-implementation period.28 For all these reasons, we conjecture that unconventional fiscal
policy might affect the inflation expectations of every consumer, irrespective of sophistication
in economic matters.
       To assess our conjecture, we repeat the difference-in-differences analysis after splitting our
sample across several demographic characteristics that correlate with sophistication in economic
matters and/or systematic differences in inflation expectations and readiness to spend. To
perform this test, we perform the matching of German and foreign households each month
within each demographic group. We then estimate the average treatment effect of the policy
announcement on households' readiness to purchase durable goods separately within each
matched demographic group.
       Figure 6 plots the estimated average treatment effects of the unconventional fiscal policy
announcement when splitting the samples based on five demographic variables.                  First, we
consider education levels--whether the respondent has a college degree (High Education) or
not (Low Education). Consistent with our conjecture, we find no noticeable difference in the
reactions of respondents with different levels of education after the announcement.
       The second characteristic we consider is gender, because, unconditionally, women have
systematically higher inflation expectations than men (D'Acunto et al. (2018)). Differences in
the reaction across genders throughout 2016 are economically negligible and we cannot reject
the null hypothesis that such differences equal zero statistically.
       We then split the sample between those expecting higher income over the following 12
months and those expecting the same or lower income over the same period. Different reactions
by income expectations would imply an income effect of the announcement.                   Instead, the
reactions are almost identical for households with income expectations of opposite signs.
       Moving on to respondents' age, unconditionally--that is, outside the policy periods--we
find that older respondents have a lower propensity to spend when they expect higher inflation.
This fact is not surprising because older individuals have nominal pensions and lower human
capital compared to someone in the labor force. And, yet, we detect no differences in the reaction
to the VAT announcement for respondents of different ages.
       Finally, we consider socio-economic status.       Even in this case, we fail to detect any
systematic differences in the reactions of respondents in the lowest and highest socio-economic
brackets.
       Overall, the homogeneous and universal response to unconventional fiscal policy supports
our conjecture that all households appear to understand, be aware, and react to such form of
  28
   In the online appendix, we report more anecdotal evidence on media captions covering the November 2005
unconventional fiscal policy announcement at the announcement date and throughout 2006.



                                                   20
unconventional policy.
       Although consistent with our hypothesis, the striking similarity of reactions across
demographics might raise the concern that our analysis captures some mechanical features
of the data.29 For this reason, we propose an assessment of our conjecture in the spirit of
falsification tests. Fortunately, our conjecture of universal reaction irrespective of consumers'
sophistication is falsifiable across the domain of financial and liquidity constraints. Intuitively,
even though financial and/or liquidity-constrained consumers fully understood the implications
of unconventional fiscal policy, their binding constraints would not allow them to bring forward
all durable spending before the VAT increase. For this reason, we should observe a muted effect
of unconventional fiscal policy on the willingness to spend of constrained households, even if the
households understood the policy implications.
       In Figure 7, we perform this test using three proxies for the likelihood of binding constraints.
The first proxy is a direct question about whether respondents are unable to save any of their
income or borrow (high financial constraints) or whether respondents save regularly part of their
monthly income (low financial constraints). The second proxy we consider is households' income
levels. Intuitively, higher-income households are less likely to face financial constraints relative
to low-income households. Third, we consider a split of homeowners and renting households.
This split is justified by the fact that, in Germany, homeownership is the strongest predictor of
household wealth.30
       Across all the three proxies for financial/liquidity constraints, the reaction is economically
and statistically weaker for more constrained respondents relative to unconstrained respondents.
       We then move on to run the heterogeneity analysis across demographics around the
two forward guidance announcements.               Although we detected no average effect of these
announcements on the overall population, sophisticated consumers might react. Unfortunately,
we do cannot measure financial literacy and economic sophistication directly in the survey. For
instance, we do not know respondents' occupations, which would have allowed us to isolate those
working in the financial industry. Nor do we know the major for college-educated respondents,
which would have allowed isolating those with a background in economics and finance.
       Figure 8 and Figure 9 show the results for the heterogeneity test. Across all demographic
splits, we fail to detect any significant reaction to forward guidance announcements. Even
college graduates are non-reactive, although, as discussed above, more precise ways to isolate
  29
     Although we are unable to formulate a compelling reason for why the results might be "mechanical," we fully
acknowledge that the consistently overlapping patterns by demographics might appear surprising.
  30
     The Bundesbank (2019) shows that the average net worth of German homeowners is Euro 477.8K for non-
mortgage holders and Euro 336.9K for mortgage holders, whereas it is only Euro 54.7K for renters using the micro
data from the Panel of Household Finances.




                                                      21
economic literacy might have allowed us to detect a reaction in the small fraction of the German
population that has such expertise.


                                               V      Channels

In the last part of the paper, we assess a set of potential economic channels through which
unconventional fiscal policy announcements might affect consumers' inflation expectations and
durable spending plans. Here, we only study unconventional fiscal policy, because we failed to
detect any effects of forward guidance announcements.
       Unconventional fiscal policy can affect purchasing propensities via an inflation-expectations
channel only if consumers' willingness to purchase reacts to changes in their inflation
expectations. In times of fixed nominal interest rates, the Euler equation predicts a positive
association between consumption and inflation expectations. Earlier research, however, found
conflicting evidence about this channel. In this section, we document a positive association
between households' inflation expectations and their willingness to purchase durable goods.
The size of the association varies substantially across demographics. This result confirms the
importance of matching similar households before implementing our difference-in-differences
strategy.


A.      Intertemporal Substitution

Consumers' readiness to purchase durable goods derives from discrete, non-ordered choices in a
survey. We therefore model the response probabilities in a multinomial-logit setting.31
       We assume the answer to the question on the readiness to spend is a random variable
representing the underlying population. The random variable may take three values, y 
{0, 1, 2}: 0 denotes it is neither a good nor a bad time to purchase durable goods; 1 denotes it
is a bad time to purchase durable goods; and 2 denotes it is a good time to purchase durable
goods.
       We define the response probabilities as P (y = t|X ), where t = 0, 1, 2, and X is an N × K
vector where N is the number of survey participants. The first element of X is a unit vector,
and the other K - 1 columns represent a rich set of household-level observables, including
demographics and expectations.
 31
      Results are similar if we estimate a probit model.




                                                           22
    We assume the distribution of the response probabilities is

                                                       eXt
                                 P (y = t|X ) =                   Xz
                                                                                              (3)
                                                  1+   z =1,2 e


for t = 1, 2, and t is a K × 1 vector of coefficients. The response probability for the case y = 0
is determined, because the three probabilities must sum to unity. We estimate the model via
maximum likelihood to obtain the vector t of coefficients for t = 1, 2, and set the category
y = 0 as the baseline response. We compute the marginal effects of changes in the covariates on
the probability that households choose any of three answers in the survey, and report them in
the tables.
    Table 3 reports the average marginal effects computed from the multinomial logit
regressions. We cluster standard errors at the quarter level to allow for correlation of unknown
form in residuals across contiguous months. In all columns, we report the marginal effect of
the inflation-increase dummy on the likelihood that households respond that it is a good time
to buy durables. Columns (1)-(5) focus on the sample of German households, whereas columns
(6)-(8) report the results for estimating the same specification separately for households abroad.
    In column (1), the inflation-increase dummy is the only explanatory variable. Germans
who expect increasing inflation over the following 12 months are on average 5.8% more likely to
answer that it is a good time to buy durables compared to individuals that expected constant or
decreasing inflation. Column (2) augments the specification by adding a set of controls, which
include perceptions of past inflation (Jonung (1981)), a rich set of demographic characteristics
that might determine both purchasing propensities and inflation expectations (see, e.g.,
Attanasio and Weber (1993)), as well as expectations about personal and macroeconomic
variables. The baseline association between expecting higher inflation and readiness to purchase
durable goods becomes larger (8.8%), which suggests that omitted factors in this analysis are
unlikely to dramatically change the results.
    In columns (3)-(5) of Table 3, we show the association between inflation expectations
and readiness to spend is robust across subperiods. Consistent with our interpretation of the
difference-in-differences analysis, the baseline association is larger during the VAT announcement
period, and hence unconventional fiscal policy was successful to trigger a higher propensity to
purchase durable goods relative to normal times.
    A back-of-the-envelope calculation implies the marginal effect of inflation expectations on
the willingness to buy durables translates into 4.8% higher real durable consumption expenditure
if all Germans expected higher inflation. During the period after the announcement and before
the actual increase in VAT, our back-of-the-envelope calculation implies the increase in VAT by


                                                  23
3 percentage points resulted in a 10.3% higher real durable consumption growth.32
     In columns (6)-(8), we find that the baseline association between inflation expectations and
readiness to spend is also true, on average, in each of the countries in our difference-in-differences
analysis.
     Table 4 studies the variation in the baseline effect by household characteristics. We first
consider respondents' education. Columns (1)-(2) of Table 4 report the marginal effects for our
baseline specification estimated separately for survey participants with a Hauptschule degree
(lowest level of formal education) and those with college education. Households with low levels
of education that expect inflation to increase are 6.9% more likely to have a positive stance
toward buying durables compared to households that expected constant or decreasing inflation
(column (1)). This marginal effect increases with education, and is more than 50% larger for
household heads that hold a college degree (column (2)).
     We find a 5% higher marginal effect of inflation expectations on the likelihood of richer
survey participants with a monthly net income above EUR 2,500 replying that it was a good
time to buy durables (column (4)), compared to survey participants with a monthly net income
less than EUR 1,000 (column (3)).
     Retirees have different time-use and consumption patterns compared to the working-age
population, typically have nominal pensions in Germany, hold few real assets, and have lower
human capital compared to someone in the labor force. The marginal effect of inflation increases
on the willingness to spend is lower for those aged 65 or higher (column (6)) than for the younger
population (column (5)).
     In our sample, we do not detect large differences in the sensitivity to buy large-ticket
items to inflation expectations by gender or income expectations, but high-socioeconomic-status
households tend to display a somewhat smaller sensitivity than low-status households (see
columns (7)­(12)).
     To further assess the intertemporal substitution channel, we ask whether households declare
it is a bad time or a good time to save. Higher inflation expectations should trigger a lower
willingness to save. Verifying this channel is important, because our results so far might be
consistent with households substituting between nondurable and durable spending, without any
effects on their propensity to save or overall consumption. Table 5 confirms that higher inflation
expectations increase the likelihood German households declare it is a bad time to save and
decrease the likelihood they declare it is a good time to save.
  32
     To reach this suggestive conclusion, we regress the natural logarithm of real durable consumption expenditure
at the quarterly frequency on the end-of-quarter value of the average durable purchasing propensity and quarterly
dummies, and multiply the resulting coefficient of 0.5396 by the marginal effect of 8.76% (column (2) of Table 3)
and 19.09% for the period of the natural experiment (see column (3)).



                                                       24
       Overall, the results in Table 3 and Table 5 appear consistent with the an intertemporal
substitution channel of unconventional fiscal policy.


B.      Other Channels

Unconventional fiscal policy could also affect spending through income and wealth effects rather
than intertemporal substitution.           For instance, the expected increase in prices might lead
households to expect higher income. Figure 11 plots the evolution of average income perceptions
and income expectations over the following 12 months together with inflation expectations.
The announcement affected average inflation expectations, whereas average income perceptions
and income expectations stayed flat throughout the period, and especially around the VAT
announcement.
       In Figure 12, we find that, around the forward guidance announcements, all expectations
stayed flat. Not only inflation expectations did not move, but also income expectations and
perceptions were flat, which is direct evidence that exceptionally depressed income expectations
during the Great Recession cannot have offset a positive shock of the forward guidance
announcement on households' willingness to spend.
       Another channel we consider for the unconventional fiscal policy period is intratemporal
substitution from non-durable to durable consumption without any increase in overall
consumption. Table 5 shows households who expect higher inflation were more likely to report it
was a bad time to save relative to households with constant or decreasing inflation expectations.
These results make the intratemporal substitution channel unlikely.
       A housing-wealth channel and home-equity extraction could also affect households'
consumption responses (Leth-Petersen (2010)). In the German context, for instance, this channel
might have been triggered by the abolition of German's homeowner subsidy.33 First, though,
the home-ownership rate is on average below 43% in Germany, and house-price inflation was
largely negative in the 2000s.34 Moreover, using data from the German Sample Survey of Income
and Expenditure, we find that the homeownership rate was strikingly stable around the policy
announcements we study. Specifically, the rate moved from of 43.0% in 2003 to 43.2% in 2008
and back to 43.0% in 2013. A substitution away from home purchases to purchases of other
durable goods is therefore unlikely to explain our findings.
       Modern heterogeneous-agent models feature a redistribution channel of surprise inflation
from lenders to borrowers (see Doepke and Schneider (2006)). Based on the VAT increase of
  33
     We discuss this and other policy changes that were implemented in the same years as unconventional fiscal
policy and forward guidance in more detail in section A.2 of the online appendix
  34
     Empirically, we find similar associations between inflation expectations and spending propensities for renters
and home owners.


                                                        25
3 percentage points, if all goods are subject to the higher VAT under full tax incidence on the
consumer side, we would expect an increase in consumer price inflation of 2.59%. However,
the change in inflation is only a surprise for loan contracts that existed before November 2005
and matured after December 2006. For this subset of contracts, we expect a redistribution of
nominal wealth from lenders to borrowers after the actual increase in VAT. At the same time, the
increase in VAT was permanent and should have resulted in a reduction in wealth corresponding
to 2.59% of lifetime consumption under the assumption that consumers did not change their
consumption bundle after the VAT announcement. The total wealth effect of an increase in
VAT is therefore most likely negative for both borrowers and lenders, which suggests that our
estimates of higher spending after the policy announcement are, if anything, a lower bound of
the true effect.
    Finally, more elaborate macroeconomic models with financial constraints or hand-to-mouth
consumers might also offer alternative channels (Kaplan et al. (2018)). We cannot test for all
alternative channels with our data. However, financial constraints or hand-to-mouth consumers
are unlikely to drive our findings, because tax increases would result in lower consumption
expenditure in these alternative models. In section A.2 in the online appendix we also show
that labor-force participation and unit labor costs--additional indirect channels in recent HANK
models (Slacalek, Tristani, and Violante (2020))--did not change during the period we study.


                             VI      Concluding Remarks

We assess the effectiveness of expectations-based unconventional policies that have been recently
proposed by macroeconomic theory and policymakers--unconventional fiscal policy and forward
guidance. Theoretically, these policies should act through the same channels, but we find
substantial differences in their empirical effectiveness: in a same representative population,
unconventional fiscal policy increased individual inflation expectations and willingness to
purchase durable goods, and all demographics reacted similarly to the policy, including
less sophisticated consumers.     Instead, we do not detect any effects of forward guidance
announcements on individual expectations or readiness to spend.
    Our results open questions for theoretical and empirical scholars in finance and
macroeconomics. For instance, what are the distributional consequences of consumers' lack of
reaction to hard-to-grasp policies such as forward guidance? The fact that only financial-market
participants and economic experts reacted to forward guidance announcements in the EU opens
the possibility to unintended redistributive consequences of policy announcements.
    Moreover, the universal reaction to a simple policy like unconventional fiscal policy stresses a


                                                26
potentially relevant but overlooked role for the extent to which ordinary households understand
the implications of economic policy. For policies that aim to reach households directly, and
not through financial intermediaries or firms, policymakers and researchers should consider
the simplicity of the policy implications when designing effective policy making. Our results
are among the first steps to connect the large body of research on the biases and mistakes
of households in the financial domain to the effectiveness of unconventional policies, and
macroeconomists and policymakers can learn from applying the body of work in household
finance and behavioral finance into policy design.




                                               27
References
Abel, J. and A. Fuster (2019). How do mortgage refinances affect debt, default, and spending?
  evidence from harp. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics (forthcoming) (841).
Adelino, M., K. Gerardi, and P. S. Willen (2013). Why don't lenders renegotiate more home
  mortgages? redefaults, self-cures and securitization. Journal of Monetary Economics 60 (7),
  835­853.
Agarwal, S., G. Amromin, S. Chomsisengphet, T. Landvoigt, T. Piskorski, A. Seru, and V. W.
  Yao (2019). Mortgage refinancing, consumer spending, and competition: Evidence from the
  home affordable refinancing program. Working Paper (15-85).
Agarwal, S., J. C. Driscoll, X. Gabaix, and D. Laibson (2009). The age of reason: Financial
  decisions over the life cycle and implications for regulation. Brookings Papers on Economic
  Activity 2009 (2), 51­117.
Agarwal, S., Y. Hwee Chua, and C. Song (2020). Inflation expectations of households and the
  upgrading channel. Working Paper .
Agarwal, S. and W. Qian (2014).           Consumption and debt response to unanticipated
  income shocks: Evidence from a natural experiment in singapore. American Economic
  Review 104 (12), 4205­30.
Alesina, A., C. Favero, and F. Giavazzi (2015). The output effect of fiscal consolidation plans.
  Journal of International Economics 96, S19­S42.
Alesina, A., C. Favero, and F. Giavazzi (2019). Effects of austerity: Expenditure-and tax-based
  approaches. Journal of Economic Perspectives 33 (2), 141­62.
Andersen, S., J. Y. Campbell, K. M. Nielsen, and T. Ramadorai (2020). Sources of inaction in
  household finance: Evidence from the danish mortgage market. American Economic Review
  (forthcoming) .
Anderson, E. T. and D. I. Simester (2010). Price stickiness and customer antagonism. The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 125 (2), 729­765.
Andrade, P. and F. Ferroni (2019). Delphic and odyssean monetary policy shocks: Evidence
  from the euro area. Unpublished Manuscript .
Andre, P., C. Pizzinelli, C. Roth, and J. Wohlfart (2019). Subjective models of the
  macroeconomy: Evidence from experts and a representative sample. Available at SSRN
  3355356 .
Angeletos, G.-M. and C. Lian (2017). Dampening general equilibrium: From micro to macro.
  Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Armantier, O., W. Bruine de Bruin, S. Potter, G. Topa, W. van der Klaauw, and B. Zafar
  (2013). Measuring inflation expectations. Annual Review Economics 5 (1), 273­301.
Armantier, O., W. Bruine de Bruin, G. Topa, W. Klaauw, and B. Zafar (2015). Inflation
  expectations and behavior: Do survey respondents act on their beliefs?           International
  Economic Review 56 (2), 505­536.
Atkinson, A. B. and J. Micklewright (1983). On the reliability of income data in the
  family expenditure survey 1970-1977. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series A
  (General) 146 (1), 33­61.
Attanasio, O. P. and G. Weber (1993). Consumption growth, the interest rate and aggregation.
  The Review of Economic Studies 60 (3), 631­649.
Bachmann, R., T. O. Berg, and E. Sims (2015). Inflation expectations and readiness to spend:
  Cross-sectional evidence. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 7 (1), 1­35.
Bailey, M., E. D´ avila, T. Kuchler, and J. Stroebel (2019). House price beliefs and mortgage
  leverage choice. The Review of Economic Studies (forthcoming) .
Baker, S. R., N. Bloom, and S. J. Davis (2016). Measuring economic policy uncertainty.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics (forthcoming) .
Barsky, R. B., C. Boehm, C. L. House, and M. S. Kimball (2016). Monetary policy and durable
  goods. Unpublished Manuscript, University of Michigan 97 (3), 984­998.
Barsky, R. B., C. L. House, and M. S. Kimball (2007). Sticky-price models and durable goods.
  The American economic review 97 (3), 984­998.


                                              28
Beraja, M., A. Fuster, E. Hurst, and J. Vavra (2019). Regional heterogeneity and the refinancing
  channel of monetary policy. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 134 (1), 109­183.
Bernanke, B. S. (2007). Inflation expectations and inflation forecasting. Speech 306, Board of
  Governors of the Federal Reserve System (U.S.).
Besley, T. J. and H. S. Rosen (1999). Sales taxes and prices: an empirical analysis. National
  Tax Journal 52 (2), 157­178.
Bundesbank, D. (2019). Household wealth and finances in germany: Results of the 2017 survey.
  Deutsche Bundesbank Monthly Report (April 2019) .
Burke, M. A. and A. Ozdagli (2014). Household inflation expectations and consumer spending:
  evidence from panel data. Unpublished Manuscript, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston 13 (25),
  1­43.
Campbell, J. R., C. L. Evans, J. D. Fisher, and A. Justiniano (2012). Macroeconomic effects of
  federal reserve forward guidance. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity , 1­80.
Cashin, D. (2016). The household expenditure response to a consumption tax rate increase.
  Unpublished Manuscript, Federal Reserve Board .
Cavallo, A., G. Cruces, and R. Perez-Truglia (2017). Inflation expectations, learning, and
  supermarket prices: Evidence from survey experiments. American Economic Journal:
  Macroeconomics 9 (3), 1­35.
CDU (2005). Deutschlands Chancen nutzen. Wachstum. Arbeit. Sicherheit. Electoral Manifest .
Christelis, D., D. Georgarakos, T. Jappelli, and M. van Rooij (2016). Trust in the central bank
  and inflation expectations. Unpublished manuscript, ECB .
Coibion, O., D. Georgarakos, Y. Gorodnichenko, and M. Weber (2020). Forward guidance and
  household expectations. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Coibion, O., Y. Gorodnichenko, and M. Weber (2019). Monetary policy communications
  and their effects on household inflation expectations. Technical report, National Bureau of
  Economic Research.
Coibion, O., Y. Gorodnichenko, and M. Weber (2020a). The cost of the covid-19 crisis:
  Lockdowns, macroeconomic expectations, and consumer spending. Technical report, National
  Bureau of Economic Research.
Coibion, O., Y. Gorodnichenko, and M. Weber (2020b). Labor markets during the covid-19
  crisis: A preliminary view. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Correia, I., E. Farhi, J. P. Nicolini, and P. Teles (2013). Unconventional fiscal policy at the zero
  bound. American Economic Review 103 (4), 1172­1211.
Crossley, T., H. Low, and C. Sleeman (2014). Using a temporary indirect tax cut as a fiscal
  stimulus: evidence from the UK. Unpublished Manuscript, University of Essex .
Crump, R. K., S. Eusepi, A. Tambalotti, and G. Topa (2015). Subjective intertemporal
  substitution. FRB of New York Staff Report (734).
D'Acunto, F. (2014). Basic education in the long run: Innovation, investments. Technical report,
  and finance. Working Paper.
D'Acunto, F. (2018). Tear down this wall street: Anti-market rhetoric, motivated beliefs, and
  investment. Working Paper .
D'Acunto, F., D. Hoang, M. Paloviita, and M. Weber (2019a). Cognitive abilities and inflation
  expectations. AEA Papers & Proceedings (forthcoming) .
D'Acunto, F., D. Hoang, M. Paloviita, and M. Weber (2019b). Human frictions in the
  transmission of economic policies. Working Paper .
D'Acunto, F., D. Hoang, M. Paloviita, and M. Weber (2020). Iq, expectations, and choice.
  Working Paper .
D'Acunto, F., D. Hoang, and M. Weber (2018). Unconventional fiscal policy. AEA Papers and
  Proceedings 108.
D'Acunto, F., U. Malmendier, J. Ospina, and M. Weber (2019). Perceived inflation, frequent
  price changes, and inflation expectations. Working Paper .
D'Acunto, F., U. Malmendier, and M. Weber (2018). Gender roles distort women's economic
  expectations. Working Paper .
D'Acunto, F., M. Prokopczuk, and M. Weber (2018). Historical antisemitism, ethnic

                                                29
   specialization, and financial development. The Review of Economic Studies 86 (3), 1170­1206.
Del Negro, M., M. P. Giannoni, and C. Patterson (2015). The forward guidance puzzle. FRB
   of New York Staff Report (574).
Di Maggio, M. and A. Kermani (2019). Unemployment insurance as an automatic stabilizer:
   The financial channel. Working Paper .
Di Maggio, M., A. Kermani, and C. J. Palmer (2020). How quantitative easing works: Evidence
   on the refinancing channel. The Review of Economic Studies 87 (3), 1498­1528.
Doepke, M. and M. Schneider (2006). Inflation and the redistribution of nominal wealth. Journal
   of Political Economy 114 (6), 1069­1097.
Eggertsson, G. B. (2008). Great expectations and the end of the depression. The American
   Economic Review 98 (4), 1476­1516.
Eggertsson, G. B. and M. Woodford (2003). The zero bound on interest rates and optimal
   monetary policy. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2003 (1), 139­211.
Farhi, E., G. Gopinath, and O. Itskhoki (2014). Fiscal devaluations. The Review of Economic
   Studies 81 (2), 725­760.
Farhi, E. and I. Werning (2018). Monetary policy, bounded rationality, and incomplete markets.
   Working Paper .
Feldstein, M. (2002). The role for discretionary fiscal policy in a low interest rate environment.
   Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Fuchs-Schuendeln, N. and T. A. Hassan (2016). Natural experiments in macroeconomics. In
   Handbook of macroeconomics, Volume 2, pp. 923­1012. Elsevier.
Gabaix, X. (2016). A behavioral new keynesian model. Technical report, National Bureau of
   Economic Research.
Gorodnichenko, Y. and M. Weber (2016). Are sticky prices costly? evidence from the stock
   market. American Economic Review 106 (1), 165­99.
Hall, R. E. (2011). The long slump. American Economic Review 101 (2), 431­469.
Hurd, M. D. and S. Rohwedder (2012). Measuring total household spending in a monthly
   internet survey: Evidence from the American Life Panel. Technical report, National Bureau
   of Economic Research.
Ichiue, H. and S. Nishiguchi (2015). Inflation expectations and consumer spending at the zero
   bound: Micro evidence. Economic Inquiry 53 (2), 1086­1107.
Ilut, C. and R. Valchev (2017). Economic agents as imperfect problem solvers. Unpublished
   Manuscript, Boston College .
Jalil, A. and G. Rua (2016). Inflation expectations and recovery from the depression in 1933:
   Evidence from the narrative record. Explorations in Economic History, forthcoming .
Jappelli, T. and L. Pistaferri (2014). Fiscal policy and MPC heterogeneity. American Economic
   Journal: Macroeconomics 6 (4), 107­136.
Jonung, L. (1981). Perceived and expected rates of inflation in Sweden. The American Economic
   Review 71 (5), 961­968.
Kaplan, G., B. Moll, and G. L. Violante (2018). Monetary policy according to hank. American
   Economic Review 108 (3), 697­743.
Kreiner, C. T., D. D. Lassen, and S. Leth-Petersen (2013). Measuring the accuracy of survey
   responses using administrative register data: Evidence from denmark. Technical report,
   National Bureau of Economic Research.
Kuchler, T. and B. Zafar (2018). Personal experiences and expectations about aggregate
   outcomes. Journal of Finance (forthcoming) .
Kuhnen, C. M. and A. C. Miu (2017). Socioeconomic status and learning from financial
   information. Journal of Financial Economics 124 (2), 349­372.
Leth-Petersen, S. (2010). Intertemporal consumption and credit constraints: Does total
   expenditure respond to an exogenous shock to credit? American Economic Review 100 (3),
   1080­1103.
Malmendier, U. and S. Nagel (2009). Learning from inflation experiences. Unpublished
   manuscript, UC Berkeley .


                                               30
Menz, J.-O. and P. Poppitz (2013). Household disagreement on inflation expectations and
  socioeconomic media exposure in Germany. Unpublished Manuscript, Deutsche Bundesbank .
Nakamura, E., J. Steinsson, P. Sun, and D. Villar (2016). The elusive costs of inflation: Price
  dispersion during the US great inflation. Unpublished Manuscript, Columbia University .
Poterba, J. M. (1996). Retail price reactions to changes in state and local sales taxes. National
  Tax Journal 49 (2), 165­176.
Romer, C. D. and D. H. Romer (2010). The macroeconomic effects of tax changes: Estimates
  based on a new measure of fiscal shocks. The American Economic Review 100 (3), 763­801.
Romer, C. D. and D. H. Romer (2013). The missing transmission mechanism in the monetary
  explanation of the Great Depression. The American Economic Review 103 (3), 66­72.
Roth, C. and J. Wohlfart (2019). How do expectations about the macroeconomy affect personal
  expectations and behavior? Review of Economics and Statistics (forthcoming) .
Shapiro, M. D. (1991). Economic stimulant. Technical report, New York Times.
Slacalek, J., O. Tristani, and G. L. Violante (2020). Household balance sheet channels of
  monetary policy: A back of the envelope calculation for the euro area. Technical report,
  National Bureau of Economic Research.
SPD (2005). Vertrauen in Deutschland. Das Wahlmanifest der SPD. Electoral Manifest .
Stehle, R. M. (2006, June 23, 2006). Geplante Mehrwertsteuer-Anhebung treibt Inflation.
  Berliner Zeitung .
Vellekoop, N. and M. Wiederholt (2017). Inflation expectations and choices of households:
  Evidence from matched survey and administrative data. Unpublished Manuscript, University
  of Frankfurt .
Weber, A. (2006, June 23, 2006). Weber haelt Zinserhoehung der EZB fuer notwendig.
  Handelsblatt .
Woodford, M. (2018). Monetary policy analysis when planning horizons are finite. NBER Macro
  Annual (forthcoming) .




                                               31
     Figure 2: Expected Increase in Inflation: Germany and European Countries



                      Germany                                                    Germany
                      European Countries                                         European Countries
         0.4                                                0.4




         0.2                                                0.2
               06 4
               09 4
               12 4
               03 4
               06 5
               09 5
               12 5
               03 5
               06 6
               09 6
                    6




                                                                       3

                                                                                3

                                                                                         3

                                                                                                  3

                                                                                                           4

                                                                                                                    4

                                                                                                                             4

                                                                                                                                      4
                 /0
                 /0
                 /0
                 /0
                 /0
                 /0
                 /0
                 /0
                 /0
                 /0
                 /0




                                                                   /1

                                                                            /1

                                                                                     /1

                                                                                              /1

                                                                                                       /1

                                                                                                                /1

                                                                                                                         /1

                                                                                                                                  /1
           03




                                                                  03

                                                                           06

                                                                                    09

                                                                                             12

                                                                                                      03

                                                                                                               06

                                                                                                                        09

                                                                                                                                 12
                      Germany                                                    Germany
                      France                                                     UK and Sweden
         0.4                                                0.4




         0.2                                                0.2
               06 4
               09 4
               12 4
               03 4
               06 5
               09 5
               12 5
               03 5
               06 6
               09 6
                    6




                                                                       3

                                                                                3

                                                                                         3

                                                                                                  3

                                                                                                           4

                                                                                                                    4

                                                                                                                             4

                                                                                                                                      4
                 /0
                 /0
                 /0
                 /0
                 /0
                 /0
                 /0
                 /0
                 /0
                 /0
                 /0




                                                                   /1

                                                                            /1

                                                                                     /1

                                                                                              /1

                                                                                                       /1

                                                                                                                /1

                                                                                                                         /1

                                                                                                                                  /1
           03




                                                                  03

                                                                           06

                                                                                    09

                                                                                             12

                                                                                                      03

                                                                                                               06

                                                                                                                        09

                                                                                                                                 12




This figure plots average monthly inflation expectations over time. We use the confidential micro data underlying
the GfK Consumer Climate MAXX survey to construct the variables for Germany and similar data from national
statistical agencies and GfK subsidiaries for the United Kingdom, Sweden, and France. GfK asks a representative
sample of 2,000 households how consumer prices will evolve in the next 12 months compared to the previous 12 months.
We create a dummy variable which equals 1 when a household expects inflation to increase. The sample periods are
January 2004--December 2006 and January 2013--December 2014.




                                                      32
   Figure 3: Readiness to Spend on Durables: Germany and European Countries


               3                                              3
                       Germany                                                    Germany
                       European Countries                                         European Countries

           2.5                                               2.5



               2                                              2



           1.5                                               1.5



               1                                              1
                   06 4
                   09 4
                   12 4
                   03 4
                   06 5
                   09 5
                   12 5
                   03 5
                   06 6
                   09 6
                        6




                                                                        3

                                                                                 3

                                                                                          3

                                                                                                   3

                                                                                                            4

                                                                                                                      4

                                                                                                                               4

                                                                                                                                        4
                     /0
                     /0
                     /0
                     /0
                     /0
                     /0
                     /0
                     /0
                     /0
                     /0
                     /0




                                                                    /1

                                                                             /1

                                                                                      /1

                                                                                               /1

                                                                                                        /1

                                                                                                                  /1

                                                                                                                           /1

                                                                                                                                    /1
               03




                                                                   03

                                                                            06

                                                                                     09

                                                                                              12

                                                                                                       03

                                                                                                                 06

                                                                                                                          09

                                                                                                                                   12
           3                                                   3
                      Germany                                                        Germany
                      France                                                         UK and Sweden

         2.5                                                 2.5



           2                                                   2



         1.5                                                 1.5



           1                                                   1
               06 4
               09 4
               12 4
               03 4
               06 5
               09 5
               12 5
               03 5
               06 6
               09 6
                    6




                                                                        3

                                                                                 3

                                                                                          3

                                                                                                   3

                                                                                                             4

                                                                                                                       4

                                                                                                                                4

                                                                                                                                         4
                 /0
                 /0
                 /0
                 /0
                 /0
                 /0
                 /0
                 /0
                 /0
                 /0
                 /0




                                                                    /1

                                                                             /1

                                                                                       /1

                                                                                               /1

                                                                                                            /1

                                                                                                                      /1

                                                                                                                               /1

                                                                                                                                        /1
           03




                                                                   03

                                                                            06

                                                                                     09

                                                                                              12

                                                                                                       03

                                                                                                                 06

                                                                                                                           09

                                                                                                                                    12




This figure plots the average monthly readiness to purchase durables over time. We use the confidential micro data
underlying the GfK Consumer Climate MAXX survey to construct these variables for Germany and similar data
from national statistical agencies and GfK subsidiaries for the United Kingdom, Sweden, and France. GfK asks a
representative sample of 2,000 households whether it is a good time to purchase durables given the current economic
conditions. Higher values correspond to better times to purchase durables. The sample periods are January 2004--
December 2006 and January 2013--December 2014.




                                                      33
             Figure 4: Common Support of Treated and Matched Households

                               Panel A. Unconventional Fiscal Policy




                        0              .2              .4              .6            .8
                                                   Propensity Score

                                                 Untreated            Treated




                                      Panel B. Forward Guidance




                        0                .2              .4                 .6            .8
                                                   Propensity Score

                                                 Untreated            Treated



This figure plots the number of households in the untreated (blue) and treated (red) groups across forty equal-length
partitions of the distribution of the propensity score in the baseline months (June 2005 and March 2013) for the
difference-in-differences analyses. We estimate the propensity score with a logit specification whose outcome variable
is the indicator for whether a household is in the treated or control group. The controls are the observables we use for
the matching of households: age group, gender, education group, income group, and social status group. The treated
group includes German households, whereas the control group includes households from the UK, France, and Sweden
in Panel A and from the UK and Sweden in Panel B.




                                                         34
                         Figure 5: Change in the Readiness to Spend on Durables for German vs. Foreign Households


                                   Unconventional Fiscal Policy                                                                Forward Guidance
                                                                                                       0.4
                  0.4
                                                                                                                     Average Treatment Effect Over Time
                                  Average Treatment Effect Over Time                                  0.35
                 0.35                                                                                                Two-Standard Error Bounds
                                  Two-Standard Error Bounds
                                                                                                       0.3
                  0.3

                 0.25                                                                                 0.25


                  0.2                                                                                  0.2

                 0.15                                                                                 0.15

                  0.1                                                                                  0.1




35
                 0.05                                                                                 0.05

                    0                                                                                    0

                 -0.05                                                                                -0.05

                  -0.1                                                                                 -0.1
                                                                                                                3
                                                                                                                         3
                                                                                                                                    3
                                                                                                                                               3
                                                                                                                                                            4
                                                                                                                                                                   4
                                                                                                                                                                          4




                              5
                                         5
                                                  6
                                                            6
                                                                       6
                                                                                6
                                                                                         7
                                                                                                  7
                                                                                                                /1
                                                                                                                        /1
                                                                                                                                   /1
                                                                                                                                              /1
                                                                                                                                                            /1
                                                                                                                                                                   /1
                                                                                                                                                                          /1




                          /0
                                     /0
                                               /0
                                                         /0
                                                                   /0
                                                                            /0
                                                                                     /0
                                                                                              /0
                                                                                                              05
                                                                                                                      07
                                                                                                                                 09
                                                                                                                                            11
                                                                                                                                                          01
                                                                                                                                                                 03
                                                                                                                                                                        05




                         09
                                    12
                                             03
                                                       06
                                                                 09
                                                                           12
                                                                                    03
                                                                                             06
     This figure plots the m coefficient (solid line) estimated from the following specification: Duri,basem = +m ×Shocki +Xi,basem × + i .
     Dashed lines are two standard deviation error bands. Shock is an indicator that equals 1 if the household was exposed to the VAT shock in
     the left panel or to the Forward Guidance announcements in the right panel. For the VAT shock, the base month m is June 2005. For the
     Forward Guidance announcement, the base month m is March 2013. Duri,basem is the difference in the willingness to spend on durable
     goods between month m and the base month. m captures the effect of each shock on the willingness to buy durables for household i in month
     m. We use the micro data underlying the Directorate-General for Economic and Financial Affairs of the European Commission harmonized
     consumer surveys to construct these variables.
Figure 6: Effect of Unconventional Fiscal Policy by Sophistication and Demographics


           0.4                                                                                0.4
                                Low                                                                                 Women
           0.3                  High                                                          0.3                   Men


           0.2                                                                                0.2


           0.1                                                                                0.1


            0                                                                                   0


          -0.1                                                                                -0.1
                      5

                               5

                                        6

                                                 6

                                                          6

                                                                   6

                                                                            7

                                                                                     7




                                                                                                          5

                                                                                                                   5

                                                                                                                            6

                                                                                                                                     6

                                                                                                                                              6

                                                                                                                                                       6

                                                                                                                                                                7

                                                                                                                                                                         7
                  /0

                           /0

                                    /0

                                             /0

                                                      /0

                                                               /0

                                                                        /0

                                                                                 /0




                                                                                                      /0

                                                                                                               /0

                                                                                                                        /0

                                                                                                                                 /0

                                                                                                                                          /0

                                                                                                                                                   /0

                                                                                                                                                            /0

                                                                                                                                                                     /0
                 09

                          12

                                   03

                                            06

                                                     09

                                                              12

                                                                       03

                                                                                06




                                                                                                     09

                                                                                                              12

                                                                                                                       03

                                                                                                                                06

                                                                                                                                         09

                                                                                                                                                  12

                                                                                                                                                           03

                                                                                                                                                                    06
           0.4                                                                                0.4
                                Low                                                                                 Young
           0.3                  High                                                          0.3                   Old


           0.2                                                                                0.2


           0.1                                                                                0.1


            0                                                                                   0


          -0.1                                                                                -0.1
                      5

                               5

                                        6

                                                 6

                                                          6

                                                                   6

                                                                            7

                                                                                     7




                                                                                                          5

                                                                                                                   5

                                                                                                                            6

                                                                                                                                     6

                                                                                                                                              6

                                                                                                                                                       6

                                                                                                                                                                7

                                                                                                                                                                         7
                  /0

                           /0

                                    /0

                                             /0

                                                      /0

                                                               /0

                                                                        /0

                                                                                 /0




                                                                                                      /0

                                                                                                               /0

                                                                                                                        /0

                                                                                                                                 /0

                                                                                                                                          /0

                                                                                                                                                   /0

                                                                                                                                                            /0

                                                                                                                                                                     /0
                 09

                          12

                                   03

                                            06

                                                     09

                                                              12

                                                                       03

                                                                                06




                                                                                                     09

                                                                                                              12

                                                                                                                       03

                                                                                                                                06

                                                                                                                                         09

                                                                                                                                                  12

                                                                                                                                                           03

                                                                                                                                                                    06



           0.4
                                Low
           0.3                  High

           0.2

           0.1

            0

          -0.1

          -0.2
                     5

                     5

                     6

                     6

                     6

                     6

                     7

                     7
                   /0

                   /0

                   /0

                   /0

                   /0

                   /0

                   /0

                   /0
                 09

                 12

                 03

                 06

                 09

                 12

                 03

                 06




This figure plots the m coefficient (solid line) estimated from the following specification: Duri,06/2005m =  + m ×
V AT shocki + Xi,06/2005m ×  + i , for different sample splits by demographic characteristics. Duri,06/2005m
is the difference in the willingness to spend on durable goods between month m and June 2005, V AT shocki is an
indicator which equals 1 if the household was exposed to the VAT shock, m captures the effect of the VAT shock on
the willingness to buy durables for household i in month m, and Xi,06/2005m is the difference in a set of observables
between month m and the baseline month. We use the micro data underlying the Directorate-General for Economic
and Financial Affairs of the European Commission harmonized consumer surveys to construct these variables.

                                                                                         36
Figure 7: Effect of Unconventional Fiscal Policy by Proxies of Financial Constraints



           0.4                                                                 0.4
                                High                                                                 Low
                                Low                                                                  High
           0.3                                                                 0.3


           0.2                                                                 0.2


           0.1                                                                 0.1


            0                                                                    0


          -0.1                                                                 -0.1
                     5

                            5

                                   6

                                          6

                                                 6

                                                        6

                                                               7

                                                                      7




                                                                                          5

                                                                                                 5

                                                                                                        6

                                                                                                               6

                                                                                                                      6

                                                                                                                             6

                                                                                                                                    7

                                                                                                                                           7
                  /0

                         /0

                                /0

                                       /0

                                              /0

                                                     /0

                                                            /0

                                                                   /0




                                                                                       /0

                                                                                              /0

                                                                                                     /0

                                                                                                            /0

                                                                                                                   /0

                                                                                                                          /0

                                                                                                                                 /0

                                                                                                                                        /0
                 09

                      12

                            03

                                   06

                                          09

                                                 12

                                                        03

                                                               06




                                                                                      09

                                                                                           12

                                                                                                 03

                                                                                                        06

                                                                                                               09

                                                                                                                      12

                                                                                                                             03

                                                                                                                                    06
           0.4                  Renter
                                Owner
           0.3

           0.2

           0.1

            0

          -0.1
                     5

                     5

                     6

                     6

                     6

                     6

                     7

                     7
                   /0

                   /0

                   /0

                   /0

                   /0

                   /0

                   /0

                   /0
                 09

                 12

                 03

                 06

                 09

                 12

                 03

                 06




This figure plots the m coefficient (solid line) estimated from the following specification: Duri,06/2005m =  +
m × V AT shocki + Xi,06/2005m ×  + i , for different sample splits by financial constraints. Duri,06/2005m
is the difference in the willingness to spend on durable goods between month m and June 2005, V AT shocki is an
indicator which equals 1 if the household was exposed to the VAT shock, m captures the effect of the VAT shock on
the willingness to buy durables for household i in month m, and Xi,06/2005m is the difference in a set of observables
between month m and the baseline month. We use the micro data underlying the Directorate-General for Economic
and Financial Affairs of the European Commission harmonized consumer surveys to construct these variables.




                                                                          37
      Figure 8: Effect of Forward Guidance by Sophistication and Demographics


           0.4                                                                       0.4
                                Low                                                                        Women
           0.3                  High                                                 0.3                   Men


           0.2                                                                       0.2


           0.1                                                                       0.1


            0                                                                          0


          -0.1                                                                       -0.1
                      3

                               3

                                        3

                                                 3

                                                          4

                                                                   4

                                                                            4




                                                                                                 3

                                                                                                          3

                                                                                                                   3

                                                                                                                            3

                                                                                                                                     4

                                                                                                                                              4

                                                                                                                                                       4
                  /1

                           /1

                                    /1

                                             /1

                                                      /1

                                                               /1

                                                                        /1




                                                                                             /1

                                                                                                      /1

                                                                                                               /1

                                                                                                                        /1

                                                                                                                                 /1

                                                                                                                                          /1

                                                                                                                                                   /1
                 05

                          07

                                   09

                                            11

                                                     01

                                                              03

                                                                       05




                                                                                            05

                                                                                                     07

                                                                                                              09

                                                                                                                       11

                                                                                                                                01

                                                                                                                                         03

                                                                                                                                                  05
           0.4                                                                       0.4
                                Low                                                                        Young
           0.3                  High                                                 0.3                   Old


           0.2                                                                       0.2


           0.1                                                                       0.1


            0                                                                          0


          -0.1                                                                       -0.1
                      3

                               3

                                        3

                                                 3

                                                          4

                                                                   4

                                                                            4




                                                                                                 3

                                                                                                          3

                                                                                                                   3

                                                                                                                            3

                                                                                                                                     4

                                                                                                                                              4

                                                                                                                                                       4
                  /1

                           /1

                                    /1

                                             /1

                                                      /1

                                                               /1

                                                                        /1




                                                                                             /1

                                                                                                      /1

                                                                                                               /1

                                                                                                                        /1

                                                                                                                                 /1

                                                                                                                                          /1

                                                                                                                                                   /1
                 05

                          07

                                   09

                                            11

                                                     01

                                                              03

                                                                       05




                                                                                            05

                                                                                                     07

                                                                                                              09

                                                                                                                       11

                                                                                                                                01

                                                                                                                                         03

                                                                                                                                                  05




           0.4
                                Low
           0.3                  High

           0.2

           0.1

            0

          -0.1

          -0.2
                     3

                     3

                     3

                     3

                     4

                     4

                     4
                   /1

                   /1

                   /1

                   /1

                   /1

                   /1

                   /1
                 05

                 07

                 09

                 11

                 01

                 03

                 05




This figure plots m coefficient (solid line) of Duri,03/2013m =  + m × V AT shocki + Xi,03/2013m ×  + i ,
for different sample splits by demographics. Duri,03/2013m is the difference in the willingness to spend on durable
goods between month m and March 2013, V AT shocki is an indicator which equals 1 if the household was exposed to
the VAT shock, m captures the effect of the VAT shock on the willingness to buy durables for household i in month
m, and Xi,03/2013m is the difference in a set of observables between month m and the baseline month. We use
the micro data underlying the Directorate-General for Economic and Financial Affairs of the European Commission
harmonized consumer surveys to construct these variables.

                                                                                38
      Figure 9: Effect of Forward Guidance by Proxies of Financial Constraints



          0.4                                                               0.4
                                High                                                              Low
                                Low                                                               High
          0.3                                                               0.3


          0.2                                                               0.2


          0.1                                                               0.1


            0                                                                 0


          -0.1                                                              -0.1
                    3

                            3

                                    3

                                            3

                                                    4

                                                           4

                                                                   4




                                                                                      3

                                                                                              3

                                                                                                      3

                                                                                                              3

                                                                                                                      4

                                                                                                                             4

                                                                                                                                     4
                 /1

                         /1

                                 /1

                                         /1

                                                 /1

                                                        /1

                                                                /1




                                                                                   /1

                                                                                           /1

                                                                                                   /1

                                                                                                           /1

                                                                                                                   /1

                                                                                                                          /1

                                                                                                                                  /1
             05

                        07

                                09

                                        11

                                                01

                                                     03

                                                               05




                                                                               05

                                                                                          07

                                                                                                  09

                                                                                                          11

                                                                                                                  01

                                                                                                                       03

                                                                                                                                 05
          0.4
                                Renter
                                Owner
          0.3


          0.2


          0.1


            0


          -0.1
                 3

                 3

                 3

                 3

                 4

                 4

                 4
               /1

               /1

               /1

               /1

               /1

               /1

               /1
             05

             07

             09

             11

             01

             03

             05




This figure plots m coefficient (solid line) of Duri,03/2013m =  + m × V AT shocki + Xi,03/2013m ×  + i ,
for different sample splits by financial constraints. Duri,03/2013m is the difference in the willingness to spend on
durable goods between month m and March 2013, V AT shocki is an indicator which equals 1 if the household was
exposed to the VAT shock, m captures the effect of the VAT shock on the willingness to buy durables for household i
in month m, and Xi,03/2013m is the difference in a set of observables between month m and the baseline month.
We use the micro data underlying the Directorate-General for Economic and Financial Affairs of the European
Commission harmonized consumer surveys to construct these variables.




                                                                       39
                                               Figure 10: Coefficient of Variation in Inflation Expectations


                                Unconventional Fiscal Policy                                                            Forward Guidance
                  0.35
                                                                                               0.35
                                                                Coefficient of Variation
                                                                                                                                                   Coefficient of Variation




                   0.3                                                                          0.3




40
                  0.25                                                                         0.25




                   0.2                                                                          0.2




                           5
                                   5
                                           6
                                                   6
                                                          6
                                                                    6
                                                                               7
                                                                                           7
                                                                                                           3
                                                                                                                    3
                                                                                                                             3
                                                                                                                                      3
                                                                                                                                               4
                                                                                                                                                            4
                                                                                                                                                                        4




                           /0
                                  /0
                                          /0
                                                  /0
                                                          /0
                                                                  /0
                                                                             /0
                                                                                        /0
                                                                                                       /1
                                                                                                                /1
                                                                                                                         /1
                                                                                                                                  /1
                                                                                                                                           /1
                                                                                                                                                         /1
                                                                                                                                                                     /1




                         09
                                12
                                        03
                                                06
                                                        09
                                                                12
                                                                           03
                                                                                      06
                                                                                                      05
                                                                                                               07
                                                                                                                        09
                                                                                                                                 11
                                                                                                                                          01
                                                                                                                                                       03
                                                                                                                                                                   05




     This figure plots the coefficient of variation of monthly inflation expectation over time. We use the confidential micro data underlying the GfK
     Consumer Climate MAXX survey to construct those variables. GfK asks a representative sample of 2,000 households how consumer prices
     will evolve in the next 12 months compared to the previous 12 months, how the financial situation of the household evolved during the past 12
     months, and how the financial situation of the household will evolve during the next 12 months. We create a dummy variable that equals 1 if
     a household expects inflation to increase, perceives an improved financial situation, and expects an improved financial situation. The sample
     period is September 2005 to June 2007 for a total of 3 years.
                               Figure 11: Channels of Unconventional Fiscal Policy: Income Effect?

                               0.6
                                              Inflation Expectations
      Household Expectations




                               0.5            Income Perception
                                              Income Expectations
                               0.4

                               0.3

                               0.2

                               0.1

                                0
                                          4


                                                   4


                                                            4


                                                                        4


                                                                                  5


                                                                                           5


                                                                                                       5


                                                                                                                5


                                                                                                                         6


                                                                                                                                  6


                                                                                                                                           6
                                      /0


                                                  /0


                                                         /0


                                                                    /0


                                                                              /0


                                                                                       /0


                                                                                                    /0


                                                                                                            /0


                                                                                                                     /0


                                                                                                                                 /0


                                                                                                                                       /0
                                     03


                                              06


                                                       09


                                                                   12


                                                                             03


                                                                                      06


                                                                                                  09


                                                                                                           12


                                                                                                                    03


                                                                                                                             06


                                                                                                                                      09
This figure plots average monthly inflation expectation, perception of past income, and expectation of future income
over time. We use the confidential micro data underlying the GfK Consumer Climate MAXX survey to construct
those variables. GfK asks a representative sample of 2,000 households how consumer prices will evolve in the next
12 months compared to the previous 12 months, how the financial situation of the household evolved during the past
12 months, and how the financial situation of the household will evolve during the next 12 months. We create a
dummy variable that equals 1 if a household expects inflation to increase, perceives an improved financial situation,
and expects an improved financial situation. The sample period is January 2004 to December 2006 for a total of 3
years.




                                          Figure 12: Channels of Forward Guidance: Income Effect?


                                 0.6
                                                       Inflation Expectations
                                                       Income Perception
                                 0.4
                                                       Income Expectations


                                 0.2


                                     0
                                              13



                                                              13



                                                                              13



                                                                                               13



                                                                                                             14



                                                                                                                             14



                                                                                                                                           14
                                              /



                                                           /



                                                                               /



                                                                                              /



                                                                                                              /



                                                                                                                             /



                                                                                                                                         /
                                           05



                                                        07



                                                                            09



                                                                                           11



                                                                                                           01



                                                                                                                          03



                                                                                                                                      05




This figure plots average monthly inflation expectation, perception of past income, and expectation of future income
over time. We use the confidential micro data underlying the GfK Consumer Climate MAXX survey to construct
those variables. GfK asks a representative sample of 2,000 households how consumer prices will evolve in the next
12 months compared to the previous 12 months, how the financial situation of the household evolved during the past
12 months, and how the financial situation of the household will evolve during the next 12 months. We create a
dummy variable that equals 1 if a household expects inflation to increase, perceives an improved financial situation,
and expects an improved financial situation. The sample period is April 2013 to June 2014.




                                                                                       41
                                       Table 1: Descriptive Statistics

This table reports descriptive statistics for households' inflation expectations and readiness to purchase durables in Panel A;
household demographics in Panel B; and household expectations and perceptions in Panel C. We use the confidential micro
data underlying the GfK Consumer Climate survey to measure these variables. GfK asks a representative sample of 2,000
households questions about general economic expectations, income expectations, and willingness to buy in order to create an
aggregate measure labeled "consumer climate." For Panel A, GfK asks whether it is a good time to purchase durables given
the current economic conditions. GfK also asks how consumer prices will evolve in the next 12 months compared to the
previous 12 months. Inflation increase is a dummy variable that equals 1 if a household replies that inflation will increase.
GfK also asks how consumer prices evolved in the previous 12 months. See the online appendix for data sources and detailed
survey questions. The sample period is January 2000 to February 2016.


                                                           Nobs     Mean      Std        Min        p25        p50        p75    Max
Panel A: Inflation expectations and readiness to spend
Readiness to buy durables     Good time                  377,064   21.85%
                              Neither                              56.43%
                              Bad time                             21.72%
Inflation increase                                       408,776   13.17%    0.34   0           0          0         0           1
Inflation perception       increased substantially       400,169   25.79%
                           increased somewhat                      29.39%
                           increased slightly                      28.67%
                           remained the same                       14.82%
                           decreased                                1.33%
Panel B: Household demographics
Sex                           Male                       408,776   45.99%
                              Female                               54.01%
Age                                                      408,776   46.56    17.57   14         33         46         60         99
Education                     Hauptschule                402,624   41.99%
                              Realschule                           39.30%
                              Gymnasium                            10.48%
                              Universitaet                          8.23%
Household members                                        408,776    2.47     2.47   1           2          2         3           5
City                          City<9,999                 408,776   28.05%
                              9,999<=City<49,999                   34.46%
                              50,000<=City<199,999                 15.56%
                              199,999<=City                        21.94%
Kids at home                  yes                        408,776   26.11%
                              no                                   73.89%
Number of kids                                           363,476    0.45     0.80   0           0          0         1           4
Net income (inc)             inc< 1,000                  312,224   42.40%
(EUR per month)              1,000<=inc<1,500                      28.52%
                             1,500<=inc<2,500                      21.73%
                             2,500<=inc                             7.36%
Panel C: Household expectations and perceptions
Past Financial situation    Improved substantially       404,494    1.53%
                            Improved somewhat                      12.29%
                            Identical                              62.32%
                            Worsened somewhat                      19.46%
                            Worsened substantially                  4.39%
Financial outlook           Improves substantially       392,898    1.17%
                            Improves somewhat                      11.43%
                            Identical                              73.83%
                            Worsens somewhat                       11.67%
                            Worsens substantially                   1.91%
Current financial situation Save a lot                   398,014    4.35%
                            Save little                            41.06%
                            Don't save                             40.49%
                            Dissave                                11.96%
                            Take on debt                            2.14%
Expected unemployment rate Increases substantially       408,776   13.08%
                            Increases somewhat                     31.75%
                            Identical                              36.71%
                            Decreases somewhat                     17.35%
                            Decreases a lot                         1.10%


                                                           42
         Table 2: Balancing of Variables - German and Foreign Households

This table describes the balancing of the observables we use to match treated and control households during
the unconventional fiscal policy period (11/2005­12/2006) in Panel A and during the forward guidance period
in Panel B (03/2013­06/2014) for the difference-in-differences analysis. For each variable, columns (1) and
(4) report the mean within the pool of treated German households in the raw and matched samples. Columns
(2) and (5) report the mean within the pool of control households (UK, France, and Sweden) in the raw and
matched samples. Columns (3) and (6) report the results for a two-sided t-test whose null hypothesis is that
the means across groups are equal.

                                        Unmatched Sample                         Matched Sample
                                    Mean       Mean                         Mean       Mean
                                   Treated    Control       t-stats        Treated    Control       t-stats
 Variable                            (1)        (2)             (3)          (4)        (5)             (6)


                                             Panel A: Unconventional Fiscal Policy Period
 Age (four groups)                   2.38       2.49         -15.32          2.38       2.38          0.00
 Male                                0.46       0.44           5.61          0.46       0.46         -0.01
 Education (three groups)            1.77       2.32        -109.47          1.77       1.77          0.00
 Income (four quartiles)             2.36       2.77         -41.53          2.36       2.36          0.01
 Social Status (three groups)        2.65       1.93         107.50          2.65       2.65          0.00
 Nobs in common support                                                     28,642     95,890

                                                  Panel B: Forward Guidance Period
 Age (four groups)                   2.57       2.46          13.48          2.57       2.57          0.00
 Male                                0.46       0.49          -7.96          0.46       0.46          0.00
 Education (three groups)            1.85       2.43        -105.57          1.85       1.85          0.00
 Income (four quartiles)             2.59       3.39         -53.60          2.59       2.59          0.00
 Social Status (three groups)        2.65       2.41          30.89          2.65       2.65          0.00
 Nobs in common support                                                     24,321     49,535




                                                       43
                                                 Table 3: Inflation Expectations and Readiness to Spend

     This table reports the average marginal effects of a multinomial logit regression. Households' readiness to purchase durables is the dependent variable. Inflation
     expectation is a dummy variable that equals 1 if a household expects inflation to increase. We also control for household demographics and household expectations
     where indicated. Demographics include: gender, age, age squared, education level, household size, rural or urban residence, socio-economic status group, number of
     children, rental or owned housing, employment status, income level group. Expectations include: income expectations and perceptions, expected financial situation,
     expected GDP growth, expected unemployment rate, saving expectations and perceptions, inflation perceptions. We use the confidential micro data underlying the
     GfK Consumer Climate MAXX survey to construct these variables and similar data from national institutes for the European households. GfK asks a representative
     sample of 2,000 households on a monthly basis whether it is a good time to purchase durables given the current economic conditions. Households can reply that it
     is a good time, it is a bad time, or it is neither a good time nor a bad time. Standard errors are clustered at the quarter level. The sample period is January 2000
     to February 2016.

                                                          German Households                                                           European Households
                                                                VAT           Forward             No VAT or
                            Baseline         Controls          Period         Guidance         Forward Guidance              France          Sweden             UK




44
                              (1)              (2)               (3)            (4)                   (5)                      (6)             (7)              (8)
      Inflation             0.0582           0.0876           0.1909           0.0508               0.0540                  0.0391           0.0371           0.0254
      expectation          (0.0147)         (0.0157)         (0.0094)         (0.0132)             (0.0031)                (0.0072)         (0.0052)         (0.0031)


      Demographics                              X                X                X                    X                       X                X                X
      Expectations                              X                X                X                    X                       X                X                X
      Pseudo R2              0.0030          0.0663            0.0631           0.0517               0.0689                  0.0540           0.0301          0.0438
      Nobs                  377,064          227,027           19,477           11,685              195,865                  63,264          176,389          180,646
      Standard errors in parentheses
      p < 0.10,   p < 0.05,   p < 0.01
                                      Table 4: Inflation Expectations and Readiness to Spend: Heterogeneity

     This table reports the average marginal effects of a multinomial logit regression. Households' readiness to purchase durables is the dependent variable. Inflation
     expectation is a dummy variable that equals 1 if a household expects inflation to increase. We also control for household demographics and household expectations.
     Demographics include: gender, age, age squared, education level, household size, rural or urban residence, socio-economic status group, number of children, rental or
     owned housing, employment status, income level group. Expectations include: income expectations and perceptions, expected financial situation, expected GDP growth,
     expected unemployment rate, saving expectations and perceptions, inflation perceptions. We use the confidential micro data underlying the GfK Consumer Climate
     MAXX survey to construct these variables and similar data from national institutes for the European households. GfK asks a representative sample of 2,000 households
     on a monthly basis whether it is a good time to purchase durables given the current economic conditions. Households can reply that it is a good time, it is a bad time,
     or it is neither a good time nor a bad time. Standard errors are clustered at the quarter level. The sample period is January 2000 to February 2016.

                                                                                                                                      Income                Socioeconomic
                                Education                     Income                       Age                 Gender               Expectations                Status
                          High School    College       <= 1,000     2,500 <       <= 21          65 <      Men      Women          Low        High         Low        High
                              (1)         (2)            (3)           (4)         (5)            (6)      (7)       (8)           (9)        (10)         (11)       (12)




45
      Inflation               0.0691 0.1080              0.0899 0.0940             0.0917 0.0695           0.0845 0.0902           0.0489 0.0428           0.0905 0.0769
      expectation            (0.0150) (0.0184)          (0.0164) (0.0202)         (0.0210) (0.0135)       (0.0160) (0.0157)       (0.0152) (0.0222)       (0.0174) (0.0156)


      Demographics             X            X              X          X             X              X         X         X            X          X            X          X
      Expectations             X            X              X          X             X              X         X         X            X          X            X          X
      Pseudo R2              0.0677       0.0510         0.0638     0.0511        0.0444         0.0632    0.0678    0.0645       0.0861     0.0519       0.0573     0.0679
      Nobs                   91,936       19,008         93,249     17,487        15,319         35,023   107,002   120,025       5,103      3,097        47,555     36,882
      Standard errors in parentheses
      p < 0.10,   p < 0.05,   p < 0.01
Table 5: Inflation Expectations and Readiness to Save
 This table reports the average marginal effects of a multinomial
 logit regression. Households' readiness to save is the dependent
 variable. Inflation expectation is a dummy variable that equals 1 if
 a household expect higher inflation. Demographics include: gender,
 age, age squared, education level, household size, rural or urban
 residence, socio-economic status group, number of children, rental or
 owned housing, employment status, income level group. Expectations
 include: income expectations and perceptions, expected financial
 situation, expected GDP growth, expected unemployment rate, saving
 expectations and perceptions, inflation perceptions. We use the
 confidential micro data underlying the GfK Consumer Climate MAXX
 survey to construct these variables and similar data from national
 institutes for the European households. GfK asks a representative
 sample of 2,000 households on a monthly basis whether it is a good
 time to save given the current economic conditions. Households can
 reply that it is a good time, it is a bad time, or it is neither a good
 time nor a bad time. Standard errors are clustered at the quarter level.
 The sample period is January 2000 to February 2016.


                                 Not at all   Not really    Good time
                                    (1)          (2)           (3)
  Inflation expectation            0.0282 0.0015            -0.0297
                                  (0.0027) (0.0057)          (0.0069)


  Demographics                       X             X            X
  Individual expectations            X             X            X
  Pseudo R2                                      0.1471
  Nobs                                          242,820
  Standard errors in parentheses
  p < 0.10,   p < 0.05,   p < 0.01




                                   46
                       Online Appendix:
      Managing Households' Expectations with Unconventional
                            Policiess
                      Francesco D'Acunto, Daniel Hoang, and Michael Weber

                                         Not for Publication

                                 A.1      Survey Questions

Below we report the original survey questions with answer choices for Germany, the English
translation, and the harmonized surveys from the Directorate-General for Economic and
Financial Affairs of the European Commission harmonized consumer surveys used in Section
II for the matching estimator.

A.    Germany
Question 1 Wie hat sich Ihrer Meinung nach die "allgemeine Wirtschaftslage" in
           Deutschland in den letzten 12 Monaten entwickelt?
     Sie ...

                ·   hat sich wesentlich verbessert
                ·   hat sich etwas verbessert
                ·   ist in etwa gleich geblieben
                ·   hat sich etwas verschlechtert
                ·   hat sich wesentlich verschlechtert
                ·   weiss nicht

Question 2 Wie haben sich Ihrer Ansicht nach die Verbraucherpreise in den letzten 12
           Monaten entwickelt?
     Sie sind ...

                ·   stark gestiegen
                ·   in Massen gestiegen
                ·   leicht gestiegen
                ·   in etwa gleich geblieben
                ·   gesunken
                ·   weiss nicht

Question 3 Wie werden sich Ihrer Ansicht nach die Verbraucherpreise in den kommenden
           12 Monaten im Vergleich zu den letzten 12 Monaten entwickeln?
     Sie werden ...

                · staerker als bisher steigen
                · etwa im gleichen Masse wie bisher steigen
                · weniger stark als bisher steigen

                                                  1
               · in etwa gleich bleiben
               · gesunken
               · weiss nicht

Question 4 Wie hat sich die finanzielle Lage Ihres Haushaltes in den letzten 12 Monaten
           entwickelt?
    Sie ...

               ·   hat sich wesentlich verbessert
               ·   hat sich etwas verbessert
               ·   ist in etwa gleichgeblieben
               ·   hat sich etwas verschlechtert
               ·   hat sich wesentlich verschlechtert
               ·   weiss nicht

Question 5 Wie wird sich Ihrer Ansicht nach die finanzielle Lage Ihres Haushaltes in den
           kommenden 12 Monaten entwickeln?
    Sie wird ...

               ·   sich wesentlich verbessern
               ·   sich etwas verbessern
               ·   in etwa gleichbleiben
               ·   sich etwas verschlechtern
               ·   sich wesentlich verschlechtern
               ·   weiss nicht

Question 6 Wie wird sich Ihrer Ansicht nach die allgemeine Wirtschaftslage in Deutsch-
           land in den kommenden 12 Monaten entwickeln?
    Sie wird ...

               ·   sich wesentlich verbessern
               ·   sich etwas verbessern
               ·   in etwa gleichbleiben
               ·   sich etwas verschlechtern
               ·   sich wesentlich verschlechtern
               ·   weiss nicht

Question 7 Wie ist die derzeitige finanzielle Lage Ihres Haushaltes?

               ·   wir sparen viel
               ·   wir sparen ein wenig
               ·   wir kommen mit unseren finanziellen Mitteln so gerade aus
               ·   wir greifen etwas unsere Ersparnisse an
               ·   wir verschulden uns
               ·   weiss nicht

Question 8 Glauben Sie, dass es in Anbetracht der allgemeinen Wirtschaftslage derzeit
           guenstig ist, groessere Anschaffungen (Moebel, elektrische/elektronische Ger-
           aete usw.) zu taetigen?


                                                    2
              ·     ja, jetzt der Augenblick ist guenstig
              ·     der Augenblick ist weder besonders guenstig noch besonders unguenstig
              ·     nein, der Augenblick ist nicht guenstig
              ·     weiss nicht

Question 10 Wie wird sich Ihrer Ansicht nach die Zahl der Arbeitslosen in Deutschland in
            den kommenden 12 Monaten entwickeln?
    Die Zahl wird ...

              ·     stark steigen
              ·     leicht steigen
              ·     in etwa gleich bleiben
              ·     leicht zurueckgehen
              ·     stark zurueckgehen
              ·     weiss nicht

Question 11 Wollen Sie in den kommenden 12 Monaten fuer groessere Anschaffungen
            (Moebel, elektrische /elektronische Geraete usw.) mehr oder weniger ausgeben
            als in den letzten 12 Monaten?
    Ich werde ...

              ·     wesentlich mehr ausgeben
              ·     etwas mehr ausgeben
              ·     in etwa gleich viel ausgeben
              ·     etwas weniger ausgeben
              ·     wesentlich weniger ausgeben
              ·     weiss nicht

Question 12 Wie wahrscheinlich ist es, dass Sie in den kommenden 12 Monaten Geld
            sparen werden?
              ·     sehr wahrscheinlich
              ·     recht wahrscheinlich
              ·     unwahrscheinlich
              ·     sehr unwahrscheinlich
              ·     weiss nicht

Question 13 Glauben Sie, dass es in Anbetracht der allgemeinen Wirtschaftslage derzeit
            ratsam ist, zu sparen?
              ·     ja, auf alle Faelle
              ·     wahrscheinlich ja
              ·     eher nicht
              ·     auf keinen Fall
              ·     weiss nicht

Question 1 How did you perceive the general economic situation in Germany over the last
           12 months?
    It ...

              · improved substantially

                                                   3
                  ·   improved somewhat
                  ·   remained about the same
                  ·   worsened somewhat
                  ·   worsened substantially
                  ·   don't know

Question 2 What is your perception on how consumer prices evolved during the last 12
           months?
    They ...

                  ·   increased substantially
                  ·   increased somewhat
                  ·   increased slightly
                  ·   remained about the same
                  ·   decreased
                  ·   don't know

Question 3 How will consumer prices evolve during the next 12 months compared to the
           previous 12 months?

    They will ...

                  ·   increase more
                  ·   increase the same
                  ·   increase less
                  ·   stay the same
                  ·   decrease
                  ·   don't know

Question 4 How did the financial situation of your household evolve during the past 12
           months?
    It ...

                  ·   improved substantially
                  ·   improved somewhat
                  ·   remained about the same
                  ·   worsened somewhat
                  ·   worsened substantially
                  ·   don't know

Question 5 How will the financial situation of your household evolve during the next 12
           months?
    It will ...

                  ·   improve substantially
                  ·   improve somewhat
                  ·   remain the same
                  ·   worsen slightly
                  ·   worsen substantially
                  ·   don't know

                                                4
Question 6 How will the general economic situation in Germany evolve during the next
           12 months?
    It will ...

                  ·   improve substantially
                  ·   improve slightly
                  ·   remain the same
                  ·   worsen slightly
                  ·   worsen substantially
                  ·   don't know

Question 7 What is the current financial situation of your household?

                  ·   we save a lot
                  ·   we save a bit
                  ·   we just manage to live from our financial inflows and don't save
                  ·   we have to de-save
                  ·   we become indebted
                  ·   don't know

Question 8 Given the current economic situation, do you think it's a good time to buy
           larger items such as furniture, electronic items etc?

                  ·   yes, it's a good time
                  ·   the time is neither good nor bad
                  ·   no, it's a bad time
                  ·   don't know

Question 10 What is your expectation regarding the number of unemployed people in
            Germany in the next 12 months?

    It will ...

                  ·   increase substantially
                  ·   increase somewhat
                  ·   remain the same
                  ·   decrease somewhat
                  ·   decrease a lot
                  ·   don't know

Question 11 Do you plan to spend more money during the next 12 months on larger items
            such as furniture, electronics, etc compared to the previous 12 months?

    I will ...

                  ·   spend substantially more
                  ·   spend somewhat more
                  ·   spend about the same
                  ·   spend somewhat less
                  ·   spend substantially less
                  ·   don't know


                                                   5
Question 12 How likely is it that you will save money during the next 12 months?

              ·   very likely
              ·   quite likely
              ·   unlikely
              ·   very unlikely
              ·   don't know

Question 13 Given the current economic situation, do you think it's a good time to save
            right now?

              ·   yes, it's a good time
              ·   probably yes
              ·   not really
              ·   not at all
              ·   don't know




                                            6
B.   France
Question 1 A votre avis, au cours des douze derniers mois, la situation ´
                                                                        economique
           g´
            en´
              erale de la France ...

              ·   s'est nettement am´  elior´ee
              ·   s'est un peu am´ elior´ee
              ·   est rest´
                          ee stationnaire
              ·   s'est un peu d´egrad´ ee
              ·   s'est nettement d´ egrad´ ee
              ·   ne sait pas

Question 2 A votre avis, au cours des douze prochains mois, la situation ´
                                                                         economique
           g´
            en´
              erale de la France ...

              ·   va   nettement s'am´   eliorer
              ·   va   un peu s'am´  eliorer
              ·   va   rester stationnaire
              ·   va   un peu se d´ egrader
              ·   va   nettement se d´  egrader
              ·   ne   sait pas

Question 3 Pensez-vous que, dans les douze prochains mois, le nombre de ch^
                                                                          omeurs va ...

              ·   fortement augmenter
              ·   un peu augmenter
              ·   rester stationnaire
              ·   un peu diminuer
              ·   fortement diminue
              ·   ne sait pas

Question 4 Trouvez-vous que, au cours des douze derniers mois, les prix ont ...

              ·   fortement augment´
                                   e
              ·   moyennement augment´
                                     e
              ·   un peu augment´
                                e
              ·   stagn´
                       e
              ·   diminu´e
              ·   ne sait pas

                                                            ~ votre avis l'´
Question 5 Par rapport aux douze derniers mois, quelle sera A              evolution des
           prix au cours des douze prochains mois?

              ·   elle va ^
                          etre plus rapide
              ·   elle va se poursuivre au m^ eme rythme
              ·   elle va ^
                          etre moins rapide
              ·   les prix vont rester stationnaires
              ·   les prix vont diminuer
              ·   ne sait pas

Question 6 Dans la situation ´economique actuelle, pensez-vous que les gens aient int´
                                                                                     er^
                                                                                       et
           `
           a faire des achats importants? (meubles, machines `       a laver, mat´ eriels
           ´
           electroniques ou informatiques ...)

                                                   7
              ·   oui, le moment est plut^
                                         ot favorable
              ·   le moment n'est ni favorable ni d´efavorable ...
              ·                           ~ d´
                  non, le moment est plutA´t    efavorable
              ·   ne sait pas

Question 7 Dans la situation ´
                             economique actuelle, pensez-vous que ce soit le bon moment
           pour ´
                epargner?

              ·   oui, certainement
              ·   oui, peut-`
                            etre
              ·   non, probablement pas
              ·   non, certainement pas
              ·   ne sait pas

Question 8 A votre avis, au cours des douze derniers mois, le niveau de vie en France,
           dans l'ensemble s'est ...
              ·   nettement am´   elior´
                                       e
              ·   un peu am´  elior´e
              ·   rest´
                      ee stationnaire
              ·   un peu d´ egrad´ e
              ·   nettement d´  egrad´e
              ·   ne sait pas

Question 9 A votre avis, au cours des douze prochains mois, le niveau de vie en France,
           dans l'ensemble va ...
              ·   nettement s'am´  eliorer
              ·   s'am´eliorer un peu
              ·   rester stationnaire
              ·   se d´
                      egrader un peu
              ·   nettement se d´ egrader
              ·   ne sait pas

Question 10 Laquelle des affirmations suivantes vous semble d´
                                                             ecrire le mieux la situation
            financi`
                   ere actuelle de votre foyer?

              ·   vous arrivez `
                               a mettre pas mal d'argent de c`
                                                             ot´e
              ·   vous arrivez `
                               a mettre un peu d'argent de c`
                                                            ot´e
              ·   vous bouclez juste votre budget
              ·   vous tirez un peu sur vos r´
                                             eserves
              ·   vous `
                       etes en train de vous endetter
              ·   ne sait pas

Question 11 Au cours des douze derniers mois, la situation financi`
                                                                  ere de votre foyer s'est
            ...
              ·   nettement am´   elior´
                                       ee
              ·   un peu am´  elior´ee
              ·   rest´
                      ee stationnaire
              ·   un peu d´ egrad´ ee
              ·   un peu d´ egrad´ ee
              ·   ne sait pas

                                                 8
Question 12 Pensez-vous que, au cours des douze prochains mois, la situation financi`
                                                                                    ere
            de votre Foyer va ...

              ·   nettement s'am´   eliorer
              ·   un peu s'am´  eliorer
              ·   rester stationnaire
              ·   un peu se d´ egrader
              ·   nettement se d´  egrader
              ·   ne sait pas

Question 13 Pensez-vous r´
                         eussir `
                                a mettre de l'argent de c^
                                                         ot´
                                                           e au cours des douze prochains
            mois?
              ·   oui, certainement
              ·   oui, peut-^
                            etre
              ·   non, probablement pas
              ·   non, certainement pas
              ·   ne sait pas

Question 14 Au cours des douze prochains mois, par rapport aux douze mois pass´    es, avez-
            vous l'intention de d´
                                 epenser, pour effectuer des achats importants ...

              ·   beaucoup plus
              ·   un peu plus
              ·   autant
              ·   un peu moins
              ·   beaucoup moins
              ·   ne sait pas




                                              9
C.   Sweden
Question 1 Hur ar ditt hushalls ekonomiska situation for narvarande jamfort med for 12
           manader sedan? Ar den ...
              ·   Mycket battre
              ·   Nagot battre
              ·   Ungefar lika
              ·   Nagot samre
              ·   Mycket samre
              ·   Vet inte

Question 2 Hur tror du att ditt hushalls ekonomiska situation ar om 12 manader? Ar den
           ...
              ·   Mycket battre
              ·   Nagot battre
              ·   Ungefar lika
              ·   Nagot samre
              ·   Mycket samre
              ·   Vet inte

Question 3 Hur tycker du att den ekonomiska situationen ar i Sverige for narvarande
           jamfort med for 12 manader sedan? Ar den ...

              ·   Mycket battre
              ·   Nagot battre
              ·   Ungefar lika
              ·   Nagot samre
              ·   Mycket samre
              ·   Vet inte

Question 4 Hur tror du att den ekonomiska situationen ar i Sverige om 12 manader? Ar
           den...
              ·   Mycket battre
              ·   Nagot battre
              ·   Ungefar lika
              ·   Nagot samre
              ·   Mycket samre
              ·   Vet inte

Question 5 Jamfort med for 12 manader sedan, tycker du att priserna i allmanhet for
           narvarande ar...
              ·   Mycket hogre
              ·   Ganska mycket hogre
              ·   Nagot hogre
              ·   Ungefar desamma
              ·   Lagre
              ·   Vet inte

Question 6 Om du jamfor med dagens situation, tror du att priserna i allmanhet om 12
           manader kommer att ...

                                           10
               ·   Stiga snabbare
               ·   Stiga i samma takt
               ·   Stiga langsammare
               ·   Vara i stort sett oforandrade
               ·   Sjunka nagot
               ·   Vet inte

Question 7 Hur tror du att arbetslosheten kommer att utvecklas under de narmaste 12
           manaderna? Kommer den att ...
               ·   Oka mycket
               ·   Oka nagot
               ·   Vara ungefar som nu
               ·   Minska nagot
               ·   Minska mycket
               ·   Vet inte

Question 8 Har risken for att Du sjalv ska bli arbetslos under de senaste 12 manaderna
           ...?
               ·   Oka mycket
               ·   Oka nagot
               ·   Vara ungefar som nu
               ·   Minska nagot
               ·   Minska mycket
               ·   Vet inte

Question 9 Tycker du att det i dagslaget ar fordelaktigt for folk i allmanhet att gora stora
           inkop, som exempelvis mabler, tvattmaskiner, TV osv.?
               ·   Ja, det ar ratt tidpunkt
               ·   Varken ratt eller fel tidpunkt
               ·   Nej, det ar fel tidpunkt, inkapet bar ske senare
               ·   Vet inte

Question 10 Hur mycket pengar tror du att ditt hushall kommer att anvanda till inkop av
            sadana kapitalvaror under de narmaste 12 manaderna jamfort med de senaste
            12 manaderna? Blir det ...
               ·   Mycket mer
               ·   Nagot mer
               ·   Ungefar lika mycket
               ·   Nagot mindre
               ·   Mycket mindre
               ·   Vet inte

Question 11 Mot bakgrund av det allmanna ekonomiska laget, hur tycker du att det ar att
            spara for narvarande? Som sparande raknas aven minskning av eventuella lan.
            Ar det...
               ·   Mycket fordelaktigt
               ·   Ganska fordelaktigt
               ·   Varken fordelaktigt eller ofordelaktigt
               ·   Ganska ofordelaktigt

                                                   11
             · Mycket ofordelaktigt
             · Vet inte

Question 12 Hur troligt ar det att Ditt hushall kommer att kunna spara nagot under de
            narmaste 12 manaderna? Som sparande raknas aven minskning av eventuella
            lan. Ar det ...?
             ·   Mycket troligt
             ·   Ganska troligt
             ·   Inte sarskilt troligt
             ·   Inte alls troligt
             ·   Vet inte

Question 13 Vilket av faljande pastaenden beskriver bast ditt hushalls nuvarande
            ekonomiska situation?
             ·   Vi skuldsatter oss och/ eller utnyttjar sparade medel i stor utstrackning
             ·   Vi skuldsatter oss och/ eller utnyttjar sparade medel
             ·   Vi gar ungefar jamnt upp
             ·   Vi sparar nagot
             ·   Vi sparar mycket
             ·   Vet inte




                                              12
D.    United Kingdom
Question 1 How has the financial situation of your household changed over the last 12
           months?
     It has ...

                   ·   Got a lot better
                   ·   Got a little better
                   ·   Stayed the same
                   ·   Got a little worse
                   ·   Got a lot worse
                   ·   Don't Know

Question 2 How do you expect the financial position of your household to change over the
           next 12 months?
     It will ...

                   ·   Get a lot better
                   ·   Get a little better
                   ·   Stay the same
                   ·   Get a little worse
                   ·   Get a lot worse
                   ·   Don't Know

Question 3 How do you think the general economic situation in this country has changed
           over the past 12 months?

     It has ...

                   ·   Got a lot better
                   ·   Got a little better
                   ·   Stayed the same
                   ·   Got a little worse
                   ·   Got a lot worse
                   ·   Don't Know

Question 4 How do you expect the general economic situation in this country to develop
           over the next 12 months?
     It will ...

                   ·   Get a lot better
                   ·   Get a little better
                   ·   Stay the same
                   ·   Get a little worse
                   ·   Get a lot worse
                   ·   Don't Know

Question 5 How do you think consumer prices have developed over the last 12 months?

     They have ...

                                             13
               ·    Risen a lot
               ·    Risen moderately
               ·    Risen slightly
               ·    Stayed about the same
               ·    Fallen
               ·    Don't Know

Question 6 In comparison with the past 12 months, how do you expect consumer prices
           will develop in the next 12 months?

    They will ...

               ·    Increase more rapidly
               ·    Increase at the same rate
               ·    Increase at a slower rate
               ·    Stay about the same
               ·    Fall
               ·    Don't Know

Question 7 How do you expect the number of people unemployed in this country will change
           over the next 12 months?
    The number will ...

               ·    Increase sharply
               ·    Increase slightly
               ·    Remain the same
               ·    Fall slightly
               ·    Fall sharply
               ·    Don't Know

Question 8 In view of the general economic situation, do you think now is the right time
           for people to make major purchases such as furniture or electrical goods?

               ·    Yes, now is the right time
               ·    It is neither the right time nor the wrong time
               ·    No, it is the wrong time
               ·    Don't Know

Question 9 Compared to the last 12 months, do you expect to spend more or less money
           on major purchases such as furniture and electrical goods?

    I will spend ...

               ·    Much more
               ·    A little more
               ·    About the same
               ·    A little less
               ·    Much less
               ·    Don't Know

Question 10 In view of the general economic situation, do you think that now is?


                                                 14
              ·   A very good time to save
              ·   A fairly good time to save
              ·   Not a good time to save
              ·   A very bad time to save
              ·   Don't Know

Question 11 Over the next 12 months, how likely will you be to save any money?

              ·   Very likely
              ·   Fairly likely
              ·   Not likely
              ·   Not at all likely
              ·   Don't Know

Question 12 Which of these statements best describes the current financial situation of your
            household?
              ·   We are saving a lot
              ·   We are saving a little
              ·   We are just managing to make ends meet on our income
              ·   We are having to draw on our savings
              ·   We are running into debt
              ·   Don't Know




                                               15
 A.2        Additional Discussion of the Measure of Unconventional
                                                   Fiscal Policy

In this section, we describe in detail the narrative records surrounding the 2005 general elections
in Germany, and the relationship between willingness to spend and actual spending, inflation
expectations and actual inflation, the potential mapping of our findings into the framework of
Correia et al. (2013), the marginal effect of inflation expectations on consumption expenditure
over time, salience of VAT changes, and the differences between reduced and full VAT rates.
       Relevant Narrative about the 2005 German Elections. The Christian Democrats
(CDU, center-right) were the only German party in the 2005 electoral campaign advocating an
increase in VAT by 2% starting in January 2006 to lower non-wage labor costs (see CDU (2005),
page 14). The Social Democrats (SPD, center-left) strongly opposed an increase in VAT, and
instead favored a 3% increase in income tax for top income earners (see SPD (2005), page 39).
The Greens (center-left) and Liberals (center-right) also strongly opposed an increase in VAT.
The Liberals, for example, promised to decrease the general tax burden by EUR 19bn.
       All parties except the CDU strongly opposed raising VAT, including CDU's preferred
coalition partner, the Liberals. The projections of the election outcomes were highly uncertain
(see below), as were the fiscal policy measures the new government would have implemented.
A VAT increase of 3% was therefore highly unexpected. Consistently, the opposition parties
and the popular press accused the new government between CDU and SPD of electoral fraud
after it announced this policy measure in November 2005, and they fiercely criticized the new
government. The online appendix contains press clippings commenting on the VAT policy (see
section A.5 of the online appendix).
       Empirically, households' inflation expectation over the next 12 months did not increase
until January 2006, after the new government had announced its plans in November 2005 to
increase VAT in 2007, rather than 2006 as the CDU had planned initially which is direct evidence
German households did not expect an increase in VAT in 2006, as the CDU proposed.1
       Neither of the two blocks--CDU and Liberals on the one hand, and SPD and Greens on the
other hand--had a majority in polls before the elections.2 In the actual election on September
   1
     If voters had considered the CDU proposal credible, we should already see an increase in inflation expectation
during the campaign in the summer of 2005, because the plan was to increase VAT in January 2006.
   2
     Eleven days before the elections, the polling institute Infratest Dimap predicted a vote share of 41% for the
CDU, 34% for the SPD, 8.5% for the Left, 7% for the Greens, and 6.5% for the Liberals. See http://www.infratest-
dimap.de/en/umfragen-analysen/bundesweit/sonntagsfrage/. All parties explicitly ruled out any coalition with
the Left. The media mentioned all other possible combinations, including non-traditional combinations, as possible
coalitions, including a "traffic-light" coalition among SPD, Greens, and Liberals and a "Jamaica" coalition among
CDU, Liberals, and Greens.




                                                        16
18, 2005, the CDU gained 35.2% electoral support; the SPD, 34.2%; the Liberals, 9.8%; the
Left, 8.7%; and the Greens, 8.1%. Neither the CDU nor the SPD were able to form a "small"
coalition with their preferred coalition partner (Liberals and Greens, respectively). The CDU
and SPD therefore agreed to form a "grand" coalition.
       The coalition agreed on an overall contractionary fiscal policy (see below), including the 3%
increase in VAT, and the use of one third of the additional tax revenue to decrease non-wage
labor costs by two percentage points. The government planned to use two thirds of the VAT
increase to consolidate the federal budget to comply with the Maastricht Treaty and hinder an
infringement procedure by the European Commission. Table ?? in the online appendix shows
the total tax revenue indeed increased in 2007, and Germany no longer violated the EU Stability
and Growth Pact.
       Concurrent Policy Measures.                The new government announced additional policy
measures as part of its coalition agreement. The preamble of the official agreement emphasizes
the need to reduce Germany's public debt as the major challenge for the new government, and
the set of agreed-upon policy measures would be contractionary overall. In addition to the VAT
increase and the non-wage labor-costs reduction, the government announced an investment
program of 0.25% of 2005 GDP per year over the following four years.                       The government
planned to finance the majority of the program through budget cuts. Moreover, the government
announced an increase in the top marginal income tax rate from 42% to 45% for incomes above
EUR 250,000 for singles and EUR 500,000 for couples. The Panel of Household Finances of the
Deutsche Bundesbank reports for 2014 a 95th percentile of gross income of EUR 113,900, which
implies the tax increase only affected a small fraction of households. Lastly, the government
planned to increase indirect taxes for retirement from 19.4% to 19.9%, and it abolished the
home-buyer subsidy, which had been guaranteed since 1949, and amounted to EUR 11.4 billion
in 2004.3 The overall contractionary nature of this set of policies suggests our estimates in
section II represent a lower bound of the positive effect of the announcement to increase VAT
in 2007 on households' willingness to purchase durables.
       Willingness to Spend versus Actual Spending. We are ultimately interested in how
inflation expectations transform into actual consumption expenditure. Our survey only reports
the willingness to purchase durable goods. Figure A.1 in the online appendix is a scatter plot of
the cyclical components of log real durable consumption expenditure and the average propensity
to purchase durables.4 Real and reported spending on durables are positively related, which is
consistent with Bachmann et al. (2015). The correlation is 0.46.
  3
      See http://www.kas.de/upload/ACDP/CDU/Koalitionsvertraege/Koalitionsvertrag2005.pdf for details.
  4
      We use a Hodrick-Prescott filter with smoothing parameter  of 1,600 to extract the cyclical component.


                                                       17
       The reported willingness to purchase has potential advantages compared to measures of
actual expenditures elicited with surveys. Spending data in surveys typically contain noise,
because survey participants might not recall their actual purchases, or they might overstate their
purchases of visible products, such as cars, and understate the consumption of "sin" products,
such as tobacco and alcohol (see Hurd and Rohwedder (2012) and Atkinson and Micklewright
(1983)).
       Empirical Evidence and Relationship with Theory. Correia et al. (2013) formalize
the ideas in Shapiro (1991), Feldstein (2002), and Hall (2011) and study unconventional
fiscal policy in a New Keynesian model. They show unconventional fiscal policy can fully
circumvent the zero-lower-bound constraint on nominal interest rates in a budget-neutral and
time-consistent manner.        Their benchmark model is a textbook New Keynesian model, in
which labor is the only factor of production. This model suggests that an increasing path
of consumption taxes generates inflation expectations and negative real interest rates. Lower
labor income taxes ensure consumption taxes do not affect the intratemporal margin between
leisure and consumption, and hence the real wage. Firms' pricing decisions are independent
of the change in consumption taxes, and marginal costs do not change either. Therefore, the
production allocation across firms is efficient and the government can offset the distortion coming
from monopoly rents with taxes as in the textbook model.
       Our natural experiment resembles the proposals in Shapiro (1991), Feldstein (2002), and
Hall (2011), but deviates from the setting in Correia et al. (2013) in a few dimensions. First,
the German government used 2 percentage points of the 3% increase in VAT to consolidate the
federal budget, and 1 percentage point to lower indirect labor taxes by 2%.5 Empirically, we do
not find any effect on labor force participation or unit labor costs.6 Moreover, we find similar
marginal effects of inflation expectations on the propensity to purchase durables for full-time,
part-time, and unemployed survey participants. In addition, Nakamura, Steinsson, Sun, and
Villar (2016) question whether producer price dispersion has real economic costs.
       Second, we only observe attitudes towards purchases of durable goods. In a model with
both durable and non-durable consumption, the intertemporal substitution effect of higher future
consumption taxes is larger for durable goods (see Barsky et al. (2007) and Barsky et al. (2016)).7
   5
     Efficiency gains in the unemployment insurance system financed the second percentage-point decrease in
indirect labor taxes.
   6
     Data from the OECD show unit labor costs decreased in Germany during 2006 and 2007 in absolute
terms and relative to France, Sweden, and the UK (see: http://stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?QueryName=426).
Labor force participation, instead, barely changed from 58.4% in 2005 to 59.1% in 2007 (see:
http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SL.TLF.CACT.ZS?locations=DE).
   7
     Shapiro (1991) already emphasizes the effect of unconventional fiscal policy should mainly operate through
expenditure on durable goods. Storability of durable goods can lead to an increase in durable expenditure due to
a future increases in VAT even if the IES is small through an arbitrage effect.


                                                      18
A potential concern for policymakers aiming to stimulate overall consumption is that households
might substitute intratemporally from non-durable to durable consumption, because the VAT
change did affect nondurable goods less than durable goods (see discussion below). We do not
observe households' attitudes towards purchases of non-durable goods. To address this concern
directly, we show realized non-durable consumption growth increased during 2006. German
households also lowered their savings attitudes during 2006 in absolute terms and relative
to matched foreign households, supporting the conclusion that households increased overall
consumption (see Table 5).
       Third, Correia et al. (2013) study unconventional fiscal policies during a liquidity trap,
whereas we study the effect for a single country in a currency union.                 To predict higher
consumption, the consumption Euler equation requires only that nominal interest rates not
increase sufficiently to offset the increase in inflation expectations rather than being in a liquidity
trap. The ECB explicitly excluded an increase in nominal interest rates to counteract the
announcement of a higher VAT in Germany, because it believed the increase in consumer price
inflation would be temporary and limited to Germany. The then-president of the German
Bundesbank excluded an increase in nominal rates to offset inflationary pressure: "We know
what the effects of the VAT increase are; as is the case for oil prices, we do not consider one-off
effects" (see Weber (2006); see also section A.3 in the online appendix). Nominal interest rates
for consumption loans also barely changed and were 6.7% in January 2006 and 6.4% in December
2007. Moreover, in our difference-in-differences estimation in section II, we compare the behavior
of German households to matched French households that face the same nominal interest rates
as German households.
       Last, we study the pre-announced increase in VAT rather than consumption taxes. Correia
et al. (2013) already highlight both VAT and consumption taxes should have similar implications
because of "the extensive evidence of very high pass-through of consumption taxes even in the
cases in which the usual practice is to quote after-tax prices, as is the case for the value-added
tax in Europe." This point is consistent with the ex-ante expectations for the specific case of
the VAT increase in Germany and the actual ex-post result. The Association of Consumer &
Home Electronics expected the increase in VAT would be fully passed through to consumers (see
Stehle (2006)). Ex-post, the German statistical office shows some categories immediately and
fully adjusted prices, such as tobacco and services, whereas other categories adjusted prices with
a delay, such as electronics and furniture. By early 2008, all categories underlying the German
CPI had fully adjusted their prices by the theoretical amount.8
  8
      See https://www.destatis.de/DE/Publikationen/WirtschaftStatistik/Preise/MwSterhoehungJan2007.pdf.



                                                    19
    Farhi et al. (2014) show an increase in VAT coupled with a decrease in payroll subsidy can,
under certain conditions, replicate an exchange-rate devaluation even within a currency union.
Theoretically, this fiscal devaluation makes goods in Germany cheaper than French goods and
results in an increase in the demand for goods produced in Germany by both French and German
households.   Crucially, the fiscal devaluation should barely affect the overall consumption
decision of French households, and hence the spending attitudes of French households represent
a plausible counterfactual for the spending attitudes of German households in our setting.
    Salience of VAT Changes. Pre-announced VAT increases are a salient way to generate
future consumer price inflation and induce current spending compared to conventional and
unconventional monetary policy or future government purchases. Menz and Poppitz (2013) study
the media coverage of inflation in Germany during the time period of our natural experiment
and document a surge in coverage of inflation.
    Reduced and Full VAT. All services and products in Germany are subject to a value-
added tax that is part of the European VAT system. The general tax rate was 16% until
December 2006, and increased to 19% in 2007. A reduced rate of 7% applies to many convenience
goods, such as food, books, or flowers. The reduced rate has been unchanged since 1983. Rent,
services for non-profit organizations, and medical expenses are not subject to VAT. Virtually all
durable goods are subject to the full VAT, whereas only 59% of non-durables are subject to a
VAT rate of 19%.




                                                 20
                 A.3        ECB View on German VAT Increase

In   this   section,   we    report   the   answer    of   the   former   president   of   the   ECB,
Jean-Claude Trichet,        during a Q&A after the introductory remarks following the
council meeting on October 5 2006.                   The full transcript can be found here:
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pressconf/2006/html/is061005.en.html


     Question: [...] Seeing how you have to think ahead as good central bankers, I wondered if
you could tell us what your working hypothesis is regarding the effects on price stability and on
growth of the value added tax increase that is coming in a large European country on 1 January?


     Trichet: [...] As regards your second question I will not enter into our baseline scenario.
If the baseline scenario was not confirmed, whether it would be upward or downward, we would
draw the appropriate consequences. We have a compass and we have a needle in our compass:
it is price stability, the delivery of price stability in the medium-term and the credibility of the
delivery of price stability. It is because we are credible in the delivery of price stability that our
inflationary expectations are anchored in line with our definition of price stability. This solid
anchoring is essential, as I have said, for sustainable growth and job creation in the medium and
long-term. As regards the profile of HICP due to the VAT increase in one big economy in the
euro area, clearly there we have, I would say, a mainstream analysis which is suggesting that we
will have a hump in HICP, starting in January 2007 it is extraordinarily likely, arithmetically
speaking, and there is also a probability of having more consumption in the last quarter of
this year, and less consumption in the first quarter of next year. That's also clearly suggested
by the situation. As you know, there are several schools of thought around the mainstream
analysis, and we will see exactly what happens. My sentiment­and I am communicating the
overall sentiment of the Governing Council­is that after a relatively short period of volatility we
will go back to more normal behaviour. We should not pay too much attention to the short-term
volatility that would be induced by this phenomenon. In any case we think in the Governing
Council that we must extract information from all sources we have as far as data, facts, figures
are concerned, and extract from that an assessment on the trend. You remember we had a very
poor quarter in the last quarter last year. It was, until the recent revision upward, only 0.3%, it
was disappointing obviously but we said it doesn't put into question our understanding of what
is the trend growth. And the results of the first and second quarters of this year confirmed that
our assessment of the situation was fully justified.



                                                 21
                                        A.4      Data

When conducting the survey, GfK also collects a rich set of demographics. We enlist the variables
below, and report the possible values the variables obtained in the sample in parentheses.
    Sex (male, female), age (continuous), household size (1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and more), city size
(0 size 1,999, 2,000 size 2,999, 3,000 size 4,999, 5,000 size 9,999, 10,000 size 19,999,
20,000 size 49,999,    50,000 size 99,999,     100,000 size 199,999,      200,000 size 499,999,
500,000 size), marital status (single, couple, married, widowed, divorced, separated),
children at home (yes, no), number of children (1, 2, 3, 4 and more), homeownership
(house owner, apartment owner, renter), household head (yes, no), education (Hauptschule,
Realschule, Gymnasium, University), employment (full-time, part-time, not employed), state
(Schleswig-Holstein, Hamburg, Bremen, Berlin(West), Niedersachen, Nordrhein-Westfalen,
Hessen, Rheinland-Pfalz, Saarland, Baden-Wuerttemberg, Bayern, Mecklenburg-Vorpommern,
Sachsen-Anhalt, Brandenburg, Thueringen, Sachsen, Berlin(Ost)), monthly net income
(inc)   (inc 500,   500<inc 750,     750<inc 1,000,     1,000<inc 1,2500,     1,2500<inc 1,500,
1,500<inc 2,000, 2,000<inc 2,500, 2,500<inc 3,000, 3,000<inc 3,500, 3,500<inc 4,000,
4,000<inc), job (farmer, liberal profession, self-employed, civil servant, white-collar worker,
blue-collar worker, student, trainee, draftee, housewife, retiree, unemployed).
    Data on the consumer price index, the unemployment rate, real durable consumption
expenditure, real GDP, and industrial production are from the German Statistical Office
(DeStatis); Data on the European and German uncertainty index are from Baker et al. (2016);
Data on DAX and Volatility DAX are from the Deutsche Boerse; and oil price data are from
Bloomberg.
    We obtain the harmonized consumer price indexes (CPI) from the Statistical Data
Warehouse at the European Central Bank.             The data ID for the harmonized overall
CPI is ICP.M.DE.N.000000.4.INX; for the all items CPI excluding food and energy it is
ICP.M.DE.N.XEF000.4.INX; for the major durables CPI it is ICP.M.DE.N.0921 2.4.INX; and
for the non-durable households goods CPI it is ICP.M.DE.N.056100.4.INX.
    We obtain data for bank interest rates for loans to households in Germany for consumption
from the Statistical Data Warehouse at the European Central Bank.                 The data ID is
MIR.M.DE.B.A2B.A.R.A.2250.EUR.N. The rate is the annualized agreed rate, narrowly
defined effective rate, for new loans for consumption excluding revolving loans and overdrafts,
convenience and extended credit card debt.
    Inflation expectations data for European Union member countries are from the European
Commission Directorate on Economic and Financial Affairs.


                                               22
                                    A.5   Press Clippings

We briefly cite a few media quotes following the announcement of the newly-elected
administration in 2005 to increase VAT by 3%.



    "Mehrwertsteuer ist glatter Betrug an den Waehler." Gruenen-Vorsitzende Claudia Roth
haelt den Koalitionsvertrag fuer unsozial
"VAT is electoral fraud." Green party leader Claudia Roth calls coalition agreement antisocial

                                                              Berliner Morgenpost, 11/21/2005

Opposition kritisiert"Wahlbetrug." Vor allem hoehere Mehrwertsteuer stoesst auf Protest
Opposition criticizes "electoral fraud." Especially higher VAT fiercely criticized

                                                           Frankfurter Rundschau, 11/14/2005

Opposition spricht von Wahlbetrug.
 Opposition stresses "electoral fraud."

                                                                         Die Welt, 11/13/2005

Die dreissten Steuerluegen.
 Unapologetic tax lies.

                                                               Berliner Morgenpost, 5/19/2006

Westerwelle geisselt Steuererhoehungen.
 Westerwelle criticizes tax hike.

                                                              Sueddeutsche Zeitung, 5/15/2006

Warum luegen Politiker?
 Why do politician lie?

                                                                  Welt am Sonntag, 5/14/2006




                                              23
Figure A.1: Cyclical Readiness to Spend on Durables and Real Durable Consumption


                                                  y = 0.4152x
                                         0.15       2
                                                  R = 21.46%



                                          0.1                                                           06Q4
         Cyclical Durable Consumption




                                         0.05




                                           0




                                        -0.05     07Q1




                                         -0.1




                                           -0.1       -0.05           0          0.05          0.1   0.15
                                                                Cyclical Purchasing Propensity

This figure is a scatter plot of the cyclical components of the average monthly readiness to purchase durables over time
and of the natural logarithm of the real durable consumption at the quarterly frequency. We use a Hodrick­Prescott
filter with smoothing parameter  = 1, 600 to estimate the cyclical component. We use the confidential micro data
underlying the GfK Consumer Climate MAXX survey to construct the readiness to purchase durables index. GfK
asks a representative sample of 2,000 households whether it is a good time to purchase durables given the current
economic conditions. Higher values correspond to better times. We use the end of quarter value to get a quarterly
time series. The sample period is fist quarter 2000 to fourth quarter 2013 for a total of 14 years.




                                                                            24
   Figure A.2: Inflation Expectations and Lagged Realized Durable Inflation Rate
                                   5
                                              Standardized Lagged Inflation Expectations
                                              Standardized Durable Inflation
                                   4



                                   3
         Standardized Inflation




                                   2



                                   1



                                   0



                                  -1



                                  -2
                                         01


                                                02


                                                       03


                                                               04


                                                                       05


                                                                              06


                                                                                          07


                                                                                                 08


                                                                                                        09


                                                                                                               10


                                                                                                                      11


                                                                                                                             12


                                                                                                                                    13
                                          /


                                                 /


                                                        /


                                                                /


                                                                       /


                                                                               /


                                                                                           /


                                                                                                  /


                                                                                                         /


                                                                                                                /


                                                                                                                       /


                                                                                                                              /


                                                                                                                                     /
                                       12


                                              12


                                                     12


                                                             12


                                                                    12


                                                                            12


                                                                                        12


                                                                                               12


                                                                                                      12


                                                                                                             12


                                                                                                                    12


                                                                                                                           12


                                                                                                                                  12




This figure plots the monthly time series of the one-year standardized average monthly inflation expectation and the
lagged harmonized major durables consumer price inflation rate in percent at an annual rate. We use the confidential
micro data underlying the GfK Consumer Climate MAXX survey to construct inflation expectations. GfK asks a
representative sample of 2,000 households how consumer prices will evolve in the next 12 months compared to the
previous 12 months. We create a dummy variable which equals 1 when a household expects inflation to increase. The
sample period is January 2000 to December 2013 for a total of 14 years.




                                                                                   25
                                    Figure A.3: Time Series of CPI Inflation rate

                             6%                                                    6%
                                   CPI                                                       excl food 
        Inflation Rate [%]




                                                              Inflation Rate [%]
                             4%                                                    4%


                             2%                                                    2%


                             0%                                                    0%


                             -2%                                                   -2%
                              12/00
                              12 01
                              12/02
                              12/03
                              12/04
                              12/05
                              12 06
                              12/07
                              12 08
                              12/09
                              12/10
                              12/11
                              12 12
                                    3




                                                                                    12/00
                                                                                    12 01
                                                                                    12/02
                                                                                    12/03
                                                                                    12/04
                                                                                    12/05
                                                                                    12/06
                                                                                    12 07
                                                                                    12/08
                                                                                    12 09
                                                                                    12/10
                                                                                    12/11
                                                                                    12 12
                                                                                          3
                                 /1




                                                                                       /1
                                 /




                                 /

                                 /



                                 /




                                                                                       /




                                                                                       /

                                                                                       /


                                                                                       /
                              12




                                                                                    12




                             6%                                                    6%
                                   Durable                                               Non-durable 
        Inflation Rate [%]




                                                              Inflation Rate [%]




                             4%                                                    4%


                             2%                                                    2%


                             0%                                                    0%


                             -2%                                                   -2%
                              12/00
                              12 01
                              12/02
                              12/03
                              12/04
                              12/05
                              12 06
                              12/07
                              12 08
                              12/09
                              12/10
                              12/11
                              12 12
                                   3




                                                                                    12/00
                                                                                    12 01
                                                                                    12/02
                                                                                    12/03
                                                                                    12/04
                                                                                    12/05
                                                                                    12/06
                                                                                    12 07
                                                                                    12/08
                                                                                    12 09
                                                                                    12/10
                                                                                    12/11
                                                                                    12 12
                                                                                         3
                                 /1




                                                                                       /1
                                 /




                                 /

                                 /



                                 /




                                                                                       /




                                                                                       /

                                                                                       /


                                                                                       /
                              12




                                                                                    12




This figure plots the monthly time series of the German consumer price (CPI) inflation rate  in percent at an annual
rate. The top left panel plots the harmonized overall consumer price inflation rate. The top right panel plots the all
items CPI excluding food and energy. The bottom left panel plots major durables CPI. The bottom right panel plots
the non-durable households goods CPI. The sample period is January 2000 to December 2013 for a total of fourteen
years.




                                                         26
